WT02-B01-1IA086-000615-B002-126http://206.61.184.43:80/schaffer/Library/mjfaq1.htm 206.61.184.43 19970122024641 text/html 39650HTTP/1.0 200 OKDate: Wednesday, 22-Jan-97 02:46:31 GMTServer: WebSitePro/1.1f (S/N wpo-0deb)Allow-ranges: bytesContent-type: text/htmlLast-modified: Saturday, 28-Dec-96 06:41:14 GMTContent-length: 39432 Answers To Frequently Asked Questions About Marijuana Use Contents | Feedback | Search DRCNet Library | Schaffer Library | Hemp (Marijuana) | General Hemp/MarijuanaInformation ANSWERS TO FREQUENTLY ASKED QUESTIONS ABOUT MARIJUANA USE What is DEP? The Drug Education Project (DEP) is an attempt to clear up themisinformation being propagated in the U.S. by organizations andindividuals more interested in creating works of propaganda andfear than objective pieces of education. DEP is founded upon thesame two basic principles Andrew Weil bases his book, FromChocolate to Morphine, upon: (1) "People make decisions onthe basis of information available to them. The more accurate theinformation, the better their decisions will be" [68, p.179]; and (2) "There are no good or bad drugs; there areonly good and bad relationships with drugs" [68, p. 27].This leaflet is the first in a series of sixteen that willattempt to summarize for everyone what science has to say aboutdrug use. The grunt work has been done for you. DEP only requestsof you an open mind and the time required to read these leaflets. What is this leaflet all about? This leaflet is intended for informational purposes only. DEPdoes not encourage or discourage the use of any intoxicant.Although we have tried to include as much information aspossible, this pamphlet may not be comprehensive because of spaceconstraints. To receive all of the DEP leaflets for free, send aself-addressed stamped envelope (preferably business-sized) toDEP, c/o Christopher B. Reeve, Box #2038, 1000 Morewood Ave.,Pittsburgh, PA 15213. To provide DEP with suggestions and/orcomments, write to the above address or email via internetcr39@andrew.cmu.edu. DEP urges you to photocopy, post, anddistribute this paper in an unaltered form as much as possible.Our nation's strength is in knowledge, not fear. DEP is yourobjective source of information. "There is an outright propaganda campaign being presentedthrough the informational media, and there is no challenge beingbrought by those who know the facts and should be insisting onadherence to the truth." - Alexander and Ann Shulgin, PiHKAL: A Chemical Love Story, p.442 Health Risk Myths and Realities MarijuanaOverdose No evidence exists that anyone has ever died of a marijuanaoverdose [61, p. 53 - 54]. Tests performed on mice have shownthat the ratio of cannabinoids (the chemicals in marijuana thatmake you stoned) necessary for overdose to the amount necessaryfor intoxication is 40,000:1 [1]. For comparison's sake, thatratio for alcohol is generally between 4:1 and 10:1 [61, p.227-228]. Alcohol overdoses kill about 5,000 yearly [3] butmarijuana overdoses kill no one as far as anyone can tell. BrainDamage Marijuana is psychoactive because it stimulates certain brainreceptors, but it does not produce toxins that kill them [7](like alcohol), and it does not wear them out as other drugs may[57]. There is no evidence that marijuana use is a cause of braindamage. Studies by Dr. Robert Heath claimed the contrary inexperiments on monkeys [4], but Heath's work has been sharplycriticized by the Institute of Medicine and the National Academyof Sciences on three primary counts: its insufficient sample size (only four monkeys), its failure to control experimental bias, and its misidentification of normal monkey brain structure as "damaged" [5]. A far superior experiment by the National Center forToxicological Research (NCTR) involving 64 rhesus monkeys thatwere exposed to daily or weekly doses of marijuana smoke for ayear found no evidence of structural or neurochemical changes inthe brains of rhesus monkeys [6, 58]. Studies performed on actualhuman populations will confirm these results, even for chronicmarijuana users (up to 18 joints per day) after many years of use[8, 9, 10, 11, 12]. In fact, following the publication of two1977 JAMA studies, the American Medical Association (AMA)officially announced its support for the decriminalization ofmarijuana. Contrary to a 1987 television commercial sponsored by thePartnership for a Drug-Free America (PDFA), marijuana does not"flatten" brain waves either. In the commercial, anormal human brain wave was compared to what was supposedly the(much flatter) brain wave of a 14-year-old high on marijuana. Itwas actually the brain wave of a coma patient [2]. PDFA liedabout the data, and had to pull the commercial off of the airwhen researchers complained to the television networks [62, p.74]. In reality, marijuana has the effect of slightly increasingalpha-wave activity. Alpha waves are generally associated withmeditative and relaxed states which are, in turn, oftenassociated with human creativity [13]. Memory Marijuana does impair short-term memory, but only duringintoxication. Although the authoritative studies on marijuana useseem to agree that there is no residual impairment followingintoxication [5, 6, 13], persistent impairment of short-termmemory has been noted in chronic marijuana smokers up to 6 and 12weeks following abstinence [70]. HeartProblems It is accepted in medical circles today that marijuana usecauses no evident long-term cardiovascular problems for normalpersons. However, marijuana-smoking does cause changes in theheart and body's circulation characteristic of stress, which maycomplicate preexisting cardiovascular problems like hypertension,cerebrovascular disease, and coronary atherosclerosis [5, p. 72].Marijuana's effects upon blood pressure are complex andinconsistent [5, p. 66 - 67]. Hormones Chronic marijuana use has not been found to alter testosteroneor other sex hormone levels, despite the conclusions of Dr. R.C.Kolodony's 1974 study. Seven similar studies have been performedsince then, the most recent by a Dr. Robert Block at theUniversity of Iowa [14], and none have reproduced Kolodony'sresults. In contrast, heavy alcohol use is known to lower thesesame testosterone levels [65]. ReproductiveDamage No trustworthy study has ever shown that marijuana use damagesthe reproductive system, or causes chromosome breakage. Dr.Gabriel Nahas reached the opposite conclusion in his experimentsperformed in the early 1980s, but did so in part using the invitro (i.e., in test tubes and petrii dishes) cells of rhesusmonkeys. His rather unjustified claim that these changes wouldalso occur in human bodies in vivo (in the body) was criticizedby his colleagues and, in 1983, he renounced his own results. Studies of actual human populations have failed to demonstratethat marijuana adversely affects the reproductive system [61, 5].Wu et al. found in 1988 a correlation between marijuana use andlow sperm counts in human males. But this is misleading because(1) a decrease in sperm count has not been shown to have anegative effect on fertility, and (2) the sperm count returned tonormal levels after marijuana use had ceased [5]. Claims that marijuana use may impair hormone production,menstrual cycles, or fertility in females are both unproven andunfounded [43]. TheImmune System Studies in which lab rats were injected with extremely largequantities of THC have found that marijuana (in suchunrealistically huge quantities) does have an"immunosuppressive effect" in those lab rats, in thatit temporarily shuts off certain cells in the liver calledlymphocytes and macrophages. These macrophages are useful infighting off bacterial, not viral, infections. But this is onlyfor the duration of intoxication [46]. There also exists someevidence that marijuana metabolites stay in the lungs for up toseven months after smoking has ceased, possibly affecting theimmune system of the lungs (but not by turning the cells off)[47]. This said, doctors and researchers are still not sure thatthe immune system is actually negatively affected in realisticsituations since there are no numbers to support the idea [15].In fact, three studies showed that THC may have actuallystimulated the immune system in the people studied [16, 17, 18]. BirthDefects Unlike alcohol, cocaine, and tobacco, studies show that thereexists no evident link between prenatal use of marijuana andbirth defects [5, p. 99] or fetal alcohol syndrome [72] inhumans. In fact, marijuana use during the third trimester hasbeen found to have a positive impact on birthweight [73]. It isknown that Delta-9-THC does enter the placenta [45], so mothersare advised against consuming large quantities. Cancer Smoking marijuana has the potential to cause both bronchitisand cancer of the lungs, throat, and neck, but this is generallyno different than inhaling any other burnt carbon-containingmatter since they all increase the number of lesions (andtherefore possible infections) in your airways. There are acouple of studies that claim on the basis of carcinogens thatsmoking marijuana is worse for your body than smoking a cigarette[44], but these are rather simplified. There are actually somevery convincing reasons to believe that smoking cigarettes isrelatively more dangerous to the body than smoking marijuana onmore than one count: (1) It is accepted by a growing number ofscientists today that all American cigarettes contain significantlevels of polonium-210 [22], the same sort of radiation given offby the plutonium of atom bombs (ionizing alpha radiation). Itjust so happens that the tobacco plant's roots and leaves areespecially good at absorbing radioactive elements fromuranium-containing phosphate fertilizers that are required byU.S. law, and from naturally occurring radiation in the soil,air, and water [48]. It is the opinion of C. Everette Koop thatthis radioactivity, not tar, accounts for at least 90% of allsmoking-related lung cancer [29]. Other estimates that have beenmade are, about 50% according to Dr. Joseph R. DiFranza of theUniv. of Mass. Medical Center [48] and according to Dr. EdwardMartell, a radiochemist with the National Center for AtmosphericResearch, 95% [35]. Dr. R.T. Ravenholt, former director of WorldHealth Surveys at the Centers for Disease Control, agrees withthe risk, asserting that "Americans are exposed to far moreradiation from tobacco smoke than from any other source"[49]. Supporting the radioactivity notion is the finding that (a)Relatively high levels of polonium-210 have been found in bothcigarette smoke [59] and the lungs of both smokers and nonsmokersalike [60]; (b) Smokers of low-tar-and-nicotine cigarettes die oflung cancer just as much as smokers of other cigarettes [39]; andalso, (c) Even the most potent carcinogen that has been found incigarettes, benzopyrene, is only present in quantities sufficientto account for about 1% of the lung cancer cases that occur fromsmoking[49]. Whydon't you know any of this? Because the tobacco industry is suppressing the information.(2) Tobacco smoke is theorized to work as a kind of"magnet" for airborne radioactive particles such asradon, causing them to deposit in your lungs instead of on walls,rugs, or draperies [48]. (3) Tobacco, unlike marijuana, containsnicotine, which may harden arteries and cause many of the casesof heart disease associated with tobacco use. It also breaks downinto cancer-promoting chemicals called N Nitrosamines whenburned, and perhaps even when it is inside the body [37]. (4) THCis a bronchial dilator, which means it works like a cough drop byopening up your lungs and therefore aiding in the clearance ofsmoke and dirt. Nicotine has the exact opposite effect. (5)Unlike the chemicals in marijuana, nicotine has a paralyzingeffect on the tiny hairs along the body's air passages. Thesehairs normally work to keep foreign matter out of the lungs. Thismeans that carcinogenic tar from cigarette smoke is relativelymuch harder to purge from your lungs than is that from marijuana.And finally, (6) Marijuana users smoke significantly less thancigarette smokers do because of both marijuana's psychoactiveproperties (this is called "auto-titration") andnicotine's high potential for physical addiction [21]. It isimportant to note that the NCTR study found no signs of lungcancer in its autopsied rhesus monkeys who had smoked marijuanafor one year [6]. Smoking cigarettes and smoking marijuana negatively affectdifferent areas of the body, and therefore cause differentproblems. But everything considered, marijuana-only smokers whoaverage 3 - 4 joints per day show similar symptoms to cigarettesmokers who polish off 20 in a day [74]. Although one well-donestudy tells us that frequent marijuana smokers have a 19% greaterrisk of respiratory diseases than people who smoke nothing at all[66], it seems that neck and throat cancers are much more likelyto result than lung cancer or emphysema. This is because, unliketobacco, marijuana does not penetrate deeply into the lung. Inorder to minimize the risk of acquiring neck or throat cancerfrom marijuana smoke, it is best to (1) avoid as much as possiblecigarette-smoking and heavy drinking while smoking marijuana, and(2) eat plenty of vegetables (such as carrots, broccoli, squash,and sprouts) or vitamin supplements of beta carotene, vitamins A,C and E, and selenium [65]. These are believed to impede cancer'sprogress. In addition, there are actually things that can be done toreduce and even entirely eliminate the bodily harm that maypotentially result from smoking marijuana. This is possiblebecause all of the principle psychoactive ingredients ofmarijuana (THC and the cannabinoids) are neither mutagenic(gene-mutating) nor carcinogenic (cancer-causing) [65]. Legalizing marijuana would make (better) water bongs andmarijuana foods, drinks, and pills both less expensive and moreaccessible. Smoking marijuana through a water-filled bong willcool the smoke and there is reason to believe that it will filtersome of the carcinogens [69, 36]. Eating or drinking marijuanaeffectively eliminates all negative effects. In addition, it isconceivable that an aerosol contraption or vaporizer, commonlycalled a tilt pipe, could easily be constructed that wouldsurpass joints in efficiency, match them in onset and control ofeffects, and yet would be effectively harmless to the body. FatCells One of the more ridiculous myths being circulated is thatmarijuana stays in your fat cells and can keep you high formonths. Even though they may have similar names, the psychoactiveTHC (Delta-9-THC) is different from the metabolites (forinstance, 11-OH-THC and 11-nor) that your body breaks it downinto in that the latter will not get you stoned. It is themetabolites that stay in your fatty cells and show up on drugtests. Your body is depleted of Delta-9-THC only hours afteringestion [40, 41]. Other MJ Myths and Realities AmotivationalSyndrome Amotivational syndrome is defined as a condition in which aperson loses ambition or motivation to complete tasks that hewould normally like to have completed. Claims made in the 60'sthat marijuana use resulted in amotivational syndrome werepredominantly founded on stereotypes. But more recently, thecarefully-designed NCTR study has actually confirmed thesesuspicions under certain conditions. It found that marijuana usemay consistently produce something akin to amotivational syndromein adolescent monkeys. It did not however prove that marijuanamakes adolescents apathetic or depressed. A full recovery tonormal motivation levels was typically observed to occur betweentwo to three months following cessation of exposure. For unknownreasons, one monkey was observed to never fully recover.Surprisingly, the willingness to work appeared to be equallyaffected in both the daily and weekend rhesus smokers in thestudy [6]. Other studies have failed to prove amotivationalsyndrome in adults [42], so there is much reason to believe thatthis effect only occurs during adolescent use. MarijuanaPotency Marijuana is not significantly more potent today than it hasbeen in the past [23]. It is generally agreed that this myth wasthe result of bad data. The researchers making the claims used astheir baseline the THC content of marijuana seized by police inthe early 1970's, which had deteriorated since then because ofpoor storage conditions [23]. In reality, it seems that domesticmarijuana's average potency probably doubled in the 70's with theadvent of sinsemilla, but has remained more or less constantsince then [65]. Scare tactics claiming that marijuana potencyhas increased are rather irrelevant anyways since marijuana userstypically stop smoking when the desired effect is achieved (onceagain, "auto-titration"). Contrary to one of DARE'sallegations [28], it is generally agreed that marijuana does notcreate a tolerance, withdrawal symptoms, or physical dependencein the user. Lester Grinspoon adds, "there are many whoassert that there is nevertheless drug dependence because of[marijuana's] capacity to generate psychic dependency. However itis not at all clear that this type of dependency is essentiallyany different from that which a man may develop with respect tohis trousers, his automobile, or his wife" [61, p. 234]. Driving Driving in any inebriated state is adding complication to whatalready amounts to a constant life-threatening situation. Thatsaid, the National Highway Transportation Safety Administration(NHTSA) summarized all of its studies by saying that there was"no indication that marijuana by itself was a cause of fatalaccidents," and that alcohol was by far the "dominantproblem" in drug-related accidents [32]. The VictorianInstitute of Forensic Pathology and Monash University'sDepartment of Forensic Medicine in Melbourne, Australia havefound that drivers who use cannabis are actually less likely tocause fatal accidents than drug-free drivers, and are no morelikely than other drivers to be killed or seriously injured inroad accidents [33]. One experiment tested marijuana-intoxicateddrivers on both a closed course and on a crowded city street. Itfound that the elements of driving most affected wereconcentration and judgment [52]. An experiment involving adriving simulator that tested actual driving ability according tohow many mistakes are incurred by sober, drunk, and high subjectsfound that marijuana, unlike alcohol, does not significantlyaffect driving ability. It was found that these results hold truefor even higher doses (within reason) and inexperienced marijuanausers. In fact, the only significant difference reported by thestoned subjects was an altered perception of time, whicheffectively made them drive relatively slower [50]. A similarstudy found that marijuana additionally impairs the driver'sability to attend to peripheral stimuli [71]. One theoryattempting to explain these surprising findings states thatmarijuana users, in instances requiring seriousness, are in factable to willingly "bring themselves down," such thatthey are no longer high [51]. Studies that in the past have shownthat marjuana-intoxicated drivers cause significantly moreaccidents than sober drivers are typically unreliable on one ormore of the following counts: (1) They use drug tests todetermine whether or not a person is high, and drug tests in useonly indicate use over the past 30 days; (2) Some studies havenot corrected for alcohol use, or do not provide a control group;and (3) In many studies there were relatively more stoned driverskilled, but it was not their fault. And when the police"culpability scores" were tallied and factored in,marijuana was generally not to blame for the accidents. It mustbe emphasized however that one study shows that daily marijuanasmokers tend to have a 30% higher risk of injuries than non-users[66]. In fact, accidents resulting from intoxication are thoughtto be "the number one hazard of marijuana use" [67]. TheGateway Effect Marijuana use has not been found to act as a gateway drug tothe use of harder drugs. Studies show that when the Dutchpartially legalized marijuana in the 70's, heroin and cocaine usesubstantially declined, despite a slight increase in marijuanause [24]. If the stepping stone theory were true, use should havegone up rather than down. In reality, it appears that marijuanause tends to substitute for the use of relatively more dangeroushard drugs like cocaine and heroin, rather than lead to theiruse. Thus, oftentimes strict marijuana laws themselves are themost significant factor involved in moving on to harder drugslike cocaine. Such is the case in Nevada and Arizona, the statestoughest on marijuana use [65]. A recent study by ColumbiaUniversity's Center on Addiction and Substance Abuse attempts toshow, like many past studies have, that marijuana users are morelikely to use heroin or cocaine. But what the study actually doesshow is that a large number of heroin or cocaine users have usedmarijuana, not the reverse. What is not mentioned is that just asmany or even more had probably also drank alcohol, smokedcigarettes, had sex, or eaten sandwiches prior to their hard druguse. In fact, a National High School survey tells us that in1990, 40.7% of all high school students had tried marijuana orhashish at least once, whereas only 9.4% and 1.3% had ever usedcocaine and heroin, respectively [25]. Thus, at maximum, only 23%of marijuana users go on to use cocaine, and only 3% go on to useheroin. Thus, the stepping stone theory fails on even empiricalgrounds. Marijuanaand Crime DARE literature would have you believe that there exists astrong correlation between marijuana use and juvenile and youngadult crime [28]. And a recent study attempts to present a linkbetween marijuana use and violence by stating that 2/3 of allstudents who admit to taking a gun to school at least once hadsmoked marijuana. In fact, DEA head Thomas Constantine recentlystated in a Washington Times interview that "Many timespeople talk about the nonviolent drug offender. That is a rarespecies. There is not some sterile drug type not involved inviolence who is contributing some good to the community; that isridiculous. They are contributing nothing but evil." Butthese allegations are unsupported by research because testresults show that changes in personality resulting from marijuanause, even though they are not relatively significant, includeamong other things a lessening of aggressive trends [34]. Andlarge population studies such as the La Guardia report [10] havefound that, if anything, marijuana use inhibits antisocialactivity such as violence [20]. The drug-inspired violence myth,including a comprehensive history of its conception, is discussedat great length in Lester Grinspoon's book, where it is shown tobe based largely on a distorted Persian story that is hundreds ofyears old [61]. The problem inherent in drawing conclusions basedon correlations such as the 2/3 statistic above is that causalitycannot be inferred from correlation. In other words, there is noway of determining whether marijuana use contributed in some wayto the existence of certain traits of marijuana users, i.e.bringing a gun to school, or, as seems entirely more likely,people with such traits are drawn to marijuana use. One studyfound that chronic marijuana users had significantly higher WAISIQ scores (113.08) than both moderate users (102.15) and nonusers(103.26) [30]. It is simply impossible to make sense of suchstatistics as presented. References [1] Mikuriya, T.H. "Historical Aspects of Cannabis Sativain Western Medicine," New Physician, 1969, p. 905. [2] Cotts, Cynthia, "Hard Sell in the Drug War." TheNation. March 9, 1992. p 300 - 302. [3] Nadelmann, Ethan A. "Drug Prohibition in the UnitedStates: Costs, Consequences, and Alternatives," Science, Vol245: 943, 1 September 1989. [4] Heath, R.G., A.T. Fitzjarrell, C.J. Fontana, and R.E.Garey. "Cannabis sativa: Effects on brain function andultrastructure in Rhesus monkeys," Biological Psychiatry.15:657-690, 1980. [5] Marijuana and Health, Institute of Medicine, NationalAcademy of Sciences, 1982. [6] Slikker, William Jr. et al. "Behavioral,Neurochemical, and Neurohistological Effects of Chronic MarijuanaSmoke Exposure in the Nonhuman Primate" in "MarijuanaCannabinoids Neurobiology and Neurophysiology,'' Laura Murphy,Andrzej Bartke ed. Boca Raton, FL: CRC Press, 1992. [7] Matsuda, L.A., S.J. Lolait, M.J. Brownstein, A.C. Young,and T.I. Bonner. "Structure of a Cannabinoid Receptor,"Nature, 346 (issue 6824): 561-564. August, 1990. [8] Co, B.T., D.W. Goodwin, M. Gado, M. Mikhael, and S.Y.Hill. "Absence of cerebral atrophy in chronic cannabisusers," Journal of the American Medical Association, 237:1229-1230, 1977. [9] Kuehnle, J., J.H. Mendelson, K.R. Davis, and P.F.J. New."Computed topographic examination of heavy marijuanasmokers," Journal of the American Medical Association, 237:1231-1232, 1977. [10] Lancaster, Cattell. Mayor's Committee on Marijuana. TheMarijuana Problem in the City of New York. 1944. [11] Freedman and Rockmore, "Marihuana: A Factor inPersonality Evaluation," 7: 765-781, 1946. [12] Siler et al., "Marihuana Smoking in Panama,"The Military Surgeon, 73: 269-280, 1933. [13] R. L. Dornbush, M.D., M. Fink, M.D., and A. M. Freedman,M.D. "Marijuana, Memory, and Perception," presented atthe 124th annual meeting of the American Psychiatric Association,May 3-7, 1971. [14] Block, Robert, M.D. Drug and Alcohol Dependence, 28:121-8, 1991. [15] Hollister, Leo E. "Marijuana and Immunity",Journal of Psychoactive Drugs, 24 (issue 2):159-164, April, June,1992. pub. Haight-Ashbury Publications in association with theHaight-Ashbury Free Medical Clinic, San Francisco, CA. [16] Kaklamani, et al. "Hashish smoking and T-lymphocytes," 1978. [17] Kalofoutis et al. "The significance of lymphocytelipid changes after smoking hashish," 1978. [18] Wallace, J.M., D.P. Tashkin, J.S. Oishi, R.G. Barbers."Peripheral Blood Lymphocyte Subpopulations and MitogenResponsiveness in Tobacco and Marijuana Smokers," Journal ofPsychoactive Drugs, 1988. [20] Kaplan, John. Marijuana, The New Prohibition, New York,World Publishing Co., 1969. [21] Health Consequences of Smoking: Nicotine Addiction,Surgeon General's Report, 1988. [22] Winters, T.H., and J.R. Franza. "Radioactivity inCigarette Smoke." New England Journal of Medicine, 1982: 306(6): 364-365. [23] Mikuriya, Tod H., M.D., and Michael R. Aldrich, Ph.D."Cannabis 1988, Old Drug New Dangers, The PotencyQuestion" , Journal of Psychoactive Drugs. Vol. 20, Issue 1:47-55. pub. Haight-Ashbury Publications in association with theHaight-Ashbury Free Medical Clinic San Francisco, Calif.: JanuaryMarch, 1988. [24] Dennis, Richard J. "The Economics of LegalizingDrugs," The Atlantic Monthly, Vol. 266, No. 5, Nov 1990, p.130. [25] Data supplied by the U.S. Department of Health and HumanServices, Public Health Service, Alcohol, Drug Abuse, and MentalHealth Administration. Revised January, 1991. For moreinformation contact the National Clearinghouse for Alcohol andDrug Info., P.O. Box 2345, Rockville, Maryland 20847 / (800)729-6686. [28] the name of the DARE pamphlet is "Facts AboutMarijuana; Marijuana: Drug of Deception" [29] Nationally-televised speech in 1990 [30] Singer, Jerome L. "Ongoing Thought: The NormativeBaseline for Alternate States of Consciousness," AlternateStates of Consciousness. [32] The NHTSA report, "The Incidence and Role of Drugsin Fatally Injured Drivers," by K.W. Terhune, et al. of theCalspan Corp. Accident Research Group in Buffalo, NY (Report #DOT-HS-808-065) is available from the National TechnicalInformation Service, Springfield VA 22161. [33] Bruer, Mark. Age, March 23, 1994, p. 3 [Melbourne,Australia; this report is also published in the university's Business Victoria]. [34] Halpern. "Emotional Reactions and GeneralPersonality Structure," The Marihuana Problem, pp. 130 -131. [35] Martell, Edward. Proceedings of the National Academy ofScience, Biophysics, and Biological Science, March 1983. [36] Hoffmann, Dietrich, Gunter Rathkamp, and Ernest L.Wynder. "Comparison of the Yields of Several SelectedComponents in the Smoke From Different Tobacco Products,"Journal of the National Cancer Institute, Vol. 31, No. 3, 1963,p. 627-635 [37] Hofmann, D., J.D. Adams, K.D. Brunnemann, and D.D. Hecht."Formation, occurrence and carcinogenesity of N-nitrosaminesin tobacco products," Am. Chem. Soc. Symp. Ser.,174:247-273, 1981. [39] Hammond, E.C., L. Garfinkel, H. Seidman, and E.A. Lew."Some Recent findings concerning cigarette smoking,"In: Origins of Human Cancer. New York: Cold Spring HarborLaboratory, 1977. p. 101-112. [40] Starks, Michael, "Marijuana Chemistry Genetics,Processing, and Potency'," Ronin Inc., 1990. [41] Murphy, Laura, and Andrzej Bartke. "MarijuanaCannabinoid Neurobiology and Neurophysiology," CRC PressBoca Raton, FL, 1992. [42] Mendelson, Dr. Jack H., "Behavioral and BiologicalConcomitants of Chronic Marijuana Use," 1974. [43] "Marihuana A Signal of Misunderstanding," U.S.Government Printing Office Washington, 1972. [44] Wu, Tzu Chin, Donald P. Tashkin, Behnam Djahed, and JedE. Rose. "Pulmonary Hazards of Smoking Marijuana as Comparedwith Tobacco," New England Journal of Medicine, 318 (issue6): 347-351, 1988. [45] Slikker, William Jr, H.C. Cunny, J.R. Bailey, and M.G.Paule. "Placental Transfer and Fetal Disposition ofDelta-9-Tetrahydrocannabinol (THC) During Late Pregnancy in theRhesus Monkey," pp. 97-102. [46] Lyman, W.D., J.R. Sonett, C.F. Brosnan, R. Elkin, andM.B. Bornstein. "Delta-9-tetrahydrocannabinol A NovelTreatment for Experimental Autoimmune Encephalitis" by inJournal of Neuroimmunology, 23: 73-81. 1989. [47] Cabral, Guy A., Amy L. Stinnet, John Bailey, Syed F. Ali,Merle G. Paul, Andrew C. Scallet, and William Slikker, Jr."Chronic Marijuana Smoke Alters Alveolar MacrophageMorphology and Protein Expression," 1991. [48] Ponte, Lowell. "Radioactivity: The New-Found Dangerin Cigarettes," Reader's Digest, March 1986, pp. 123-127. [49] Litwak, Mark. "Would You Still Rather Fight ThanSwitch?" Whole Life Times, Mid-April/May, 1985, p. 11. [50] Crancer, A., et al. "Comparison of the Effects ofMarihuana and Alcohol on Simulated Driving Performance,"Science, 164:851-854, 1969. [51] Caldwell, D.F., et al. "Auditory and VisualThreshold Effects of Marihuana in Man," Perceptive and MotorSkills, 29:758-759, 1969. [52] Klonoff, H. (1974). "Effects of marihuana on drivingin a restricted area and on city streets: Driving performance andphysiological changes." In L. L. Miller (Ed.), Marijuana,Effects on human behavior (pp. 359-397). New York: AcademicPress. [57] Westlake, Tracy M., Allyn C. Howlett, Syed F. Ali, MerleG. Paule, Andrew C. Scallet, William Slikker, Jr. "ChronicExposure to Delta-9-Tetrahydrocannabinol Fails to IrreversiblyAlter Brain Cannabinoid Receptors," Brain Research, 544:145-149, 1991. [58] Ali, Syed F., Glenn D. Newport, Andrew C. Scallet, MerleG. Paule, John R. Bailey, William Slikker, Jr. "ChronicMarijuana Smoke Exposure in the Rhesus Monkey IV NeurochemicalEffects and Comparison to Acute and Chronic Exposure toDelta-9-Tetrahydrocannabinol (THC) in Rats" Pharmacology,Biochemistry & Behavior, 40: 677-682. 1991. [59] Radford EP Jr, and V.R. Hunt. "Polonium-210: avolatile radioelement in cigarettes." Science. 1964;143:247-9. [60] Little JB, E.P. Radford Jr, H.L. McCombs, V.R. Hunt."Distribution of polonium-210 in pulmonary tissues ofcigarette smokers." New England Journal of Medicine. 1965,273:1343-51. [66] Polen, Michael. "Health Care Use by FrequentMarijuana Smokers Who Do Not Smoke Tobacco," West J Med1993: 158. [67] Gieringer, Dale. "Marijuana, Driving and AccidentSafety," Journal of Psychoactive Drugs, Jan-Mar, 1988. [68] Weil, Andrew, and Winifred Rosen, From Chocolate toMorphine: Everything You Need to Know About Mind-Altering Drugs.Boston: Houghton Mifflin, 1993. [69] Cozzi, Nicholas. "Effects of Water Filtration onMarijuana Smoke: A Literature Review." MAPS Newsletter IV #2(Multidisciplinary Association for Psychedelic Studies, 1993).Reprints available from California NORML. [70] "Cannabis and Memory Loss," (editorial) BritishJournal of Addiction, 86:249-252 (1991). [71] Muskowitz, H., Hulbert, S., & McGlothlin, W.H.(1976). "Marihuana: Effects on simulated drivingperformance." Accident Analysis and Prevention, 8(1), p. 45- 50. [72] Astley, Susan, Dr. "Analysis of Facial Shape inChildren Gestationally Exposed to Marijuana, Alcohol, and/orCocaine," Pediatrics, 89 #1: 67 - 77 (June 1992). [73] Day, Nancy, et. al. "Prenatal Marijuana Use andNeonatal Outcome," Neurotoxicology and Teratology, 13:329-334 (1992). [74] Tashkin, Donald, et. al. "Effects of Habitual Use ofMarijuana and/or Cocaine on the Lung," in C. Nora Chiang andRichard L. Hawks, ed., Research findings on Smoking of AbusedSubstances, NIDA Research Monograph 99 (US Dept of Health andHuman Services, 1990). Suggested Reading [61] Grinspoon, Lester. Marihuana Reconsidered. Cambridge:Harvard University Press, 1971. [62] Herer, Jack. The Emperor Wears No Clothes. Van Nuys, CA:Hemp Publishing, 1990. [63] Hendin, Herbert. Living High: Daily Marijuana Use AmongAdults. New York: Human Sciences Press, 1987. [64] Himmelstein, Jerome L. The Strange Career of Marihuana:Politics and Ideology of Drug Control in America. Westport,Conn.: Greenwood Press, 1983. [65] Dale Gieringer, Ph.D from California's NORML."Health Tips for Marijuana Smokers," Feb. 1994 edition.To receive this very comprehensive 32-page compilation ofreports, send a $5 donation to California NORML, 2215-R MarketSt. #278, San Francisco, CA 94114 or call (415) 563-5858 and askfor the paper by name. The packet includes detailed instructionson how to construct a vaporizer. Contents | Feedback | Search DRCNet Library | Schaffer Library | Hemp (Marijuana) | General Hemp/MarijuanaInformation WT02-B01-2IA031-000655-B032-5http://206.61.184.43:80/schaffer/activist/args2.htm 206.61.184.43 19970122110409 text/html 39289HTTP/1.0 200 OKDate: Wednesday, 22-Jan-97 11:04:00 GMTServer: WebSitePro/1.1f (S/N wpo-0deb)Allow-ranges: bytesContent-type: text/htmlLast-modified: Saturday, 28-Dec-96 07:28:11 GMTContent-length: 39071 Drug Legalization Debates - Part 2 Contents | Feedback | Search DRCNet Library | Schaffer Library | The Drug Legalization Debate DRUG LEGALIZATION DEBATES Part 2 - About 15 pages by Clifford A. Schaffer The following pages are actual excerpts from some of mydebates on drug policy. The person I am debating in many of these questions is an M.D.with about 25 years experience in medicine. You can see how hestarted out from the first paragraph. He wound up agreeing withme and posted a message telling everyone he had changed his mindand supported a plan similar to the plan used in Liverpool. I SAID: Research done at the Federal hospital at Lexington,KY, was unable to establish what a lethal dose of heroin mightbe. In addition, the doctors in Liverpool who prescribe heroin toaddicts every day state that "heroin is not a dangerousdrug" and they have some patients on massive doses of heroinwith no risk of overdose. {{ Cliff, you must stop this dangerous garbage before you killsomeone. Opiates cause the suppression of respiration. You quietly stop breathing and die. The LD50 (dose required tokill half the population of a test animal) of the various opiateshas been well worked out. Specific opiate antagonists such asnaloxone can and are LIFE-SAVING in opiate overdose cases.Naloxone does nothing but antagonize the respiratory effects ofopiates.}} You had better talk to the doctors listed in Signer.zipbecause they are the ones who told me, as well as the doctors inLiverpool who prescribe it. They announced it on 60 Minutes sothey reached far more people than I ever will. The people whotold me are -- without doubt -- the leading authorities in theworld on the subject. One of them, in fact, has headed upCalifornia's official investigation into the subject for the last25 years. There have been other doctors on these boards who havealready recognized that the credentials of the people I amreferring to were far superior to their own. If you would like tocompare credentials, I will list theirs. Of course, even if heroin was a significant health hazard,that still would not mean that prison was a productive approachto the problem. Every major study said that it was preciselybecause of these dangers that we should not take this approach --because this policy only made things worse. {{ It is true that habitual users become resistant to theseeffects, but, for God's sake believe me when I say that a naiveuser is in mortal danger from the same dose of heroin.}} Naive users can be in mortal danger from a lot of things,including alcohol, automobiles, and firearms. I can't begin toimagine all the things that we might have to protect you from.That does not mean it is a good idea to throw them in prison, oryou either, even if you did succumb to the temptations of heroin. {{Please give us the words actually used the doctors by thedoctors you are quoting above. If you want to be believed, backup your opinions WITH QUOTES.}} Dr. Benson Rowe stated that heroin was "harmless".Present in the room at the same time, and voicing no protest wereDr. Frederick H. Meyers, Dr. Herbert Berger, and the otherslisted in Signer.zip. You may look them up in Who's Who. Also,the doctors in Liverpool stated on 60 Minutes that "Heroinis not a dangerous drug." They ought to know because theyprescribe it every day. The full transcript of the program is inHoover.zip. {{ The reason, of course, that you cant is that these notionsfly in the very face of modern neuro-pharmacology.}} As I said, I will be glad to compare the credentials of thesepeople with anyone you would like to name. The following message is from David C. I thought it wasparticularly good. PMFJI, {{Drugs are illegal because using them is very bad forpeople, and therefore very bad for the country.}} Either I missed something and you finally made tobacco andalcohol illegal in America or you are saying that tobacco andalcohol are not drugs or you are saying that using tobacco oralcohol is not very bad for people. I don't think there are anyother possibilities. Either way this would seem to be a verysilly thing to say. Let me inject some statistics into your debate: DRUGS Drug Crimes per 100,000 people Australia - 403 USA - 234 Canada - 225 Denmark - 176 Switzerland - 129 Norway - 116 Austria - 77 Belgium - 40 Netherlands - 38 Japan - 31 Israel - 25 Spain - 15 Portugal - 13 Italy - 6 PRISON Prisoners per 100,000 people USA - 426 Poland - 204 Bulgaria - 160 Hungary - 142 Canada - 94 Austria - 87 Germany - 77 United Kingdom - 77 Finland - 75 Australia - 60 New Zealand - 60 Italy - 60 Portugal - 58 Switzerland - 54 Spain - 49 Denmark - 47 France - 40 Netherlands - 27 Greece - 24 Source: UN Centre for Social Devt. and Humanitarian Affairs.Looks to me like we both have a serious drug problem - and thatit is the probable cause of some crimes. Also looks like youwouldn't really want to stuff too many more Americans in jail -its obviously not working. Australia generaly follows theAmerican model RE: Drug law, although minor offenders are treatedmuch more leniently (ie users). Looking at the statistics would lead one to think that some ofthe programmes that continental Europe have for limitting druguse might be worthwhile. "Liberal" or not, if they workthey would be better than whatever it is we are doing now. Ithink your society and mine are obfuscating their moral duty inthe treatment of drug offenders if we continues to simply lockthem up. And, it would seem, wasting a lot of money. I assume you have never been inside a prison? The probabilityof meeting death in a prison is much higher than outside of it.Prohibition of alcohol didn't work very well early this century.I don't think that the track record of prohibition of drugs isdoing very well either. I am told that over half the population of Australia hassmoked marijuana (no source). Should we just build a prison wallaround the place and lock the lot up?? Regards David C. {{How many people would I imprison to stop the flow ofthese drugs? Enough to save the rest. Or, if you can come up withanother alternative that would stop the widespread destructioncaused by drug abuse, I would throw out the prison idea, and gowith that. }} Thirty million people in prison? What an idea! First, face thefact that there is no way in Hell that we can afford to throwenough people in prison to make this policy effective. You mightas well go out and throw rocks at the moon and claim that you aregetting closer every time. We can't do it even if it was a goodidea. So, it looks like the first thing we ought to do is look forOption #2. Any suggestions? {{You see the horrors of putting drug abusers in prison. Isee the horrors of drug abuse period.}} Every major study of drug policy agreed that prison onlyincreased the existing dangers of drugs, and made the situationworse. In the case of drugs like heroin, they said that nearlyall of the damage to the individual health and to society was theresult of the fact that the drugs were illegal and thereforeunregulated. {{Consider the possibility that continued vigorousprosecution of the drug laws may limit FUTURE incarcerations inthe long term.}} So how many millions should we put in prison right now? {{ In the meantime I'm comfortable leaving the question inthe hands of our elected representatives.}} Certainly any change in the laws will have to come from them.But tell me, where do you agree or disagree with the conclusionspresented by the CU Report, and why? {{ for God's sake, you gave a reference. If discourse is tomean anything, you must be prepared to back up the reference.}} It would be nice if you did the same, or maybe just answeredsome of the simple questions I have asked. Like: who is Dr.William Halsted and how does his story relate to what you saidearlier? I am beginning to believe you have not read the CU Report oryou would know the answer to this one right off the top of yourhead. {{ }} Dr. Benson Rowe stated that heroin was"harmless". {{ The full quote, in context, please.}} The occasion was the signing of the Hoover Resolution at theHoover Institute at Stanford. Present in the room were the peoplelisted in Signer.zip, as I said. Dr. Benson Rowe is ProfessorEmeritus of Cardiac Surgery at the University of California atSan Francisco. In introducing himself to the assembled group, heexplained how he became interested in the drug issue. He said itwas immediately after World War II when he began doing surgery onsome addicts with damaged heart valves. In order to find out whatwas damaging their heart valves he went to the county coroner andresearched the issue with the bodies of people who had died. Hediscovered, much to his surprise, that the coroner and everyother medical authority agreed that heroin was not the cause ofthe injury to the heart valves. The cause of the injury, insteadwas the impurities in the street drug, and the infections whichresulted from injecting anything in unsanitary conditions. Hesaid that, after almost fifty years of research on the subject,he was convinced that, except for the fact that heroin causedaddiction, it was otherwise medically "harmless" to thebody. The other doctors in attendance nodded agreement. At the same conference I asked Dr. Frederick Meyers about whatmedication he would recommend for my mother's condition. He saidthat opioids were the drug of choice and that they should have noharmful effects on my mother. {{}}Also, the doctors in Liverpool stated on 60 Minutesthat "Heroin is not a dangerous drug."{{{ The fullquote, in context, please.}} See below. The show aired December 28, 1993. Ed is Ed Bradley.Julia is an addict. Alan Perry is a counselor at the clinic. As Isaid, the full text is in Hoover.zip which you could have lookedup and read yourself. Ed: Julia says she's now able to have normal relation, to holddown a job as a waitress and to care for her 3 year old daughter.Without the prescription, where do you think you would be? Julia: I would probably be dead now. Ed: Once, they have gotten their prescriptions, addicts mustshow up for regular meetings to show that they are stayinghealthy and free from crime. But how can anyone be healthy ifthey are taking a drug like heroin? Alan Perry: Pure heroin is not a dangerous drug. We havepeople on massive doses of heroin. Ed: Alan Perry is a former Drug Information Officer for thelocal Health Authority and now a counselor at the clinic. So howcome we see so much damage caused by heroin? Alan: The heroin that is causing that damage, is not causingdamage because of the heroin in it, it is causing damage becauseof the bread dust, coffee, crushed bleach crystals, anything thatcauses the harm and if heroin is 90% adulterated that means only10% is heroin, the rest is rubbish, and if you inject cement intoyour veins, you don't have to be a medical expert to work it out,that's going to cause harm. Ed: Many at the clinic like George still suffer from thedamage caused by street drugs. Alan Perry believes you can'tprescribe clean drugs and needles to addicts without teachingthem how to use them. Alan: You know the major causes of ill health to druginjectors is not even the dirty drugs they take, it is their badtechnique. Not knowing how to do it. In America I have seenaddicts missing legs and arms and that is through bad technique.So we show people how to, not how to inject safely, but how toinject less dangerously. We have to be clear about that, you havestoned people sticking needles in themselves in a dangerousactivity. The strategy is called "harm minimalization." {{There is a program in Oakland, Calif. When a drug abusercomes in, and is convicted of a felony charge, he has thepossibility of a new program. . . .}} You seem to miss the point of these programs. These programscame about as a result of recognition that prison does not work.The point of these drug courts is to do anything they can to keeppeople out of prison. {{But good news! Did you watch NBC news tonight? If so, yousaw the description of a drug program in Oakland. See my post toDavid C. for a quickie description. It keeps drugs illegal, andkeeps many users out of prison, and sobers them up. Wow. }} You should have caught the A&E special about what ishappening in Europe. They featured the Chief of Police of Oaklandand the Sheriff of San Francisco both saying that the drug warshould be abandoned because it is absolutely hopeless. Youprobably missed the news that the mayors of San Francisco,Oakland, and San Jose held a press conference (along with theirrespective law enforcment officials) to announce their signing ofthe Hoover Resolution. {{But there was even more good news with it. A man wasquoted who was trying to sell the program. He pointed out that itsaved a whole lot of money. Said it costs $20,000 a year to keepa druggie in prison. So, unless the average amount of time servedfor a drug offense is 23 years, your figure of $450,000 is wayhigh. }} The $450,000 figure is composed of the following: $150,000 forarrest and prosecution, according to figures compiled by theState of New York. About $150,000 for a prison cell, which iswhat it costs here in California. In New York this figure is alittle lower - but still over $100,000. Then add about $30,000per year for an average term of five years. Total: about $450,000 {{Also, Mr C. pointed out the number of prisoners per100,000 in this country. It 426, which comes to a little over1,000,000 altogether. So Cliff's figure of 1,000,000 now inprison on drug charges must have also been a bit off. (Maybe heused it like the figure for black males - there are 1,000,000 inprison, and some of them are there on drug charges.)}} As earlier, you are misstating what I said. Let me try itagain. There are currently about 1.4 million people in theprisons and jails of the US and the population is rising rapidly,primarily because of drugs. The 1.4 million figure is thepopulation in the prisons on a given census day, which means theactual count of people who went through those prisons is higherthan that figure. By the Federal Government's own estimates, wewill soon reach the points where we have more than 1.5 millionpeople in prison (on a given census day) and about two- thirds ofthose people will be there for drug charges. The full figures, ifyou care to read them, are available in the Sourcebook ofCriminal Justice Statistics, published by the DOJ and availableat your local Government book store or through your locallibrary. {{Drugs are illegal because using them is very bad forpeople, and therefore very bad for the country. }} Absolutely false. That never was the reason for the laws. {{ It is far to our benefit to have a nation of soberpeople. }} No doubt about that, but prison does not achieve that verywell. {{It merely depends on what you want to discourage. Usingdrugs is a behavior which is subject to negative reinforcement.}} The average drug user never sees any such negativereinforcement from the criminal justice system, except perhapsthat it makes their drugs cost a little more. If that is yourobject, you should face the fact right now that this is afailure. {{How, then, would you persuade them to seek treatment?}} My good friend Judge James P. Gray says he does it all thetime with people with alcohol problems, without threatening themwith prison. {{Well, yes, "separation from society" now meansprison. You have some other alternative?}} So answer the question: How many millions of people do youthink we ought to put in prison for drugs? {{Once again, the British experiment with prescriptionheroin has been a failure: "The prescription ofpharmaceutically pure heroin in controlled doses is, in mostessential respects, a thing of the past in Britain."("Drug Problems and Criminal Justice Policy inBritain," _Contemporary Drug Problems_, Summer 1992)}} My good friend, Dr. Clarke Smith, a member of the CaliforniaAcademy of Family Practice just got back from there last week andreported that heroin and cocaine are CURRENTLY being prescribedand that the authorities consider it quite successful. The 60Minutes show on this subject aired on December 28, 1993, and wehave personally confirmed the facts with the British doctors onseveral occasions. The doctors say that their biggest problemwith the program is that the United States Government keeps lyingabout it. }}prison as rehabilitation is a disproven illusion According to who?}} According to Thomas Coughlin, the New York State Commissionerof Corrections, for one. {{Work-release programs are already a standard part of theprison system in many states, and have been for many years.}} Most convicts do not have the opportunity to participate inany such programs. These programs have been virtuallydiscontinued in California. {{ Once again, what you saw that 15-minute televisionepisode doesn't prove a thing. What may have occurred (accordingto Ed Bradley) in one clinic in Liverpool does not allow one togeneralize to the entire society. Anyone can create a"successful" heroin maintenance program by taking theaddicts who are stable anyway and putting them in the program.That is, if there are 500 addicts and 20 or 30 of them arestable, then when you put the 20 or 30 stable addicts in amaintenance program, you can claim a big "success," butyou haven't really accomplished anything. Britain has beenpracticing heroin maintenance since 1926, according to"Contemporary Drug Problems," and very few physiciansprescribe it anymore. If you want to impress anyone with thesupposed successs of the Liverpool program, you will have to comeup with something better than a TV report. I have been to thelibrary and researched the issue; if you want to continue thedebate, so should you.}} The more I think about this message, the more I see someonewho is in serious denial here. I have told you of the 60 Minutesshow, the A&E one hour show (originally produced by the BBC),and the fact that we have personally contacted the doctorsinvolved to confirm that both shows were accurate. As I said, agroup -- headed by Dr. Clarke Smith, a member of the Board ofDirectors of the California Academy of Family Physicians, went toEurope to confirm what is happening in several areas. The doctorsconfirmed to us that the shows were accurate and your informationis, shall we say, outdated. Decriminalization and even outrightlegalization are being called for by both medical and policeauthorities all over Europe. As far as research goes, you candownload Signer.zip in library 13 of the Issues forum and startcontacting some of the doctors listed there. If you want to knowwho they are in more detail, look them up in Who's Who, also atyour local library. If you have researched this so well in the library, whyhaven't you read any of the studies I mentioned? So I am calling your bluff again. The doctors involved inLiverpool are named in the text of the 60 Minutes program inHoover.zip. They are listed with information in Liverpool, or youcan simply call the public health service in Liverpool, as weoriginally did, and ask to be put in touch with the doctorsrunning the program. Go ahead. Call them and tell us the results.And while you are at it, remember to ask them about the vote ofthe British chiefs of police. {{ The Chinese are biologically the same as the Americans.They react to addictive substances the same as we do.}} Aren't the Europeans biologically the same as us, too?Therefore, the programs which are currently working in Europeshould work here. {{ Try reading what I wrote before you comment on it:"People who had boring or stressful jobs turned to opium:court eunuchs, wealthy housewives, harried clerks, soldiers goinginto combat, students preparing for exams." These peoplehave their counterparts in America.}} Court eunuchs have their counterpart in America? Other studiesof the same period of time showed that opium use in China was nota lot different from alcohol use in the US. That is, the majorityof the users were weekend recreational users who could take it orleave it. The percentage who appeared to be addicted was not muchdifferent than the percentage one would expect from alcohol. And, since you seem to be so good at history, you ought toknow that the first anti-opium laws in the US had nothing to dowith public health and safety. The first anti-opium law was an1875 San Francisco ordinance banning the smoking of opium inopium dens, a peculiarly Chinese custom. The stated reason forthe law was the fear that Chinese men were luring white women totheir "ruin" in opium dens. "Ruin" wasdefined not as opium addiction, but as associating with Chinesemen. The racism behind these laws was overt from the verybeginning. At the same time, opium remained available in allsorts of medicinal preparations, more commonly used by whites. {{ Again, you should read what I wrote. During the periodof legal narcotics trade, between 1858 and 1906, the incidence ofnarcotics use increased from around 5% of the population toapproximately 25%.}} And it was on a steady decline from 1906 to 1914 when theHarrison Narcotics Act was passed, primarily because of the PureFood and Drug Act of 1905 which made manufacturers list theingredients and therefore allowed consumers to intelligentlychoose. You may also recall that the major medical societies allstated that the Harrison Act was a medical, criminal, and socialdisaster and urged its repeal. After the passage of the Act, theproblems of drug use rose sharply. And, maybe you could share with us the reasons why hemp -- thelargest crop in America -- was made illegal? {{ Great idea, only what is more positively reinforcingthan a heroin rush?}} Well, most people I know think that the mundane old stuff likemaking an honest living, and being sober enough to enjoy yourfamily is a whole lot better than any drug high. {{ "Drug users referred to treatment by the criminaljustice system stay in treatment longer on average than thosewith no legal involvement, and length of time spent in treatmentis an important predictor of success. . . . Clients monitoredthrough TASC are as successful in reducing their drug use andcriminal activity as are those voluntarily in drugtreatment." _Bureau of Justice Statistics National Report_(1992).}} That's easy to do if you are behind bars for twenty years. Andthe ones that went to prison are "as successful" as theones who went voluntarily. Because it is so expensive to processthem through prison, don't you think it would be a better idea toget them to go voluntarily? {{ I don't see what this has to do with drug offenses.Since you are unaware of the fact, I should explain that mostdrug offenses are non- violent.}} The only people who seem to be unaware of this fact are thedrug warriors. {{Fine, then I can assume that you won't mind sitting inthe passenger seat.}} The stats show quite clearly that illegal drugs are arelatively minor problem on the road. {{}}Heroin is a very safe drug when legal.{{ Just sprinkle a little on your breakfeast cereal? Or a BringYour Own Balloon (BYOB) Christmas party? We'll invite yourchildren over, after all it's safe. Come on, you can't reallybelieve this. }} That is the word of the world's leading medical experts on thesubject, including the doctors in Liverpool who prescribe itevery day. There is a long list of them in Signer.zip. If youneed more information on them you can read Who's Who or I canprobably put you in touch with a good number of them. (I haveoffered that before but you seem strangely reluctant to try toreply to any of my messages.) {{}} Pot is safer than alcohol or tobacco, and has nevercaused a documented human death according to all theliterature.{{ Except when you're flying planes, trains or automobiles.}} Even then, accidents caused by pot are pretty rare. Forexample, a study of OSHA statistics showed that about .014% ofon=the-job accidents were caused by illegal drugs. {{How many millions in this country drink? Are you willingto live with a similar abuse rate for drugs like cocain, heroin,pot and speed?}} Gosh no, but why aren't we doing the same thing for alcoholand tobacco if it is such a good idea? If prison is the best wayto keep people from becoming addicted to drugs, why aren't wejailing wine drinkers and cigarette smokers? {{Were it not so embedded in our culture, I would might beinclined to say yes. Until then, I'll settle for mandatory deathsentences for manslaughter cases related to alcohol abuse,mandatory prison terms for those selling to minors, and so on. }} Let's suppose you got your fondest wish. Let's suppose thattomorrow morning, you woke up as President and found outside yourhome, every drug dealer in America lined up with a bag of dope inone hand and a signed confession in the other? What would you do? {{How many more children are you willing to hand over tolives of dependency, isolation and neglect? }} Not one -- which is one the main reasons that the currentpolicy ought to be stopped -- because it is devastating thechildren in the black community. {{ Gosh, a serious question! It's been *so* long!}} I have asked you lots of serious questions but you don't wantto answer them. So here is an old one, slightly rephrased: Let'ssuppose I believe everything you say about drugs and the bestkind of drug program. You say that prison must be an integralpart of that program. So, as a taxpayer who has to pay for theprisons, I ask you: There are thirty million drug users in theUnited States. How many millions do you want to throw in prison? Further supposing I believe everything you say: If prison issuch a good idea for these drugs, why isn't it an equally good(or even better!) idea for alcohol and tobacco? {{ The failure of our present program is that it treatsdealers as criminals and addicts as victims.}} No, as the judges and other law enforcement officials havetold me, it is a disaster (not just a failure) because it neverwas a good idea in the first place. {{ This is a rather arbitrary distinction, since mostdealers are also addicts and most addicts are involved incrime.}} Under the law all users are dealers. {{ Also, it is also useless trying to suppress drug dealingwithout suppressing drug abuse. Therefore, I believe that asuccessful drug policy should place greater weight on curtailingdrug abuse.}} We agree there. {{ Drug abuse occurs for a number of reasons. People whoare poor and uneducated turn to drugs because they have nothingbetter to do with their lives. Unfortunately, you can't do muchabout that, short of a general reform of American society. It isimportant, however, that treatment programs offer addicts analternative lifestyle. Taking someone out of a rotten, no-futurelife in a miserable slum and putting them in treatment isuseless, if they can only go back to a rotten, no- future life ina miserable slum.}} We agree there. {{ In this light, vocational training is very important. Itis important that training be suited to the individual and alsoprovide him with the opportunity for pursuing a meaningfulcareer. But in all cases, it should be made plain that thealternative to honest work is prison.}} We agree that vocational training is very important. Well, we don't have any programs funded to meet the"honest work" part of it so the alternative is alwaysprison. Of course, once they go to prison, it doesn't matter ifthey get vocational training or not, because nobody is going tohire them anyway. As a society, that is called shooting ourselvesin the foot. {{ A lot of affluent people, who have plenty otheropportunities, also use narcotics. For such individuals, thestigma of going to jail is very important, and so punishment is astrong deterrent.}} Poor people get jail. Affluent people get the Betty FordClinic. That disparity in the outcome of this policy is one ofthe reasons that every major study of drug policy has recommendeddecriminalization. {{ The MADD movement provides a good model of how effectivelegislation can produce a real social change: There is now astrong stigma against drunk driving, and so the offense hasdeclined. Legalized gambling provides a counter-example: There isno stigma against playing Lotto or video poker, and so millionsof people gamble who never did it before.}} Your analogies are weak. Drunk driving is a public behavior.There is a useful purpose to enforcing laws on public behaviorand, because the behavior is public, the laws have a chance toconfront the offender and stop the situation. The same is nottrue with drug use. {{ So, treatment and punishment are both important forcontrolling the drug problem. }} The information supplied above does not support thisconclusion. {{ One often hears the argument, however, that we shouldtreat addicts *instead* of throwing them in jail. However, theseare not logical alternatives. Many addicts will not accepttreatment unless they are already in jail or are threatened withimprisonment.}} The Rand Corporation recently issued a study which said thatevery dollar spent on drug treatment saved an additional sevendollars in related social costs. On the other hand, every dollarspent on putting drug users in prison costs about an additionalfifteen dollars in related social costs. Of course, the British have a way of getting addicts to accepttreatment and become crime-free. They simply tell the addictsthat they will lose their legal prescription if they don'tstraighten their lives out. It works a whole lot better than whatyou are recommending. {{ Judges often do sentence minor drug offenders totreatment rather than prison. This has merit; we definitely needto expand drug treatment and make it more available.}} We agree on this point. I would also point out that judgesoften sentence minor offenders to unconscionable prison termsover trivial offenses, like the young woman who got a mandatoryminimum of ten years without even touching drugs. {{ But we also need to end the cycle by which addicts gointo treatment, then relapse. }} You missed the 60 Minutes show and the A&E show onLiverpool (obviously) so you might be interested in what thedoctors there said. They said that all modes of treatment orpunishment for drug use that they could find produced the sameessential result. That is, about five percent of the addicts peryear would come off of drugs by themselves, regardless of whatyou did. They said it seemed to be as much a process ofmaturation as anything else. Therefore, they said, rather thanpunish them and seriously impact their health with dirty heroin,dirty needles, etc., they opted to give the addicts prescriptionsfor heroin and cocaine, and teach them how to manage theiraddiction until they can mature off of it. As a result, most ofthe health problems have been eliminated, most of the crime hasbeen eliminated, and most addicts are employed and living withtheir families. {{ For this reason, I would support a program ofaccelerated minimum sentences for second and subsequent offenses.When an addict proves untreatable, the next best alternative isto separate him from society. In addition, the acceleratedschedule of punishments provides incentive to reform.}} So I ask again. How many people do you propose to put inprison? {{ The aim of treatment programs is to end addiction. }} The primary aim of the British program is to keep addictshealthy long enough to end the addiction. {{ But it is also important to prevent untreated addictsfrom becoming a menace to society. }} Their crimes are primarily property crimes and are a result ofthe fact that drugs are illegal. In Liverpool, where they havetried another approach, the addicts are no longer a menace tosociety. {{In this light, methadone programs have been verysuccessful. While methadone is addictive, it can be taken orallyand is much more long- lasting in preventing withdrawal than isheroin.}} Many famous medical experts, such as Dr. Frederick H. Meyerspoint out that the prescription of methadone (a narcotic) in suchlarge amounts proves that narcotics are not inherently dangerous. {{ A heroin addict needs an injection every few hours andoften becomes violent if he doesn't get it. }} A recent report by the Department of Justice titled"Drugs and Violence" says that the only drug which hasany real connection to any kind of violent crime is alcohol. Evenif what you said was true, it would seem that we would be farbetter off with an approach like they are using in Liverpool. Amanaged daily prescription would seem to be the best way toinsure that this does not happen. If you had read any of thestudies I have mentioned, you would know that tobacco and alcoholusers exhibit the same kinds of anti-social behavior when theyare deprived of their drug. {{ Finally, I would support expanded drug testing. Atpresent, the police are well equipped to test drunk drivers, butnarcotics users may evade punishment, unless they happen to havethe drugs in their possession. Definitely, police stations shouldbe equipped to test persons arrested for reckless driving andsimilar offenses for drugs. Regular drug testing should also be apart of all prison programs.}} Why wouldn't you support the same thing for alcohol andtobacco? They do far more damage than illegal drugs so we wouldbe far better off to put the same effort against them. How aboutit? Should we throw George Burns in jail because he refuses togive up cigars? And do you want to punish people based solely on their drugtests? After all, you have money in your pocket right now withcocaine dust on it and it is possible that enough of it got in toyour system to make you register positive. That is, of course, ifyou didn't already test positive because you took a coldmedication, or a headache pill, or a cough syrup, or ate certainkinds of bread, etc., etc., etc., Contents | Feedback | Search DRCNet Library | Schaffer Library | The Drug Legalization Debate WT02-B01-3IA087-000632-B036-62http://206.61.184.43:80/schaffer/Activist/args2.htm 206.61.184.43 19970122070545 text/html 39289HTTP/1.0 200 OKDate: Wednesday, 22-Jan-97 07:05:36 GMTServer: WebSitePro/1.1f (S/N wpo-0deb)Allow-ranges: bytesContent-type: text/htmlLast-modified: Saturday, 28-Dec-96 07:28:11 GMTContent-length: 39071 Drug Legalization Debates - Part 2 Contents | Feedback | Search DRCNet Library | Schaffer Library | The Drug Legalization Debate DRUG LEGALIZATION DEBATES Part 2 - About 15 pages by Clifford A. Schaffer The following pages are actual excerpts from some of mydebates on drug policy. The person I am debating in many of these questions is an M.D.with about 25 years experience in medicine. You can see how hestarted out from the first paragraph. He wound up agreeing withme and posted a message telling everyone he had changed his mindand supported a plan similar to the plan used in Liverpool. I SAID: Research done at the Federal hospital at Lexington,KY, was unable to establish what a lethal dose of heroin mightbe. In addition, the doctors in Liverpool who prescribe heroin toaddicts every day state that "heroin is not a dangerousdrug" and they have some patients on massive doses of heroinwith no risk of overdose. {{ Cliff, you must stop this dangerous garbage before you killsomeone. Opiates cause the suppression of respiration. You quietly stop breathing and die. The LD50 (dose required tokill half the population of a test animal) of the various opiateshas been well worked out. Specific opiate antagonists such asnaloxone can and are LIFE-SAVING in opiate overdose cases.Naloxone does nothing but antagonize the respiratory effects ofopiates.}} You had better talk to the doctors listed in Signer.zipbecause they are the ones who told me, as well as the doctors inLiverpool who prescribe it. They announced it on 60 Minutes sothey reached far more people than I ever will. The people whotold me are -- without doubt -- the leading authorities in theworld on the subject. One of them, in fact, has headed upCalifornia's official investigation into the subject for the last25 years. There have been other doctors on these boards who havealready recognized that the credentials of the people I amreferring to were far superior to their own. If you would like tocompare credentials, I will list theirs. Of course, even if heroin was a significant health hazard,that still would not mean that prison was a productive approachto the problem. Every major study said that it was preciselybecause of these dangers that we should not take this approach --because this policy only made things worse. {{ It is true that habitual users become resistant to theseeffects, but, for God's sake believe me when I say that a naiveuser is in mortal danger from the same dose of heroin.}} Naive users can be in mortal danger from a lot of things,including alcohol, automobiles, and firearms. I can't begin toimagine all the things that we might have to protect you from.That does not mean it is a good idea to throw them in prison, oryou either, even if you did succumb to the temptations of heroin. {{Please give us the words actually used the doctors by thedoctors you are quoting above. If you want to be believed, backup your opinions WITH QUOTES.}} Dr. Benson Rowe stated that heroin was "harmless".Present in the room at the same time, and voicing no protest wereDr. Frederick H. Meyers, Dr. Herbert Berger, and the otherslisted in Signer.zip. You may look them up in Who's Who. Also,the doctors in Liverpool stated on 60 Minutes that "Heroinis not a dangerous drug." They ought to know because theyprescribe it every day. The full transcript of the program is inHoover.zip. {{ The reason, of course, that you cant is that these notionsfly in the very face of modern neuro-pharmacology.}} As I said, I will be glad to compare the credentials of thesepeople with anyone you would like to name. The following message is from David C. I thought it wasparticularly good. PMFJI, {{Drugs are illegal because using them is very bad forpeople, and therefore very bad for the country.}} Either I missed something and you finally made tobacco andalcohol illegal in America or you are saying that tobacco andalcohol are not drugs or you are saying that using tobacco oralcohol is not very bad for people. I don't think there are anyother possibilities. Either way this would seem to be a verysilly thing to say. Let me inject some statistics into your debate: DRUGS Drug Crimes per 100,000 people Australia - 403 USA - 234 Canada - 225 Denmark - 176 Switzerland - 129 Norway - 116 Austria - 77 Belgium - 40 Netherlands - 38 Japan - 31 Israel - 25 Spain - 15 Portugal - 13 Italy - 6 PRISON Prisoners per 100,000 people USA - 426 Poland - 204 Bulgaria - 160 Hungary - 142 Canada - 94 Austria - 87 Germany - 77 United Kingdom - 77 Finland - 75 Australia - 60 New Zealand - 60 Italy - 60 Portugal - 58 Switzerland - 54 Spain - 49 Denmark - 47 France - 40 Netherlands - 27 Greece - 24 Source: UN Centre for Social Devt. and Humanitarian Affairs.Looks to me like we both have a serious drug problem - and thatit is the probable cause of some crimes. Also looks like youwouldn't really want to stuff too many more Americans in jail -its obviously not working. Australia generaly follows theAmerican model RE: Drug law, although minor offenders are treatedmuch more leniently (ie users). Looking at the statistics would lead one to think that some ofthe programmes that continental Europe have for limitting druguse might be worthwhile. "Liberal" or not, if they workthey would be better than whatever it is we are doing now. Ithink your society and mine are obfuscating their moral duty inthe treatment of drug offenders if we continues to simply lockthem up. And, it would seem, wasting a lot of money. I assume you have never been inside a prison? The probabilityof meeting death in a prison is much higher than outside of it.Prohibition of alcohol didn't work very well early this century.I don't think that the track record of prohibition of drugs isdoing very well either. I am told that over half the population of Australia hassmoked marijuana (no source). Should we just build a prison wallaround the place and lock the lot up?? Regards David C. {{How many people would I imprison to stop the flow ofthese drugs? Enough to save the rest. Or, if you can come up withanother alternative that would stop the widespread destructioncaused by drug abuse, I would throw out the prison idea, and gowith that. }} Thirty million people in prison? What an idea! First, face thefact that there is no way in Hell that we can afford to throwenough people in prison to make this policy effective. You mightas well go out and throw rocks at the moon and claim that you aregetting closer every time. We can't do it even if it was a goodidea. So, it looks like the first thing we ought to do is look forOption #2. Any suggestions? {{You see the horrors of putting drug abusers in prison. Isee the horrors of drug abuse period.}} Every major study of drug policy agreed that prison onlyincreased the existing dangers of drugs, and made the situationworse. In the case of drugs like heroin, they said that nearlyall of the damage to the individual health and to society was theresult of the fact that the drugs were illegal and thereforeunregulated. {{Consider the possibility that continued vigorousprosecution of the drug laws may limit FUTURE incarcerations inthe long term.}} So how many millions should we put in prison right now? {{ In the meantime I'm comfortable leaving the question inthe hands of our elected representatives.}} Certainly any change in the laws will have to come from them.But tell me, where do you agree or disagree with the conclusionspresented by the CU Report, and why? {{ for God's sake, you gave a reference. If discourse is tomean anything, you must be prepared to back up the reference.}} It would be nice if you did the same, or maybe just answeredsome of the simple questions I have asked. Like: who is Dr.William Halsted and how does his story relate to what you saidearlier? I am beginning to believe you have not read the CU Report oryou would know the answer to this one right off the top of yourhead. {{ }} Dr. Benson Rowe stated that heroin was"harmless". {{ The full quote, in context, please.}} The occasion was the signing of the Hoover Resolution at theHoover Institute at Stanford. Present in the room were the peoplelisted in Signer.zip, as I said. Dr. Benson Rowe is ProfessorEmeritus of Cardiac Surgery at the University of California atSan Francisco. In introducing himself to the assembled group, heexplained how he became interested in the drug issue. He said itwas immediately after World War II when he began doing surgery onsome addicts with damaged heart valves. In order to find out whatwas damaging their heart valves he went to the county coroner andresearched the issue with the bodies of people who had died. Hediscovered, much to his surprise, that the coroner and everyother medical authority agreed that heroin was not the cause ofthe injury to the heart valves. The cause of the injury, insteadwas the impurities in the street drug, and the infections whichresulted from injecting anything in unsanitary conditions. Hesaid that, after almost fifty years of research on the subject,he was convinced that, except for the fact that heroin causedaddiction, it was otherwise medically "harmless" to thebody. The other doctors in attendance nodded agreement. At the same conference I asked Dr. Frederick Meyers about whatmedication he would recommend for my mother's condition. He saidthat opioids were the drug of choice and that they should have noharmful effects on my mother. {{}}Also, the doctors in Liverpool stated on 60 Minutesthat "Heroin is not a dangerous drug."{{{ The fullquote, in context, please.}} See below. The show aired December 28, 1993. Ed is Ed Bradley.Julia is an addict. Alan Perry is a counselor at the clinic. As Isaid, the full text is in Hoover.zip which you could have lookedup and read yourself. Ed: Julia says she's now able to have normal relation, to holddown a job as a waitress and to care for her 3 year old daughter.Without the prescription, where do you think you would be? Julia: I would probably be dead now. Ed: Once, they have gotten their prescriptions, addicts mustshow up for regular meetings to show that they are stayinghealthy and free from crime. But how can anyone be healthy ifthey are taking a drug like heroin? Alan Perry: Pure heroin is not a dangerous drug. We havepeople on massive doses of heroin. Ed: Alan Perry is a former Drug Information Officer for thelocal Health Authority and now a counselor at the clinic. So howcome we see so much damage caused by heroin? Alan: The heroin that is causing that damage, is not causingdamage because of the heroin in it, it is causing damage becauseof the bread dust, coffee, crushed bleach crystals, anything thatcauses the harm and if heroin is 90% adulterated that means only10% is heroin, the rest is rubbish, and if you inject cement intoyour veins, you don't have to be a medical expert to work it out,that's going to cause harm. Ed: Many at the clinic like George still suffer from thedamage caused by street drugs. Alan Perry believes you can'tprescribe clean drugs and needles to addicts without teachingthem how to use them. Alan: You know the major causes of ill health to druginjectors is not even the dirty drugs they take, it is their badtechnique. Not knowing how to do it. In America I have seenaddicts missing legs and arms and that is through bad technique.So we show people how to, not how to inject safely, but how toinject less dangerously. We have to be clear about that, you havestoned people sticking needles in themselves in a dangerousactivity. The strategy is called "harm minimalization." {{There is a program in Oakland, Calif. When a drug abusercomes in, and is convicted of a felony charge, he has thepossibility of a new program. . . .}} You seem to miss the point of these programs. These programscame about as a result of recognition that prison does not work.The point of these drug courts is to do anything they can to keeppeople out of prison. {{But good news! Did you watch NBC news tonight? If so, yousaw the description of a drug program in Oakland. See my post toDavid C. for a quickie description. It keeps drugs illegal, andkeeps many users out of prison, and sobers them up. Wow. }} You should have caught the A&E special about what ishappening in Europe. They featured the Chief of Police of Oaklandand the Sheriff of San Francisco both saying that the drug warshould be abandoned because it is absolutely hopeless. Youprobably missed the news that the mayors of San Francisco,Oakland, and San Jose held a press conference (along with theirrespective law enforcment officials) to announce their signing ofthe Hoover Resolution. {{But there was even more good news with it. A man wasquoted who was trying to sell the program. He pointed out that itsaved a whole lot of money. Said it costs $20,000 a year to keepa druggie in prison. So, unless the average amount of time servedfor a drug offense is 23 years, your figure of $450,000 is wayhigh. }} The $450,000 figure is composed of the following: $150,000 forarrest and prosecution, according to figures compiled by theState of New York. About $150,000 for a prison cell, which iswhat it costs here in California. In New York this figure is alittle lower - but still over $100,000. Then add about $30,000per year for an average term of five years. Total: about $450,000 {{Also, Mr C. pointed out the number of prisoners per100,000 in this country. It 426, which comes to a little over1,000,000 altogether. So Cliff's figure of 1,000,000 now inprison on drug charges must have also been a bit off. (Maybe heused it like the figure for black males - there are 1,000,000 inprison, and some of them are there on drug charges.)}} As earlier, you are misstating what I said. Let me try itagain. There are currently about 1.4 million people in theprisons and jails of the US and the population is rising rapidly,primarily because of drugs. The 1.4 million figure is thepopulation in the prisons on a given census day, which means theactual count of people who went through those prisons is higherthan that figure. By the Federal Government's own estimates, wewill soon reach the points where we have more than 1.5 millionpeople in prison (on a given census day) and about two- thirds ofthose people will be there for drug charges. The full figures, ifyou care to read them, are available in the Sourcebook ofCriminal Justice Statistics, published by the DOJ and availableat your local Government book store or through your locallibrary. {{Drugs are illegal because using them is very bad forpeople, and therefore very bad for the country. }} Absolutely false. That never was the reason for the laws. {{ It is far to our benefit to have a nation of soberpeople. }} No doubt about that, but prison does not achieve that verywell. {{It merely depends on what you want to discourage. Usingdrugs is a behavior which is subject to negative reinforcement.}} The average drug user never sees any such negativereinforcement from the criminal justice system, except perhapsthat it makes their drugs cost a little more. If that is yourobject, you should face the fact right now that this is afailure. {{How, then, would you persuade them to seek treatment?}} My good friend Judge James P. Gray says he does it all thetime with people with alcohol problems, without threatening themwith prison. {{Well, yes, "separation from society" now meansprison. You have some other alternative?}} So answer the question: How many millions of people do youthink we ought to put in prison for drugs? {{Once again, the British experiment with prescriptionheroin has been a failure: "The prescription ofpharmaceutically pure heroin in controlled doses is, in mostessential respects, a thing of the past in Britain."("Drug Problems and Criminal Justice Policy inBritain," _Contemporary Drug Problems_, Summer 1992)}} My good friend, Dr. Clarke Smith, a member of the CaliforniaAcademy of Family Practice just got back from there last week andreported that heroin and cocaine are CURRENTLY being prescribedand that the authorities consider it quite successful. The 60Minutes show on this subject aired on December 28, 1993, and wehave personally confirmed the facts with the British doctors onseveral occasions. The doctors say that their biggest problemwith the program is that the United States Government keeps lyingabout it. }}prison as rehabilitation is a disproven illusion According to who?}} According to Thomas Coughlin, the New York State Commissionerof Corrections, for one. {{Work-release programs are already a standard part of theprison system in many states, and have been for many years.}} Most convicts do not have the opportunity to participate inany such programs. These programs have been virtuallydiscontinued in California. {{ Once again, what you saw that 15-minute televisionepisode doesn't prove a thing. What may have occurred (accordingto Ed Bradley) in one clinic in Liverpool does not allow one togeneralize to the entire society. Anyone can create a"successful" heroin maintenance program by taking theaddicts who are stable anyway and putting them in the program.That is, if there are 500 addicts and 20 or 30 of them arestable, then when you put the 20 or 30 stable addicts in amaintenance program, you can claim a big "success," butyou haven't really accomplished anything. Britain has beenpracticing heroin maintenance since 1926, according to"Contemporary Drug Problems," and very few physiciansprescribe it anymore. If you want to impress anyone with thesupposed successs of the Liverpool program, you will have to comeup with something better than a TV report. I have been to thelibrary and researched the issue; if you want to continue thedebate, so should you.}} The more I think about this message, the more I see someonewho is in serious denial here. I have told you of the 60 Minutesshow, the A&E one hour show (originally produced by the BBC),and the fact that we have personally contacted the doctorsinvolved to confirm that both shows were accurate. As I said, agroup -- headed by Dr. Clarke Smith, a member of the Board ofDirectors of the California Academy of Family Physicians, went toEurope to confirm what is happening in several areas. The doctorsconfirmed to us that the shows were accurate and your informationis, shall we say, outdated. Decriminalization and even outrightlegalization are being called for by both medical and policeauthorities all over Europe. As far as research goes, you candownload Signer.zip in library 13 of the Issues forum and startcontacting some of the doctors listed there. If you want to knowwho they are in more detail, look them up in Who's Who, also atyour local library. If you have researched this so well in the library, whyhaven't you read any of the studies I mentioned? So I am calling your bluff again. The doctors involved inLiverpool are named in the text of the 60 Minutes program inHoover.zip. They are listed with information in Liverpool, or youcan simply call the public health service in Liverpool, as weoriginally did, and ask to be put in touch with the doctorsrunning the program. Go ahead. Call them and tell us the results.And while you are at it, remember to ask them about the vote ofthe British chiefs of police. {{ The Chinese are biologically the same as the Americans.They react to addictive substances the same as we do.}} Aren't the Europeans biologically the same as us, too?Therefore, the programs which are currently working in Europeshould work here. {{ Try reading what I wrote before you comment on it:"People who had boring or stressful jobs turned to opium:court eunuchs, wealthy housewives, harried clerks, soldiers goinginto combat, students preparing for exams." These peoplehave their counterparts in America.}} Court eunuchs have their counterpart in America? Other studiesof the same period of time showed that opium use in China was nota lot different from alcohol use in the US. That is, the majorityof the users were weekend recreational users who could take it orleave it. The percentage who appeared to be addicted was not muchdifferent than the percentage one would expect from alcohol. And, since you seem to be so good at history, you ought toknow that the first anti-opium laws in the US had nothing to dowith public health and safety. The first anti-opium law was an1875 San Francisco ordinance banning the smoking of opium inopium dens, a peculiarly Chinese custom. The stated reason forthe law was the fear that Chinese men were luring white women totheir "ruin" in opium dens. "Ruin" wasdefined not as opium addiction, but as associating with Chinesemen. The racism behind these laws was overt from the verybeginning. At the same time, opium remained available in allsorts of medicinal preparations, more commonly used by whites. {{ Again, you should read what I wrote. During the periodof legal narcotics trade, between 1858 and 1906, the incidence ofnarcotics use increased from around 5% of the population toapproximately 25%.}} And it was on a steady decline from 1906 to 1914 when theHarrison Narcotics Act was passed, primarily because of the PureFood and Drug Act of 1905 which made manufacturers list theingredients and therefore allowed consumers to intelligentlychoose. You may also recall that the major medical societies allstated that the Harrison Act was a medical, criminal, and socialdisaster and urged its repeal. After the passage of the Act, theproblems of drug use rose sharply. And, maybe you could share with us the reasons why hemp -- thelargest crop in America -- was made illegal? {{ Great idea, only what is more positively reinforcingthan a heroin rush?}} Well, most people I know think that the mundane old stuff likemaking an honest living, and being sober enough to enjoy yourfamily is a whole lot better than any drug high. {{ "Drug users referred to treatment by the criminaljustice system stay in treatment longer on average than thosewith no legal involvement, and length of time spent in treatmentis an important predictor of success. . . . Clients monitoredthrough TASC are as successful in reducing their drug use andcriminal activity as are those voluntarily in drugtreatment." _Bureau of Justice Statistics National Report_(1992).}} That's easy to do if you are behind bars for twenty years. Andthe ones that went to prison are "as successful" as theones who went voluntarily. Because it is so expensive to processthem through prison, don't you think it would be a better idea toget them to go voluntarily? {{ I don't see what this has to do with drug offenses.Since you are unaware of the fact, I should explain that mostdrug offenses are non- violent.}} The only people who seem to be unaware of this fact are thedrug warriors. {{Fine, then I can assume that you won't mind sitting inthe passenger seat.}} The stats show quite clearly that illegal drugs are arelatively minor problem on the road. {{}}Heroin is a very safe drug when legal.{{ Just sprinkle a little on your breakfeast cereal? Or a BringYour Own Balloon (BYOB) Christmas party? We'll invite yourchildren over, after all it's safe. Come on, you can't reallybelieve this. }} That is the word of the world's leading medical experts on thesubject, including the doctors in Liverpool who prescribe itevery day. There is a long list of them in Signer.zip. If youneed more information on them you can read Who's Who or I canprobably put you in touch with a good number of them. (I haveoffered that before but you seem strangely reluctant to try toreply to any of my messages.) {{}} Pot is safer than alcohol or tobacco, and has nevercaused a documented human death according to all theliterature.{{ Except when you're flying planes, trains or automobiles.}} Even then, accidents caused by pot are pretty rare. Forexample, a study of OSHA statistics showed that about .014% ofon=the-job accidents were caused by illegal drugs. {{How many millions in this country drink? Are you willingto live with a similar abuse rate for drugs like cocain, heroin,pot and speed?}} Gosh no, but why aren't we doing the same thing for alcoholand tobacco if it is such a good idea? If prison is the best wayto keep people from becoming addicted to drugs, why aren't wejailing wine drinkers and cigarette smokers? {{Were it not so embedded in our culture, I would might beinclined to say yes. Until then, I'll settle for mandatory deathsentences for manslaughter cases related to alcohol abuse,mandatory prison terms for those selling to minors, and so on. }} Let's suppose you got your fondest wish. Let's suppose thattomorrow morning, you woke up as President and found outside yourhome, every drug dealer in America lined up with a bag of dope inone hand and a signed confession in the other? What would you do? {{How many more children are you willing to hand over tolives of dependency, isolation and neglect? }} Not one -- which is one the main reasons that the currentpolicy ought to be stopped -- because it is devastating thechildren in the black community. {{ Gosh, a serious question! It's been *so* long!}} I have asked you lots of serious questions but you don't wantto answer them. So here is an old one, slightly rephrased: Let'ssuppose I believe everything you say about drugs and the bestkind of drug program. You say that prison must be an integralpart of that program. So, as a taxpayer who has to pay for theprisons, I ask you: There are thirty million drug users in theUnited States. How many millions do you want to throw in prison? Further supposing I believe everything you say: If prison issuch a good idea for these drugs, why isn't it an equally good(or even better!) idea for alcohol and tobacco? {{ The failure of our present program is that it treatsdealers as criminals and addicts as victims.}} No, as the judges and other law enforcement officials havetold me, it is a disaster (not just a failure) because it neverwas a good idea in the first place. {{ This is a rather arbitrary distinction, since mostdealers are also addicts and most addicts are involved incrime.}} Under the law all users are dealers. {{ Also, it is also useless trying to suppress drug dealingwithout suppressing drug abuse. Therefore, I believe that asuccessful drug policy should place greater weight on curtailingdrug abuse.}} We agree there. {{ Drug abuse occurs for a number of reasons. People whoare poor and uneducated turn to drugs because they have nothingbetter to do with their lives. Unfortunately, you can't do muchabout that, short of a general reform of American society. It isimportant, however, that treatment programs offer addicts analternative lifestyle. Taking someone out of a rotten, no-futurelife in a miserable slum and putting them in treatment isuseless, if they can only go back to a rotten, no- future life ina miserable slum.}} We agree there. {{ In this light, vocational training is very important. Itis important that training be suited to the individual and alsoprovide him with the opportunity for pursuing a meaningfulcareer. But in all cases, it should be made plain that thealternative to honest work is prison.}} We agree that vocational training is very important. Well, we don't have any programs funded to meet the"honest work" part of it so the alternative is alwaysprison. Of course, once they go to prison, it doesn't matter ifthey get vocational training or not, because nobody is going tohire them anyway. As a society, that is called shooting ourselvesin the foot. {{ A lot of affluent people, who have plenty otheropportunities, also use narcotics. For such individuals, thestigma of going to jail is very important, and so punishment is astrong deterrent.}} Poor people get jail. Affluent people get the Betty FordClinic. That disparity in the outcome of this policy is one ofthe reasons that every major study of drug policy has recommendeddecriminalization. {{ The MADD movement provides a good model of how effectivelegislation can produce a real social change: There is now astrong stigma against drunk driving, and so the offense hasdeclined. Legalized gambling provides a counter-example: There isno stigma against playing Lotto or video poker, and so millionsof people gamble who never did it before.}} Your analogies are weak. Drunk driving is a public behavior.There is a useful purpose to enforcing laws on public behaviorand, because the behavior is public, the laws have a chance toconfront the offender and stop the situation. The same is nottrue with drug use. {{ So, treatment and punishment are both important forcontrolling the drug problem. }} The information supplied above does not support thisconclusion. {{ One often hears the argument, however, that we shouldtreat addicts *instead* of throwing them in jail. However, theseare not logical alternatives. Many addicts will not accepttreatment unless they are already in jail or are threatened withimprisonment.}} The Rand Corporation recently issued a study which said thatevery dollar spent on drug treatment saved an additional sevendollars in related social costs. On the other hand, every dollarspent on putting drug users in prison costs about an additionalfifteen dollars in related social costs. Of course, the British have a way of getting addicts to accepttreatment and become crime-free. They simply tell the addictsthat they will lose their legal prescription if they don'tstraighten their lives out. It works a whole lot better than whatyou are recommending. {{ Judges often do sentence minor drug offenders totreatment rather than prison. This has merit; we definitely needto expand drug treatment and make it more available.}} We agree on this point. I would also point out that judgesoften sentence minor offenders to unconscionable prison termsover trivial offenses, like the young woman who got a mandatoryminimum of ten years without even touching drugs. {{ But we also need to end the cycle by which addicts gointo treatment, then relapse. }} You missed the 60 Minutes show and the A&E show onLiverpool (obviously) so you might be interested in what thedoctors there said. They said that all modes of treatment orpunishment for drug use that they could find produced the sameessential result. That is, about five percent of the addicts peryear would come off of drugs by themselves, regardless of whatyou did. They said it seemed to be as much a process ofmaturation as anything else. Therefore, they said, rather thanpunish them and seriously impact their health with dirty heroin,dirty needles, etc., they opted to give the addicts prescriptionsfor heroin and cocaine, and teach them how to manage theiraddiction until they can mature off of it. As a result, most ofthe health problems have been eliminated, most of the crime hasbeen eliminated, and most addicts are employed and living withtheir families. {{ For this reason, I would support a program ofaccelerated minimum sentences for second and subsequent offenses.When an addict proves untreatable, the next best alternative isto separate him from society. In addition, the acceleratedschedule of punishments provides incentive to reform.}} So I ask again. How many people do you propose to put inprison? {{ The aim of treatment programs is to end addiction. }} The primary aim of the British program is to keep addictshealthy long enough to end the addiction. {{ But it is also important to prevent untreated addictsfrom becoming a menace to society. }} Their crimes are primarily property crimes and are a result ofthe fact that drugs are illegal. In Liverpool, where they havetried another approach, the addicts are no longer a menace tosociety. {{In this light, methadone programs have been verysuccessful. While methadone is addictive, it can be taken orallyand is much more long- lasting in preventing withdrawal than isheroin.}} Many famous medical experts, such as Dr. Frederick H. Meyerspoint out that the prescription of methadone (a narcotic) in suchlarge amounts proves that narcotics are not inherently dangerous. {{ A heroin addict needs an injection every few hours andoften becomes violent if he doesn't get it. }} A recent report by the Department of Justice titled"Drugs and Violence" says that the only drug which hasany real connection to any kind of violent crime is alcohol. Evenif what you said was true, it would seem that we would be farbetter off with an approach like they are using in Liverpool. Amanaged daily prescription would seem to be the best way toinsure that this does not happen. If you had read any of thestudies I have mentioned, you would know that tobacco and alcoholusers exhibit the same kinds of anti-social behavior when theyare deprived of their drug. {{ Finally, I would support expanded drug testing. Atpresent, the police are well equipped to test drunk drivers, butnarcotics users may evade punishment, unless they happen to havethe drugs in their possession. Definitely, police stations shouldbe equipped to test persons arrested for reckless driving andsimilar offenses for drugs. Regular drug testing should also be apart of all prison programs.}} Why wouldn't you support the same thing for alcohol andtobacco? They do far more damage than illegal drugs so we wouldbe far better off to put the same effort against them. How aboutit? Should we throw George Burns in jail because he refuses togive up cigars? And do you want to punish people based solely on their drugtests? After all, you have money in your pocket right now withcocaine dust on it and it is possible that enough of it got in toyour system to make you register positive. That is, of course, ifyou didn't already test positive because you took a coldmedication, or a headache pill, or a cough syrup, or ate certainkinds of bread, etc., etc., etc., Contents | Feedback | Search DRCNet Library | Schaffer Library | The Drug Legalization Debate WT02-B01-4IA086-000618-B047-145http://206.61.184.43:80/schaffer/Activist/claim6.htm 206.61.184.43 19970122030748 text/html 11738HTTP/1.0 200 OKDate: Wednesday, 22-Jan-97 03:07:10 GMTServer: WebSitePro/1.1f (S/N wpo-0deb)Allow-ranges: bytesContent-type: text/htmlLast-modified: Saturday, 28-Dec-96 07:27:34 GMTContent-length: 11520 Claim VI: Legalization and decriminalization of drugs havebeen a dismal failure Contents | Feedback | Search DRCNet Library | Schaffer Library | The Drug Legalization Debate CLAIM VI: LEGALIZATION AND DECRIMINALIZATION OF DRUGS HAVEBEEN A DISMAL FAILURE IN OTHER NATIONS. DEA Statement The Facts The experiences of a number of foreign countries includingGreat Britain, the Netherlands and Switzerland are often cited todemonstrate that other nations have successfully controlled druguse by offering access and areas where drug takers can obtain anduse drugs. Recently, an MTV documentary on the drug issuehighlighted coffeehouses in Amsterdam as a model for controlled,successful environment in which young Europeans can enjoymarijuana. There was also a 60 Minutes segment on the drug clinics inLiverpool, England, a special on the Arts & EntertainmentChannel, and a special on ABC which explored the situation inEurope. Legalization proponents cannot find encouragement in the factthat when drugs were once legal, cheap and available in theUnited States, the impact on society was such that laws wereenacted to make drugs illegal. They ignore our own history andpoint to Great Britain, the Netherlands and Switzerland as freeand open societies where drug use is allowed with no adverseeffects. The Quantico experts believed it is important to shedlight on the foreign experience with increased drug access andliberalized use policies, and explain that this experience hasbeen negative The statement of our own history is plainly false. Interestedreaders should any of the major studies of drug policy listed inthis book. England tried prescribing heroin but gave it up. Until themid1960s, British physicians were allowed to prescribe heroin tocertain classes of addicts. After this experiment, according toJames Q. Wilson in his 1990 article "Against theLegalization of Drugs", "a youthful drug cultureemerged with a demand for drugs far different from that of theolder addicts." The British system didn't work. Addiction levels rose,especially among teenagers, and many addicts chose to boycott theprogram and continued to get their heroin from pushers. In 1983, England began switching over to methadone and stoppeddispensing heroin from the clinics, and that caused even moreaddicts to depart in favor of the real thing. According to thelate John Kaplan of Stanford University, the number of addictsincreased fivefold. James Q. Wilson states that the BritishGovernment's experiment with controlled heroin distributionresulted in, at a minimum, a 30fold increase in the number ofaddicts in ten years. The Netherlands, despite its controlled program, is havingtroubles. Under the socalled "expediency principle"Dutch law protects individuals from prosecution for acts that aretechnically illegal, including the retaillevel sales and purchaseof marijuana and hashish. Dutch police are also instructed toignore streetlevel sales of all types of drugs. The Amsterdam Municipal Health Service showed a rise inhardcore addicts in 1992, attributable to a significant rise inthe local heroin supply which led to a price drop of as much as75%. Switzerland has become a magnet for drug users the world over.One thing small European nations have learned is a littletolerance about drugs brings a lot of unwelcome visitors. In1987, Zurich permitted drug use and sales in a part of the citycalled the "Platzspitz", dubbed "NeedlePark." Five years later the experiment was curtailed afteran influx of addicts and increased violence and deaths. In 1992,Zurich Municipal spokesman Andres Ohler told the New York Timesthat the number of regular drug users at the park had swelledfrom a few hundred in 1987 to 20,000 by 1992. After thePlatzspitz closed, the price of heroin reportedly doubled. RESOLUTION EUROPEAN CITIES AGAINST DRUGS DEA Statement The Facts A number of European cities have taken the initiative oforganizing a Conference for Cities Against the Legalization of Drugs. One of the aimsof the conference is to adopt a resolution to enable towns that have notparticipated in the conference to support its work. Imitation is the sincerest form of flattery. The tide of thedrug policy debate began to turn against the DEA with the adventof the Resolution for a Federal Commission on Drug Policy(sometimes referred to as the Hoover Resolution). A copy of thisResolution and a list of some of the major signers is included inthis book. The purpose of the conference is to increase cooperationbetween cities, to provide inspiration and hope for areas with particularly difficultdrug problems. The signatories to the resolution will affirmtheir decision to fight against the spread of drugs. The DEA apparently thought the Resolution for a FederalCommission on Drug Policy was so important that they figured theyhad to trump up something to counter it. The result is thisreally phony and poorly worded resolution against drugs. It isnotable that the DEA did not name any of the people who signedthis resolution on behalf of their entire city. STOCKHOLM  28TH APRIL 1994 Some facts which help to confirm the observations of the forumparticipants may be used in debates:  In April, 1994, a number of European cities signed aresolution titled "European Cities Against Drugs,"commonly known as the Stockholm resolution. It states: "Thedemands to legalize illicit drugs should be seen against thebackground of current problems, which have led to a feeling ofhelplessness. For many, the only way to cope is to try toadminister the current situation. But the answer does not lie inmaking harmful drugs more accessible, cheaper and sociallyacceptable. Attempts to do this have not proved successful. Webelieve that legalizing drugs will, in the long term, increaseour problems. By making them legal, society will signal that ithas resigned to the acceptance of drug abuse. The signatories tothis resolution therefore want to make their position clear byrejecting the proposals to legalize illicit drugs." It is interesting to note the differences between theResolution for a Federal Commission on Drug Policy and thisresolution. The biggest difference is that the Resolution for aFederal Commission on Drug Policy does not say anything about"legalization" but simply asks for an objective reviewof the evidence. The DEA's resolution does not call for anyobjective review of the evidence and, in fact, rejecting even theidea of a discussion of alternatives. Pointing to the appropriate international treaties whichrequire nations to "protect children from the illicit use ofnarcotic drugs," the signatories state that they"reject all demands for legalizing illicit drugs... Werequest that our Governments respect and with determination applythose conventions and agreements regarding drugs which they havesigned." Again, the DEA's resolution calls for a blind rejection of anyideas but there own, without consideration of any evidence. The cities signing this resolution include: Berlin, Stockholm,Budapest, Dublin, Gdansk (Poland), Gothenburg (Sweden), Helsinki,Paris, Lugano (Switzerland), Madrid, Malmo (Sweden), Moscow,Oslo, Prague, London, Reykjavik (Iceland), Riga (Latvia), St.Petersburg (Russia), Tallinn (Estonia), Valletta (Malta) andWarsaw. It is notable that the DEA does not mention who in thesecities signed on behalf of the entire city. It is also notablethat many of the cities are former Soviet Union cities withlittle experience in these areas.  A study by the Rotterdam Municipal Council shows that thenumber of cocaine users there has risen substantially. About 3.3%of all Rotterdam residents over 15 years of age or approximately12,000 people now use cocaine. Violent crime is also a major problem in the Netherlands. A1992 study of crime victims in twenty (mostly European) countriesranks the Netherlands as the number one country in Europe forassaults and threats. The Dutch Criminal Intelligence Service reported 104gunrelated deaths in the Netherlands in 1992, compared to 73 in1991. Almost all involved drug disputes. Robberies have alsoincreased in each of the four years since 1988. The Netherlands, smaller than West Virginia, has more than 50clinics supplying methadone to heroin addicts, and drug violatorsmake up a large percentage of prisoners in the Dutch prisonsystem.  Zurich authorities moved many addicts to a new site, anearby abandoned railway station, a few blocks north of NeedlePark. Here, addicts receive clean needles and are allowed toinject heroin and consume other drugs. Writing in Drug AbuseUpdate in 1994, Sue Rusche, executive director of NationalFamilies in Action, gave this description of what passersby cansee if they look down from the Kornhaus Bridge: "Most people think shots are bloodless events. A nurseinserts a needle, injects a medicine and you're on your way. Buthere, bright red blood streams down arms, necks, legs, feet andgroins as addicts inject themselves. Festering red and purplesores filled with pus, old blood and filthy scabs stretch fromwrist to elbow, ankle to knee." Contents | Feedback | Search DRCNet Library | Schaffer Library | The Drug Legalization Debate WT02-B01-5IA031-000652-B039-327http://206.61.184.43:80/schaffer/activist/claim7.htm 206.61.184.43 19970122130025 text/html 13680HTTP/1.0 200 OKDate: Wednesday, 22-Jan-97 13:00:15 GMTServer: WebSitePro/1.1f (S/N wpo-0deb)Allow-ranges: bytesContent-type: text/htmlLast-modified: Saturday, 28-Dec-96 07:28:25 GMTContent-length: 13462 Claim VII: Alcohol has caused significant health, social,and criminal problems Contents | Feedback | Search DRCNet Library | Schaffer Library | The Drug Legalization Debate CLAIM VII: ALCOHOL HAS CAUSED SIGNIFICANT HEALTH, SOCIAL ANDCRIME PROBLEMS IN THIS COUNTRY, AND LEGALIZED DRUGS WOULD ONLYMAKE THE SITUATION WORSE DEA Statement Many legalization advocates are fond of comparing the use ofalcohol with the use of drugs, yet draw faulty conclusions fromthe comparison. People often consume small amounts of wine orbeer as a beverage and do not necessarily drink to the point ofmental impairment. This is not true of drug use, where the wholepoint of use is intoxication. A more accurate analogy would be tocompare drug use to drunkenness. Yet even that analogy is weak,because drugs are far more addictive than alcohol, and have nocultural or social value. Dr. Mitchell Rosenthal points out, forexample, that only 10 percent of drinkers become alcoholics,while up to 75 percent of regular illicit drug users becomeaddicted. The Facts The point of use of alcohol is intoxication, just as it is forthe illegal drugs. Even small amounts of alcohol will relax aperson or change their mood. This is intoxication, it is just amild intoxication. If you don't want the intoxication, there isvery little reason to drink alcoholic wine or beer instead oftheir non-alcoholic versions. The alcoholic versions are themajor sellers so it is a fair assumption that most alcoholdrinkers want the mild intoxication which comes from a couple ofbeers. Most users of most drugs want a relatively mild intoxicationfrom their drug of choice. That is one of the main reasons thatwine and beer outsell the harder beverages, and why most illegaldrug use is the use of marijuana. This argument is a distortion in itself because it lumps allillicit drugs together, as if they had the same capacity toaddict. Clearly, there are major differences between drugs suchas heroin, cocaine, and marijuana, and Dr. Rosenthal isirresponsible not to point them out. Dr. Rosenthal's figures could not possibly be true, based onthe DEA's own evidence shown above in their chart showing thesupposed drop in drug use. The DEA's own figures shows the numberof regular drug users is far higher than the number of addictsand always has been. By the DEA's own figures at least 85 percentare not addicted, and at least 70 percent are gainfully employed. DEA Statement Proponents of legalization note--correctly--that alcohol killsmany more Americans than do illegal drugs and currently exactsocial and financial costs that are higher as well. Advocatesclaim that many people do not use alcohol, and that manyAmericans may also choose to forego drugs. Like treatmentprograms available for alcohol addicted people, treatment fordrug addicts should be more widely available. The Facts The DEA admits that alcohol causes far more damage than theillegal drugs but they don't seem to propose that we bring backalcohol Prohibition. What the DEA does not say is the degree to which alcohol andtobacco cause more damage than illegal drugs. DEA Statement The experts assembled at the AntiLegalization Forum pointed toalready overburdened health care and social systems that areunable to address all the problems associated with alcohol use.Instead of compounding these problems, and acknowledging thecrime problems made worse by alcohol use, the group stated thatlegalizing drugs would create undue burdens on the criminal,health and social service systems. The Facts The group points out that the "already overburdenedhealth care and social systems . . . are unable to address allthe problems associated with alcohol use", yet no oneproposes that we bring back alcohol Prohibition as the bestapproach to the problem. DEA Statement Alcohol use in this country has taken a tremendous physicaltoll on Americans, not to mention the social problems that haveresulted from its use. Legalization proponents would have uscompound our problems by creating a new class of drug addictedAmericans. Again, how much are we willing to tolerate? To payfor? The Facts Should we bring back alcohol Prohibition as a means of dealingwith alcohol problems? Clearly not. The message of Prohibition isclear: Alcohol is bad, but Prohibition is worse. DEA Statement Look at the problems that alcohol abuse has wrought. In the1920s those advocating the repeal of Prohibition argued thatcrime and other social ills would be alleviated if alcohol werelegal. Has that happened? We now have approximately 11 millionalcoholics or problem drinkers in this country whose behavior hascontributed to lost productivity in the workplace, fetal defects,traffic fatalities, domestic violence and other crime. If drugswere made legal, the numbers and the problems would swell. The Facts Is the DEA arguing that the best approach to the alcoholproblems is to bring back Prohibition? Why not? DEA Statement The simple fact is that if drugs are made legal, more peoplewill use drugs. There will be higher health and social costs;there will be more crime. Some facts which help to confirm theobservations of the forum participants may be used in debates: The Facts The Wickersham Commission, which was originally formed toimprove alcohol Prohibition, found that alcohol use fell in thefirst year of Prohibition but rose every year thereafter. DEA Statement  In a May, 1993 report titled "Survey of State PrisonInmates," the Bureau of Justice Statistics states that 32%of inmates committed their offense under the influence ofalcohol. Slightly more than twofifths of inmates convicted ofhomicide or assault committed their current offense under theinfluence of alcohol or of alcohol with drugs. The Facts This is another curious argument. It is clear that the biggestproblem here is alcohol, as the DEA itself states. If the DEA wasreally consistent in their position, they would advocate thereturn of alcohol prohibition. DEA Statement  According to the 1993 National Household Survey on DrugAbuse, about 11 million Americans were heavy drinkers in 1993(drinking five or more drinks per occasion on five or more daysin the past 30 days). Heavy alcohol use has changed little since1985, when there were 12 million heavy drinkers. The Facts Assuming the figures are accurate, it would obviously not be asensible approach to the problem to attempt throw all thesepeople in prison. DEA Statement The same report indicates that "of the 11 million heavydrinkers in 1993, 26 percent (3 million) were also currentillicit drug users." The report goes on to say that"Current smokers are more likely to be heavy drinkers andillicit drug users. Among smokers in 1993, 11 percent were heavydrinkers and 12 percent were illicit drug users." The Facts The DEA seems to be trying to make the discredited argumentabout "gateway drugs". That is, they used to contendthat some drugs, by some as-yet-unexplained process, naturallycreated a craving for totally unrelated drugs in people who hadnever used drugs before. This was a holdover from their earlier,plainer and even more easily discredited argument that marijuanaleads to heroin. (Which, by the way, was in direct contradictionto Harry Anslinger's testimony before Congress when marijuana wasoutlawed.) People who engage in one form of risky behavior often engagein other risky behaviors. That is the only thing that these kindsof statistics could show. DEA Statement  In a 1993 report by Brandeis University, it was estimatedthat the United States spent $10.5 billion on health care relatedto alcohol use. The Facts Then why shouldn't we bring back Prohibition as the best wayto deal with the problem? DEA Statement  Alcohol is blamed for between $140 and $210 billion peryear in lost productivity. The Facts Then why shouldn't we bring back Prohibition as the best wayto deal with the problem? DEA Statement  17,461 people were killed in alcohol related trafficincidents in 1993. The Facts That is almost as many people as the American MedicalAssociation estimates were killed by all illegal drugs from allcauses combined. Clearly, if the DEA wanted to do something aboutthe real drug problem, it would be of more benefit to concentratetheir enforcement efforts on alcohol. DEA Statement  Michigan's Director of the Office of Drug Control Policy,Robert Peterson, states that "It is estimated that alcoholabuse costs the nation $100 billion per year and over 300 livesper day, an amount that the $18 billion in state and federalexcise tax revenue does not begin to cover." The Facts And yet no one contends that throwing wine and beer drinkersin prison is a sensible approach to this problem. Contents | Feedback | Search DRCNet Library | Schaffer Library | The Drug Legalization Debate WT02-B01-6IA031-000655-B031-153http://206.61.184.43:80/schaffer/activist/groups.htm 206.61.184.43 19970122110244 text/html 4721HTTP/1.0 200 OKDate: Wednesday, 22-Jan-97 11:02:33 GMTServer: WebSitePro/1.1f (S/N wpo-0deb)Allow-ranges: bytesContent-type: text/htmlLast-modified: Saturday, 28-Dec-96 07:26:57 GMTContent-length: 4504 Local Activist Groups Contents | Feedback | Search DRCNet Library | Schaffer Library | Information for Drug Policy Reform Activists Local Activist Groups Some of the local groups around the world working for drugpolicy reform. If you would like your group listed here, please send theinformation to: schaffer@smartlink.net State City Details Hawaii The Hawai`i Drug Policy Options Group (HDPOG) was formed in 1993 by a group of concerned citizens seeking to open the discussion on alternativaes to current drug policy. General meetings are scheduled around public presentations by local as well as visiting experts on drug policy issues. Members of HDPOG conduct research, provide legislative testimony, and promote drug policy options through the media. For further information, contact Don Topping <dtopping@uhunix.uhcc.hawaii.edu>. Texas Houston Contact Al Robison, phone (713) 266-4329. E-mail:DTWN02A@prodigy.com We meet at 7:00 pm on the 3rd Monday of each month at Palmer Episcopal Church. Dallas Contact Alan Bryan, phone (214) 827-1514. E-mail: adbryan@onramp.net Regular Meeting: 2nd Monday of each month, call for details. Illinois Rockford Rockford Chapter, NATIONAL ORGANIZATION FOR THE REFORM OF MARIJUANA LAWS E.J. Pagel, Director P.O. Box 1786 Rockford, Illinois 61110-286 [800] 501-3753 Contents | Feedback | Search DRCNet Library | Schaffer Library | Information for Drug Policy Reform Activists WT02-B01-7IA087-000632-B035-57http://206.61.184.43:80/schaffer/activist/strats.htm 206.61.184.43 19970122070312 text/html 8609HTTP/1.0 200 OKDate: Wednesday, 22-Jan-97 07:03:03 GMTServer: WebSitePro/1.1f (S/N wpo-0deb)Allow-ranges: bytesContent-type: text/htmlLast-modified: Saturday, 28-Dec-96 07:28:16 GMTContent-length: 8392 Strategies to End the Drug War Contents | Feedback | Search DRCNet Library | Schaffer Library | Information for Drug Policy Reform Activists Strategies to End the Drug War Contents Strategies Flier Advertising this library -Suitable for distribution everywhere. Media Awareness Project- to let the media know about this library. What Next? This is my idea of ourcurrent top priorities. Where do we go from here? This is anassessment of where we are, and where we ought to go next. Political Strategies This documentincludes a few ideas for what we need to do nationally to bringdrug policy reform. Local Action Strategies Here are afew things you can do in your own hometown, to help campaign fordrug policy reform. Persuasive Strategies - These arethe Persuasive Strategies which have been giving the DEA suchfits over the last few years. They were originally published onCompuserve and have since been copied to every major onlineservice. In August, 1994, the DEA held a special conference inWashington and flew in law enforcement people, politicians, andpublic relations experts to try to figure out some way to dealwith the fact that they were getting hammered every time theycame out for a debate. These Persuasive Strategies were thespecific reason for that conference and their booklet How to Hold Your Own In a Drug LegalizationDebate was a direct response to, and borrowed from, thePersuasive Strategies. Basic Background Information for Activists The Biggest Studiesof Drug Policy This is a list of the largest and most comprehensive studiesof drug policy done over the last fifty years. This is anexcellent place for anyone to start their research on drugs anddrug policy. Basic Facts Aboutthe War on Drugs This is a brief summary of the major facts about the War onDrugs, in a question and answer format. How to Approach the Black Community byClifford A. Schaffer Local Activist Groups - A list oflocal groups around the world, working for reform Debate Materials Answers to Specific Arguments This document includes most of the common questions that drugwarriors will raise in a debate. For each question, there is ashort answer which almost invariably completely shuts down thedrug warrior. Pot is (Drugs are) Dangerous - Howto Deal with the Argument by Clifford A. Schaffer Sixteen ways to deal with the argument that drugs aredangerous, therefore we ought to throw massive numbers of peoplein prison. Show Stopper Questions for YourOpponent These are questions that the drug warriors justcannot answer. A speech This is a sample of thespeeches I have given. After giving the speech, I have never hadany drug warrior come back with anything but a completelydumbfounded response. More answers to specific arguments -- 30Pages of Debate questions and responses 15 More pages of answers to specificarguments More of the same from above. 25 More pages of answers to specificarguments Other Materials Presentations to Social Clubs - Howto make presentations to social groups such as churches, LionsClubs, Rotary, and other similar groups. The Dollar Cost ofPunishment This file contains miscellaneous notes andreferences regarding the costs of punishing people for drugoffenses. Lots of interesting tidbits. Originally posted onDRCNet. WHEN Mission Statement This is theMission Statement of the Washington Hemp Education Network. It isa good example of how to put together a formal charter for anactivist group. How to Reduce Junk E-Mail This is acontribution by Ryan Rossman, offering good advice on how tocontrol the blizzard of messages coming over the DRCTalk lines. A Review of the ScientificLiterature Re Amotivational Syndrome An excellent synopsis ofthe information regarding the "amotivational syndrome"and marijuana. Complete with citations for further reference.Contributed by Brian of DRCNet. How to Write Letters to the Editor Ashort but well-done instruction manual for how to write effectiveletters to the editor. As a matter of fact, it is a goodinstruction manual for writing effective letters to publicofficials, as well. Telephone and Fax Numbers of membersof Congress - in tab-delimited text format. A Summary of M.K. Gandhi's Technique forPolitical Action By Mary Sibley, February 1995 This is a good discussion of the Gandhi's techniques forpolitical change. Some good interesting advice for activists.Contributed by Mary Sibley of DRCNet. Exclusionary Rule Reform Act of1995 This is the text of HR666, which was introduced into the Houseto repeal many of the rules regarding the admissibility ofevidence in Court. Update on HR666 as of 2-8-95 This is an update on the progress of HR666, as of 2-8-95 CalNORML press release onHR666 This is a press release issued by California NORML criticizingHR666. Bumpersticker Ideas A collection ofideas for anti-drug-war bumper stickers, contributed by variousmembers of DRCNet International List of Activist Groups -Contact information for drug policy reform groups around theworld. Contents | Feedback | Search DRCNet Library | Schaffer Library | Information for Drug Policy Reform Activists WT02-B01-8IA031-000655-B030-213http://206.61.184.43:80/schaffer/activist/flier2.htm 206.61.184.43 19970122110023 text/html 3882HTTP/1.0 200 OKDate: Wednesday, 22-Jan-97 11:00:13 GMTServer: WebSitePro/1.1f (S/N wpo-0deb)Allow-ranges: bytesContent-type: text/htmlLast-modified: Monday, 16-Dec-96 08:40:53 GMTContent-length: 3667 Worlds Largest Online Library of Drug Policy World's Largest OnlineLibrary of Drug Policy The Drug War obviously isn't working. It is time we took anotherlook at the evidence on drugs. Now you can do it through the Internet.The DRCNet Online Library contains thousands of documents coveringall aspects of drugs and drug policy, from ancient history tothe latest developments from Europe. You can find this libraryon the World Wide Web at the following location: http://www.druglibrary.org What These Libraries Contain: Major Studies of Drugs and Drug Policy overthe last 100 years, including summariesand full text of many studies. These studies include the NewYork City Bar Association Report (1994), the National Commissionon Marihuana and Drug Abuse (1972), the La Guardia CommitteeReport (1944), and many more. Historical Information,including the shocking origins of the drug laws. Included in thecollection are the actual transcripts of the hearings for theMarihuana Tax Act and many other historical works, includingtexts dating back to 550 BC. Why were these laws passed in thefirst place? You will find it hard to believe - it had nothingto do with what you have assumed. Latest News from Europe- including up-to-date information on drug policies in the Netherlandsas well as other developments, such as the heroin maintenanceclinics currently being run in Switzerland. DEA Judge Young's ruling on medical marijuana.In 1989, the DEA's Chief Administrative Law Judge finished hearingtwo years of evidence on medical marijuana and ruled that theDEA's actions in restricting the medical use of marijuana were"unconscionable." Our online library has the full textof Judge Young's decision. The Drug Legalization Debate -Extensive materials covering all of the arguments in the "druglegalization" debate from all perspectives, including thefull text of documents from all points of view. See all thearguments and all the evidence from both sides. Government Documents -We maintain an extensive collection of Federal and State Governmentdocuments related to drug policy including many reports whichhave never been formally published or are so rare that they arenot available in most libraries. Much, much more -literally thousands of documents on a huge range of topics! Our Guarantee We absolutely guarantee: That you will find the information in these libraries surprisingand fascinating - no matter what your current point of view. You have never seen or heard much of this information anywherebefore. We have some of the best information resources youwill find anywhere in the world on this topic. Brought to you by the Drug ReformCoordination Network (DRCNet) as a free public service.WT02-B01-9IA031-000655-B030-243http://206.61.184.43:80/schaffer/activist/whatnext.htm 206.61.184.43 19970122110034 text/html 19461HTTP/1.0 200 OKDate: Wednesday, 22-Jan-97 11:00:25 GMTServer: WebSitePro/1.1f (S/N wpo-0deb)Allow-ranges: bytesContent-type: text/htmlLast-modified: Saturday, 28-Dec-96 07:24:45 GMTContent-length: 19243 What's Next? for Drug Legalization What's Next? by Clifford A. Schaffer This is my view of what is the current most important step inpromoting drug policy reform. This includes some suggestions onhow you can help. WHAT IS THE MAIN PRIORITY AT THIS POINT? A few people have asked the basic question, What's next? Whatis the main priority at this point? A good question. In order to answer it correctly we have toback up and review the current state of affairs. WHERE AREWE WITH RESPECT TO THE GOALS? First, it is necessary to establish where we are with respectto our goals. Atlanta has come and gone. I don't think the drugwarriors got as much publicity as perhaps they wanted, and itlooks like a flash in the pan. No doubt they will try to usetheir resolution as proof of something when they are pressed in the debate. In their rathersimplistic view of the issue they have confused the main pointand will continue to lose debates as time goes on. As Drug CzarLee Brown has recently stated, their strategy will be to pretendthat the issue doesn't exist. They just don't want to hear aboutit. The bottom line is that Atlanta won't do much to change thelong term trend in public thinking, particularly if we areintelligent about what we do. The trend is going our way and willcontinue to go our way. Little by little, we are working our wayto a majority. THE HOOVERRESOLUTION? Alan asks if the main priority at this point should be topush the Hoover Resolution. In a sense, that should be the mainpriority, but we have to recognize the underlying issuesinvolved. The Hoover Resolution was built upon the recognition of thesingle biggest flaw behind the drug war -- ignorance. No onecould support these kinds of policies if they had even read theevidence, so I knew that every drug warrior could be defeated ifyou could just get to the evidence. A good knowledge of theevidence is enough to publicly destroy any of them. The Hoover Resolution has already been successful to acertain extent. The last Crime Bill provided for a commissionwhich is due to start work in 1996. They are now selecting peopleto sit on the commission, but I have no idea of their progress onselecting any members. There is still some question about whetherit will come off or, if it does, who will be on it or how deeplyit will delve into the issues. Regardless of the commission, we should be prepared with theinformation the commission should read, or that anyone shouldread on this issue. We should have such complete evidence andresearch on the issue that anyone who wants information on theissue will have to come to us. IS IT PROPER TO REFER TO IT AS THE HOOVER RESOLUTION? No, but I often do it anyway. SHOULD WE POST THE HOOVER RESOLUTION ON A FORM? Sure. As long as we follow all of the original rules of theHoover Resolution -- that is, it must be very clear what thepeople are agreeing to -- only what the Resolution states.Signatures must include name, title, mailing address, and theform should ask them if they would like to join any of thevarious national organizations. MEMBERSHIPSUBSCRIPTION PAGES We should have an independent membership page for each of theorganizations covered under our group. People should be allowedto subscribe on-line. We don't have to hassle the problems withcredit cards or anything yet, just let them enter their name andaddress and the organization can send them an envelope. WHY WILLTHE DRUG WAR FALL? The drug war will eventually fall for the same reason thatcommunism fell. That is, they are both repressive systems whichdepend upon hiding or ignoring knowledge iin pursuit of anideological goal. As such they are wildly impractical, and thatimpracticality becomes more apparent as more knowledge becomesavailable. The Soviet Union fell because, in order to enforcetheir restrictions on knowledge, they had to put photocopymachines under lock and key and require forms to be filled outevery time someone wanted to make a copy. You can imagine theeffect that would have on a modern competitive business. Theinvention of the personal computer was their complete downfall.It became apparent that they could not have a modern economy ifthey did not have person computers, fax machines, and the like.But, of course, that meant that everyone was a publisher. Ifeveryone is a publisher, sooner or later the truth is going toget out. Computers and the Internet will be the key elements whichbring down the drug war. Political systems based on ignorancewill come down because of the information which can be madeavailable to anyone through computers. That is also thefundamental idea behind the CD ROM -- widespread public educationof the facts. We will win our struggle as soon as the publicknows the facts. We have taken the first steps with the formalestablishment of our org. #1PRIORITY -- GET THE KNOWLEDGE ASSEMBLED Our Number One Priority at this point should be to locate allof the information on drug policy that we can find, convert it tocomputer format, and post it in a commonly accessed place on theweb. We should set up an interlinked network of web pagesaccessible from a single web page which serves as a directory.Behind these web pages should be all of the information we canget. Remember all the times that people on the net have askedquestions or argued about some aspect of the drug issue? No more.Any time anyone has a question, we should be able to pointdirectly to documents on-line which provide an immediate answer. WHAT KIND OF INFORMATION? Anything relevant to the subject. We have nothing at all tofear from the truth and you will notice that, on my web pages, Iwill include materials which are propaganda of the opposition.Ultimately, we gain the most from the broadest range ofinformation. We should scan, retrieve, enter by hand, or dowhatever we can to build the best library anyone has ever seen onthe subject. We have to make our web sites an absolute must-seefor any member of the media who wants to do anything on thesubject. (Please note that, even while the public as a whole maynot be on the net yet, the media is far more likely to beconnected to the net. This is an issue on which we can, ineffect, force their behavior. If our web pages have enoughinformation, they will be forced to come to us.) Think of it this way. In the course of these conversations wehave passed back and forth a lot of good solid information toeach other, such as the information put forth on hemp, or thebackgrounds of Voth and Nahas. That kind of information should beposted so it is available to anyone who wants it, any time theyneed it. The only real difference is that we should use a lessconversational style. That is, when we post the information tothe library, it should be in "encyclopedia style" A CENTRAL ENTRY POINT - The World's Best Library on DrugPolicy. Right now, if we want to tell the media about our growinglibrary of on-line information, we would have to give them thenames of a multitude of web sites and tell them to go poke aroundon their own. We need one main menu page to give them for thelibrary. We should establish a central entry point to all the websites of interest. This one home page would list all of the otherweb pages which have factual information of interest on thesubject. This will make it easy for us to give the media a singleaccess point where they can find all of the information. That isimportant in uniformly advertising it to the media around theworld. That central point should have an index (updated once a monthperhaps) which will point to each of the web sites and providesome sort of explanation as to what kind of materials are behindit. MAKE SURE THE MEDIA KNOWS WHERE TO GO FOR INFO Then we will have to make sure that ALL the media knows thatthey have to go to our page if they are going to discuss the drugissue. That will require a dedicated campaign to publish thelocation of our unified home page to all media sources. Our nextpriority will be to make sure that everyone in the media knowswhere to look. We will each have to contact our local newssources and make sure they know. It should be mentioned as astandard reference in every letter to the editor, for example. Weshould mention our unified home page everywhere we go. Print iton your letterhead and business cards. TASKS TO BE DONE Top Itemsto be Put on the Web This is a list, somewhat incomplete as yet, of the top itemswe intend to put on the web pages as soon as we can. We askeveryone to help us by contributing this information inelectronic form. If you have it, you can e-mail it toschaffer@smartlink.net. And thanks! If all you have is a paper copy, we would appreciate thattoo. You can send stuff to Dave Borden at Drug Policy Foundation,4455 Connecticut Ave., N.W., Suite B-500, Washington, DC20008-2302. You can snail-mail stuff to me at: Cliff Schaffer, P.O.Box 1430, Canyon Country, CA 91386-1430 1. Information for Dave Bordens "Tour of the War onDrugs". Use your imagination here, but if you were going togive someone a tour of the War on Drugs, what would you include?It should have lots of interesting facts, graphics, documents,etc. 2. A video file which contains a good quality copy of"Hemp for Victory". We would like to put in onlinewhere it can be distributed to the world. If you already have acomputer and a VCR, the cost of the video capture board iscurrently running around $500 to $700. Or maybe you know someonewho has one . . . 3. The full text of any of the reference sources listed inthe Biggest Studies of DrugPolicy. We much prefer the electronic format but if all youhave is a good paper copy, we will try to work with it. 4. The full text of the Congressional Record for the portionsrelevant to both the Harrison Narcotics Act of 1914 and theMarijuana Tax Act of 1937. 5. Charts, pictures, etc., which show the current statisticsfor all of the issues related to drug policy. SCANNING We have a huge task ahead of us. We must convert tens ofthousands of pages of information to computer format. Most of theinformation, such as the major studies of drug policy, never wasin computer format and some of the documents are quite large. Thetask will probably take man years of scanning effort to beproperly accomplished. The only way we will get it done (with ourlimited financial resources) is if everyone does a little bit. Istrongly recommend that you get a scanner as soon as possible.You don't need much, a simple gray scale scanner with OCR will dothe trick. Shop around and you can install a minimum page-feedscanner in an existing computer system, with OCR for about $250.A good quality flat-bed color scanner with a page feed optioncurrently runs about $1,000. I have found from my own experiencethat the handheld scanners are not adequate to the task. Does anyone know where we can get scanners cheaply (free) todistribute to volunteers who will commit to using them? GETTINGTHE WORD OUT TO THE MEDIA We will need volunteers who will help us get the word out tothe lawmakers and the media when we are ready to launch. Anyonecan help here, if they have a telephone, a stamp, or an e-mailaddress. FORMATTINGAND ORGANIZING We will also need people to specialize in the librarianfunction. That is, we must have people who are willing to spendthe time to: Organize the data so it has a logical structure and is easyto find. Establish links from references in one document to the actualtext of the cited documents. Format good looking web pages according to a standard format We will need standards for how the web pages will beconstructed and their overall look. (Please understand, it is notthat I want to limit your creativity with web pages, it is justthat we want to present to the public the look of a uniform,organized library.) I recommend that anyone who is interested inworking on this end of the task should buy a copy of TeachYourself Web Publishing With HTML In A Week, by Laura Lemay fromSams Publishing. I just got a copy and found it quite helpful. READINGAND SUMMARIZING There will be a lot of information on line. We will needpeople to read through volumes of information and prepareaccurate summaries on a chapter by chapter basis. PROGRAMMING Someone will have to program the membership forms and otherstuff required by this little venture. WHERE TOGO TO GET THE DATA 1. Information from other on-line services. We mustaccumulate all of the information in a place we control andorganize. 2. Government sources. A lot of the government agencies arenow publishing information in computer format, including CD-ROM.We should make it a point to get all of this information we canand bring it together in a logical organization which makes iteasy for people to find. 3. Historical records. A good project for anyone would be togo to the library and browse through the newspapers of anywherefrom 1860 to the present and get copies of all the articles theycan find relating to drugs. 4. Private collections of documents. I have already contacteda number of prominent people to ask them if we can get theirpersonal records which relate to drug policy. We want to developa depth of information which cannot be challenged and the privaterecords of individuals involved in the drug war is a good way todo it. 5. NIDA research. The National Instiute on Drug Abuse haspublished volumes of data on all sorts of issues. We should startwith the most interesting stuff. 6. The Congressional Record. We need to get on-line theentire text of the Congressional Record relating to all of ourcurrent drug laws. Most important-- we must get the text of theoriginal proceedings behind these laws. Harry Anslinger's wordsshould be posted in a place where all the world can read them. 7. Current Media. Scan and/or summarize articles from yourlocal newspaper. Include the full citations of the name of thenewspaper, the headline of the article and the date it waspublished. Also include a summary, length as appropriate, of themajor points made in the article. If we can get permission toreprint, we should do so. If not, we will publish a summary ofthe points made in the article, but retain the scanned text in aprivate library for backup. 8. Videos and movies. We should convert things such as Hempfor Victory to computer format. This can be done with a computer,a VCR, and a video capture board (now down to as low as $179.00) WEB PAGESTANDARDS I suggest the following as a preliminary suggestion for webpage standards. More complete standards, including a template,should be developed by a committee working on the formatting andorganizing team. 1. All web pages should include both the name of the currentpage plus the name of the central home page. This will make surethat anyone who prints out the information will know where itcame from. The name of the central home page should also beincluded as a header in all text files on the net. 2. All menus should contain links back to your own home pageas well as the central home page. 3. All menu pages should include the title of the document,and a description of the author and the contents of the work. 4. All web pages under your own home page should have aconsistent layout. The layout should be simple and withoutexcessive graphics, so it doesn't take a month to download them. COPYRIGHTS Under current copyright law we cannot post anything which iscopyrighted without the permission of the copyright owner. Hereis how to get around this restriction and still have a completeon-line library. 1) Any material produced by any government agency, or thetexts of official statements by public officials is in the publicdomain and may be posted without any problems. 2) The current copyright law is that copyrights are effectivefor the life of the creator plus fifty years. The old law wasthat copyrights were valid for 28 years with a renewal of 28years. What this means is (with some exceptions) materialspublished before about 1940 have probably fallen into the publicdomain. I have a feeling that, if some people or organizations were asked, they would grant us permission to post their materials, or at least excerpts from the materials. If we cannot get permission, we will post our own written summaries of the materials -- reviews of the essential points made by the document. CliffSchaffer's Home Page WT02-B01-10IA031-000655-B030-277http://206.61.184.43:80/schaffer/activist/wherego.htm 206.61.184.43 19970122110057 text/html 6355HTTP/1.0 200 OKDate: Wednesday, 22-Jan-97 11:00:37 GMTServer: WebSitePro/1.1f (S/N wpo-0deb)Allow-ranges: bytesContent-type: text/htmlLast-modified: Saturday, 28-Dec-96 07:24:35 GMTContent-length: 6138 Where do we go from here? Where do wego from here? by Clifford A. Schaffer The tide has turned in the war against the War on Drugs. Itis a tough fight, but those who support drug policy reform havebegun to carry the day. There have been three major televisionspecials on the issue in less than a year and the DEA openlyadmitted their arguments were in trouble when they called aspecial conference last August to try to find ways to argueagainst reform. They have been getting pretty well shellacked inevery single debate over the last few years and the media hasbegun to seriously question the wisdom of the drug war. The drugwarriors are in retreat and they know it. The big question for those who support reform is: Where do wego from here? Activists from around the world have beendiscussing this on the Internet, and here are some of theanswers. The Internet Rapid communication is critical to this movement. Activistsfrom around the world have joined together on the Internet todiscuss ideas and provide support for each other in a widevariety of ways. There are plans for a bigger and better presenceon the Internet where news, research, and ideas will be availableto anyone with a computer, and where people from around the worldcan work together. We need more people on the Internet. We alsoneed someone in every city who is plugged in to the network andcan distribute the news on a timely basis to those who are notyet on the Internet. Unity The Internet has also brought unity. The biggest singlethrust of the DEA in their public relations campaign is that welack unity. The DEA tells the public that those who supportreform don't even agree among themselves on what they want and,therefore, they could never build a credible public policy. Formany years it was true. We have a number of organizations andgroups around the country who have always agreed on theiropposition to the drug war but have usually worked alone topursue their goals. As a result, we looked like a mob, ratherthan a team. Through the internet, we have held lengthy on-line"meetings" where many of the leading activists andorganizations have discussed where we agreed and disagreed, andhow we could work together toward the goals we all shared. As theresult of those meetings, we have formulated a basic statement ofour objective and the principles which should be the basis for abetter drug policy. They are: Our Objective Our objective is to bring drugs within the law. Principles for a Solution. We believe that a better drug policy should be based on threebasic principles: 1) Decisions on the medical use of drugs should be the soleprovince of the medical profession in consultation with itspatients. 2) Punishment should not be used to control private drug use. 3) We must have a consistent policy for all drugs ofpotential abuse. We ask all interested people and groups around the nation tojoin us in a recognition of our common goals and present a unitedfront to the world. We all agree that we need reform now. Thefirst step toward reform is to press for open and honestdiscussion of the issue. Better Public Relations When it comes to funding for media, we are clearly outgunnedby the drug warriors. But, over the last few years we have justas clearly beaten them with a better, more sensible message. Weneed a grass roots effort to educate the media at all levels.Keep track of your local newspaper, television, and radiostations and make sure that the old hysterical lies andhalf-truths of the drug war do not go unchallenged. We haveproven that the media will come our way if they know the facts. Recruitment We all know people who are not members of the DPF but shouldbe. Many of them are not members simply because no one has askedthem to join, or they don't know the DPF is there. No one hastold them that their support is important. We should all make acommitment to recruit at least one new member in the comingmonth. It's easy. All you need to do is ask them. When you leavethe house tomorrow morning, carry a membership application and astamped envelope addressed to the DPF. I will bet you find a newally before noon. The Next Step We have already demonstrated that when the evidence isexamined the drug warriors don't have a leg to stand on. Theyhave lost every debate in the last few years because of theevidence, so the last thing they want now is a public discussionof the evidence. Their "anti-legalization" resolutioneven says so, in so many words. Even the mere discussion ofpossible alternatives, they say, will cause a massive increase indrug addiction. We want to talk about alternatives. We want to review theevidence. We want openness, honesty, and objectivity in a publicreview of all we know about drug policy. We want to lay the cardson the table and let the chips fall where they may. The drugwarriors do not. Therein lies the difference between us. Our mission is to draw the drug warriors into a publicdebate. We must ask the media to ask them: "What's wrongwith the truth? Why don't you want to read the evidence? Whywon't you discuss it? If you are right, the evidence will surelyshow it." We have nothing to fear from the truth. CliffSchaffer's Home Page WT02-B01-11IA031-000655-B030-310http://206.61.184.43:80/schaffer/activist/politic.htm 206.61.184.43 19970122110115 text/html 5158HTTP/1.0 200 OKDate: Wednesday, 22-Jan-97 11:01:03 GMTServer: WebSitePro/1.1f (S/N wpo-0deb)Allow-ranges: bytesContent-type: text/htmlLast-modified: Saturday, 28-Dec-96 07:25:05 GMTContent-length: 4941 Political Strategies for Drug Policy Reform PoliticalStrategies by Clifford A. Schaffer This is a first crack at the kinds of political strategies wemust use to end the drug war. We mustwin by knockout. I believe that we must pick issues where we can by knockout.The odds are so stacked against us that, unless we win byknockout, we will not win at all. While I agree with the economics and civil libertiesarguments for decriminalization, I do not favor the use of theseissues as a primary focus. The primary reason that I do not likethe arguments on economics or civil liberties is because they arehighly intellectual arguments which could be debated all day withno clear resolution. They make people think too much, and thatslows down decision-making. We want issues which will changepeople's minds forever -- and do it today. I believe that thesearguments may be useful to convince other people like us, but itwill not convince large masses of Americans. There are two primary issues where I believe we can win byknockout right now. They are the treatment of medical patients,and the issue of African-American men. In both cases we haveclear, overwhelming arguments which would get the immediateagreement of large masses of Americans. We mustbuild a coalition of constituencies. We must bring people of different persuasions together tosupport our cause. In our Resolution, we have already chosen abroadly based statement which does not use the "D" wordand which could be supported by people of all persuasions. Thatis step one. Next we, need to formally identify our constituencies and thespecific arguments which will be most relevant to those groups. Some constituencies are: Doctors - The relevant issues here are the persecution ofdoctors and the treatment of medical patients. Medical Patient Groups - The relevant issue is the treatmentof medical patients. African-Americans - The relevant issue is the incarcerationand economic destruction of African-American men. I believe that doctors and African-Americans are absolutelyvital to our success and that every one of us should takeimmediate steps to recruit them to our cause. We mustform "intervention groups" and target specificindividuals that we need on our side. We have used an approach which someone likened to an AlcoholsAnonymous intervention group. We assembled a group of people thatwe knew an important person would find persuasive. Then we allwent together to that person and explained our concerns in termsthat were important to that person. Then we asked for support,not for the "D" word, but for general drug policyreform. This technique is highly effective and will enable us tochange the thinking of many important people, or at least startthem down the slippery slope to the "D" word. I believethat we should all commit to participating in at least one ofthese intervention groups to change the mind of at least oneimportant person. We mustseek action. We have already asked for public hearings. As many of youhave already stated, public hearings may not come about and, evenif they do, they may not change anything. Therefore, we must seekother means which will also bring about clear publicconfrontations on the issue. When those confrontations occur, wemust all respond unanimously. We mustprovide support for people who speak out for drug policy reform. We all know that many people are reluctant to speak out forreform because of the McCarthy-like tactics of our opposition. Wemust come to the defense of anyone who is criticized or vilifiedbecause of their support for a change in drug policy. Point outthat people are not vilified because they are Republican,Democrat, or Libertarian, but people are vilified if they evenwant to discuss a different drug policy. This is McCarthyism. CliffSchaffer's Home Page WT02-B01-12IA031-000655-B030-346http://206.61.184.43:80/schaffer/activist/localact.htm 206.61.184.43 19970122110125 text/html 7701HTTP/1.0 200 OKDate: Wednesday, 22-Jan-97 11:01:15 GMTServer: WebSitePro/1.1f (S/N wpo-0deb)Allow-ranges: bytesContent-type: text/htmlLast-modified: Saturday, 28-Dec-96 07:25:16 GMTContent-length: 7484 Local Action strategies for drug policy reform LocalAction strategies by Clifford A. Schaffer 1. Contactyour local media. Tell them about these web pages and theinformation on them. 2. Readthe newspapers and respond. Make it a point to read the largest newspapers in your areaand be alert for drug-policy related news stories. Write short,punchy letters to the editor to make your views heard. 3. Contactthe talk shows in your area. Most TV and radio talk shows need a steady stream ofcontroversial subjects to make the shows interesting. Sooner orlater, they will all do a show on drug policy. Go through your TVlistings and locate all talk and news shows. Call the stationsand ask for the producers of the show. In most cases, it willsurprise you how easy it is to get through. Tell them about theresolution and the people supporting it. Let them know that thereare prominent people now willing to come forward and debate thisidea publicly. Producers are probably extremely busy, so keep itshort, punchy, and sweet. Have some juicy "sound bites"planned to stimulate interest. Follow up with a letter andprinted material such as the things I have enclosed. Keep intouch with them every ninety days or so, just to make sure thatthey don't forget you. If you get a spot on a good TV show and then don't know whatto do -- call me. We'll work something out. 4. Developa constituency. Contact groups and members of groups to put on a presentationand persuade them to support the resolution. There are all kindsof groups which may support this resolution, each for their ownindividual reasons. They include African-Americans, ministers,doctors, medical patients, law enforcement officials, AIDSgroups, and many others. Pick groups that you think you canpersuade and then develop the issues which are most important tothem. 5. Pickone influential person at a time and persuade them. When you have persuaded them that it is time for a change,and that we should at least look at other drug policy options,get them to commit to going with you to persuade at least twomore influential people. Use this technique to "move up theladder" to more and more influential people. Use the "intervention group" approach. Assemble asmall group of people whom your target will view as influentialand persuasive. Arrange a meeting where all can attend and haveall those people ask the person to reconsider their point ofview. Don't ask them to support legalization ordecriminalization, because it is unlikely that you could persuadethem in one meeting anyway. Just get them to admit that there isenough of a question about the issue that it is time tore-examine the evidence and commit to the investigation of thepossibility of change. 6. Enlistyour friends to create a steady "rain" of resolutionson the White House. Get everyone to commit to sending a resolution a week. Keepit up until we get the commission. Let Clinton know that thisresolution is not going to go away. 7. Developphone networks to get people to respond when we need them torespond. The National Rifle Association is powerful because, at anygiven time, it can bombard the President and Congress withmillions of letters and phone calls. We need the same type ofresponse. 8. Put ondebates and seminars at colleges. Colleges and universities often have philosophy, publicadministration, law enforcement, or political science professorswho might like to put on a public forum or debate on drug policy.Call the local colleges and ask for the heads of thesedepartments, or anyone else you think might be interested.Suggest the idea to them. I have enclosed a sample speech from one of the debates I wasin. You can edit it as appropriate to your needs. I have neverhad anyone make an intelligent comeback to that speech. The enclosed charts can be blown up to 18 inch by 24 inchsize by places such as Kinko's Copies for about $2.50 to $5.00each, depending upon whether you get them on ordinary paper or oncard stock. For large audiences, consider taking 35mm slidepictures of the graphs. If you are out in the middle of the woodsand can't do either of those things, write to me and, if you payfor it, I will have it done for you. The biggest problem you may have with this tactic is that thelocal gendarmes and prosecutors are becoming increasinglyreluctant to come out in public and defend the drug war. Theyhave been getting their butts kicked far too much lately and eventhe most fervent drug warriors are now having a hard time withtheir beliefs. 9. Contactlocal civic organizations. In most towns, there are various local civic organizationsthat might want to have presentations on the drug war for any ofa variety of reasons. Some of them will do it just for theentertainment value. Go through the phone book and locate theRotarians, the Elks, etc. and ask them if they would beinterested. 10. Writeto and call your local Congressman. Most members of Congress are chowder-heads, but there aresome out there who are intelligent enough to read the facts andstand up for the truth. We won't know who they are until peoplelike you can find them. 11.Produce Local Access Cable Shows. You can become a producer for local access cable channelswith as little as five hours of mostly free classes. Call yourlocal cable company for information. Once you become a produceryou can use their facilities to tape shows, or you can broadcasttapes which were prepared by others. We have already done this afew times and have a number of shows which can be made availableto anyone who is hooked in to their local access cable channels. 12. Don'tget discouraged. It may take time to build your persuasive skills and even thebest of us don't persuade everybody the first time around. Keepit up, despite the setbacks, and you will eventually prevail. CliffSchaffer's Home Page WT02-B01-13IA031-000655-B030-372http://206.61.184.43:80/schaffer/activist/persuas.htm 206.61.184.43 19970122110137 text/html 22196HTTP/1.0 200 OKDate: Wednesday, 22-Jan-97 11:01:25 GMTServer: WebSitePro/1.1f (S/N wpo-0deb)Allow-ranges: bytesContent-type: text/htmlLast-modified: Saturday, 28-Dec-96 07:25:11 GMTContent-length: 21978 Persuasive Strategies for the Drug Legalization Debate Persuasive Strategies by Clifford A. Schaffer Dos The issue is prison. The issue is not legalization or decriminalization because wereally do not know if we will ever do those things, or anythinglike them. The issue is prison. The issue is how many millions ofpeople will have to go to prison before this policy issuccessful. You cannot successfully defend decriminalization orlegalization to most people at this point, because it is not hereand they cannot see it. Turn the issue around on them, and makethem defend what we are doing now. The drug war has not workedand there is not a drug law enforcement official in the UnitedStates who pretends that it can work. Once they are on thedefensive, it is easy to get them to admit that it is time tolook for another approach -- whatever that approach might be. Do your homework. There is enough information in the references I have listedto sink anyone who supports the use of jails for drugs. That'swhy the reports were written. Be reasonable. If you can present a sound and reasonable approach to solvingthe drug problem, and maintain that stance, you willshort-circuit most of the negative emotions and hostility whichmay be raised against you. Notice that I have said a reasonable"approach" to solving the drug problem, not areasonable "solution" to the drug problem. By approach,I mean a method of finding a solution. Do not try to present asolution because, as discussed later, that only gets you intotrouble. Instead, promote a fair and reasonable method of findinga solution -- such as the objective commission called for by theHoover Resolution. At the same time, this reasonable stance forces our opponentsto either be reasonable and follow us toward reform, or adoptever more extreme positions on drugs. One of my favoritequestions for them is: "What do you have against an open andhonest review of the evidence?" If they do not agree to an open and honest review of theevidence then they clearly demonstrate that they are too extremeto even consider the facts. If they do agree to the review, thenI have them every time because I have already read the evidenceand I know what it says. Judo is better than boxing. You can beat someone with boxing, in which case you knockthem down with your weight. Or, you can beat someone with judo,in which case you knock them down with their own weight. Judo isalways better than boxing when you have to persuade someone. Usethe arguments your audience finds persuasive, not the argumentsyou find persuasive. For example, if you encounter a fundamentalist Christian,nothing you will say to them will have any meaning to them at allunless they believe that Jesus Christ would support what you aresaying. So far most of them have believe that drug users shouldbe thrown in prison because drug use is immoral -- that is, Jesuswould not approve of drug use. I have found that the bestapproach to these people is to help them to understand it intheir own terms. What I say is: "You are certainly a better Christian than I am so youtell me. If Jesus came down here today and we gave the drugproblem to him, what do you think he would do? Would he buildbigger prisons? Or would he build hospitals and schools?" When the issue is stated in these simple terms, most of themwill come around right away. They will immediately see the goodsense in an approach that heals, rather than punishes. Avoid complex arguments The supporters of the drug war have, in keeping with theirgeneral intellectual level, made the simplest propagandapossible. The eggs in the frying pan commercial is a goodexample. In order to compete with them, it is necessary to makearguments which are as simple and as easily understood aspossible. There are a lot of ways to get really complicated in adrug argument but two of the favorites are arguments based oncivil liberties and economics. Please keep in mind that I agreewith the arguments based on civil liberties and economics, I justdon't find them persuasive to others. Arguments based on such topics as civil liberties oreconomics are not likely to be persuasive for three reasons: 1) They are complicated issues which take a lot of thought.Even if you come up with a reasonable sounding argument today,someone will just confuse them tomorrow with an equally goodsounding argument. 2) Surveys consistently show that a large portion of theAmerican public would readily sacrifice their civil liberties totry to solve some mythical problem. 3) The people who are likely to be persuaded are alreadypersuaded. There are exceptions to every rule, of course, but, ingeneral, most people will not be persuaded by philosophicalarguments about civil liberties, or arcane arguments abouteconomics. It may be sad, but it is true. One of the major exceptions to this is property owners.Property owners in California have become very sensitive to thefact that their property can be seized even though they knewnothing at all about criminal activity on the property. Propertyowners can be a pretty vocal group so they should not beoverlooked as allies. Economic arguments, when used, should be simplified to avoidlong-winded discussions which do not resolve anything. Forexample: With $500,000 of tax money we can put one drug user inprison, or we can provide treatment or education for more than100 people. Which do you think is the better deal? Build agreement. Sales people know that a person is more likely to agree withyou if they have already agreed with you. That is, if you can getthem to agree that it is a nice day, for example, they will bemore likely to agree with whatever else you may say. You get themin the habit of saying "Yes" and they will keep saying"Yes." There are certain issues on which nearly everyone willreadily agree. The first is that people who are sick should getwhatever medicine they need. If they understand that marijuanacan help save the lives of people with AIDS and cancer, and thatheroin can help relieve extreme chronic pain, and may even speedhealing after surgery or injury, they will usually agree that --for medical purposes at least -- we should allow the use of thesedrugs. Then point out: Sick people are suffering and dying because they need thesemedicines to live. If that was the only reason to re-examine ourdrug policy it would be reason enough. But, as you know, it isnot the only reason to re-examine what we are doing. Isn't ittime to examine all these problems and see what really is theright thing to do? Attack the very foundations of the drug laws. The drug laws were the product of racism and ignorance. Theynever did have anything to do with public health and safety. Itis important that people understand this point. Most peoplewrongly assume that the drug laws were passed because it wasnecessary to protect people against dangerous drugs. Most peopledo not know that, at the time the laws were passed, there was nomedical evidence to show that these drugs were dangerous, andthat major newspapers like the New York Times published articleswith titles like "Negro Cocaine Fiends, New SouthernMenace." Once people begin to understand that there neverwas a good reason for the laws in the first place, then it isperfectly legitimate to ask what is the reason for these lawsnow. This can lead to a discussion of how the drug laws came to be(your opponent loses by default); or the fact that half of allour prison inmates are black, most of them there on drug charges;or the fact that in places like Washington, DC, ninety percent ofall the black men have already been to jail, most of them on drugcharges (your opponent loses by embarrassment). One standard response The following sentence works for nearly anything youropponent may say: "There is no evidence to support that assertion.Every major study of drug policy agreed that, even if it wastrue, decriminalization would still be a better solution." For example, they may say that, if drugs are legalized thateveryone will become drug addicts. You say: "There is no evidence to support that assertion. Everymajor study of drug policy agreed that, even if drug use didincrease, decriminalization would still be a bettersolution." Preface your sentences Put a prefix in front of your sentences. The prefix is "Everymajor study agreed . . ." Without this phrase, thethings you say will be interpreted as your own opinion. If youuse this phrase, your opinions are seen more clearly as theoverwhelming weight of the evidence. Also, this phrase will forceyour opponent to debate on the basis of fact, where they are theweakest, and will quickly flatten their best arguments. Attack, Attack, Attack. It is the only way you will win. Even if people believed thatlegalization was right, they would still support the current setof laws because they aren't certain about legalization andbelieve the criminal laws do no harm. They must be made to seethat the current laws are worse than no laws at all. You must putyour opponents on the extreme defensive and keep them there. Makethem justify all of the awful facts. The subject is notlegalization or decriminalization. The subject is prison. Keep it short and punchy. Know what you are going to say and trim every excess word. Ifyou are really lucky you will get a full fifteen minutes of mediaair time to explain everything there is to know about drugs. Hitthe major facts as rapidly as you can. Memorize what you want to say Salesmen memorize their sales pitch because, once they haveit down by rote, they can say it without even thinking, thusfreeing their tactical brain to get an edge on their prospect.With tricky subjects like drug policy reform it is very easy tomake verbal missteps which will weaken your case, or send youraudience into extreme cognitive dissonance (a mental shutdown)where they will not hear another thing you say. Be extremelycareful about the phrasing you use and stick with the phrasingwhich will keep you out of trouble. Memorize the names of thestudies so you can spit them out without thinking. Stick to the issue. Don't let the discussion stray into related social issues.Drug policy is one of those issues which is closely intertwinedwith other issues such as morality, education, health care,welfare, and many others. Don't get sidetracked into argumentsover welfare reform or some other complicated issue You don'thave time for it and most Americans don't have the brain capacityto understand the complexities anyway. The issue is whetherbuilding massive prisons will solve the drug problem. Get the facts out. Most people do not know the actual statistics on things likedrug deaths, the number of people in prison, the percentage ofblack men who will go to prison and the plight of medicalpatients who cannot get these medicines. When they hear thefacts, they really begin to wonder about the current policy. Win by inches. Don't try to bring people too far in their thinking. Theconcept of legalization or decriminalization is a bigintellectual and emotional stretch for a lot of people and youcould easily spend years getting them to fully believe it. It issimply not practical, or necessary, to try to bring people overto the legalization side all at once. People will naturally cometo the legalization point of view if you can simply convince themthat our current policy is a disaster which could never work (andthat is really easy!). Once they agree that the current policy isnot working, and cannot work, then they will ask themselves -- ifprisons don't work, what should we do? When they confront thisquestion, they have started down the slippery slope todecriminalization. Federal Judge Jack B. Weinstein said, "Unthinkingacceptance of the current drug policy is unreasonable." Ifwe can just get people to admit that there is a real problem withwhat we are doing now, and that we must look for a bettersolution, they will eventually agree with you. An interesting thing happened to Judge James P. Gray. A manwrote Judge Gray a letter in which he started out by tellingJudge Gray how wrong Judge Gray was about legalization. The guytried to tell Judge Gray why he was so wrong and, in the space ofthree written pages, wound up realizing that Judge Gray wasright. He convinced himself once he just sat down and thoughtabout it. Take the moral high ground Our opponents like to take the stance that anyone who doesnot believe in huge prisons full of drug dealers is less thanmoral, beneath contempt, and is probably selling drugs tograde-school children in their spare time. It is time to teardown this moral charade. There is nothing moral about incarcerating most of the blackmen in America. There is nothing moral about denying legitimatemedicines to people who are suffering and dying. There is nothingmoral about a drug policy which seeks to destroy people, not healthem. The damage being done by this policy is too great to allowanyone to maintain the pretense that this drug war is somethingholy and moral. Don'ts Don't use the "L" word, the "D" word, orthe "M" word. Don't use "legalization,""decriminalization," or "medicalization".These words tend to set some people's heads on fire. In the firstplace, these words will cause many people to go into an immediatecomplete mental shut-down and they will not hear another thingyou say. In the second place, it is wrong to reduce what mustnecessarily be a complex policy under any circumstances, to asingle word. It only serves to further distort the issue.Besides, you don't have to use the words to win. Some people have mentioned that the word"legalization" must be used sooner or later in thepublic debate simply because a recognition that prison is wrongwill lead people to consider the alternatives, which willultimately lead to prison. This is certainly true. However, Iwould recommend that you let your opponent use it first, and thatyou do not promote it as a cause. Don't defend the use of drugs. Don't tell people that everyone has a God-given right to putwhatever they want to in to their body. You may be right, and Ihappen to agree, but it won't play in Peoria. Many people justview this as an excuse to get loaded (and, in many cases, theyare right). Don't advance your own plan for selling drugs. Do not discuss your personal plan for how legalization wouldwork The reasons are: a) You can only sell one product at a time. First convincethem whether we should change the laws. We will haveplenty of time for how later. b) When you suggest how it should be done then yourindividual ideas become the focus. If your plan fails for anyreason, then your whole argument will fail, and; c) The real secret is that there is no right answer to drugpolicy. Every idea you will suggest is only the lesser ofmultiple evils and leaves you open to violent emotional attack. Don't get tied up in debates over the health risks. First let me state that the evidence is quite clear that, byany standard of comparison, alcohol and tobacco are far moredangerous than almost any of the illegal drugs. However, therelative health risks are not really the issue. Just because something is dangerous does not automaticallymean that the best approach to those dangers is to throw millionsof people in prison. We all know that tobacco, and alcohol, andAIDS are hazardous to your health. But we all would agree thatprison is not the best public policy for those hazards. Prison,in fact, would be a terrible mistake. It is the same principle with illegal drugs. We can assumethat drugs are dangerous. That is not the question. The questionis: What is the best public policy for those dangers? On thisquestion, every major study of drug policy has agreed that,whatever the dangers may be, prison is the wrong approach. Everymajor study recommended decriminalization because of thosedangers, and because prison is the worst approach. Bigger prisonsdo not equal better public health policy. Don't get stuck on questions which cannot be answered. Congressman Charles Rangel likes to ask the question,"How do you propose that we go about legalizing drugs?Should we have crack stores next to liquor stores?" Thetrick is that there really is no perfect answer, and any answeryou give leaves you open to attack. It turns the issue into oneof your personal social ideas rather than the objective truththat all studies agree that decriminalization, under almost anyscenario, is a better approach. Don't Overdose I generally avoid mention of overdoses because the worditself distorts the issue in a very emotional sense. The drugwhich produces the most overdoses is alcohol. No one thinks of adrunk high school kid puking into a toilet as a drug overdose,even when you point it out to them. Consumers Union found thatthere are very few real drug overdoses and none at all formarijuana. Most of the so-called "overdoses" wereclearly attributable to other causes, such as impurities in thedrugs. Don't get the issues stuck between you People are more likely to believe you and be persuaded bywhat you say if they feel that you share their same basicconcerns, that is, if they feel you are "on theirside." Always explain you answers in terms of their thoughtsand goals. Your goals are probably the same as theirs anyway --reducing the harm done by drugs, keeping drugs away from kids,controlling the social costs of drugs, etc. Don't let them have anything. There are many, many myths about drugs and drug use. Like forinstance, the old myth that pushers spike marijuana with heroinand cocaine to get unsuspecting kids hooked. It doesn't happen. Licitand Illicit Drugs effectively explodes most of these myths.If your opponent mentions such a myth, jump down his throat andpoint out that there is no evidence at all to support what he issaying. Make them prove it. You can prove what you say, theycan't. Don't get stuck on Constitutional issues. Issues based on the US Constitution will generally not bepersuasive for a number of reasons: They are complicated. They require a lot of knowledge of history, law, and other subjects which most people, including you, are not likely to have. Like any other complicated issue, anyone can make long-winded discussions go on forever with no clear resolution. Complicated arguments are best avoided because they just don't win. The people who are likely to agree with you probably already agree with you. Many Americans, including some intelligent ones, do not understand the protections afforded by the Constitution and why they are so important. Many people tend to feel that the protections of the Constitution were only meant to be given to the law-abiding citizens like them and, besides, if innocent people are hurt because the police have violated their rights, then that is just the price we have to pay for law and order. It is pointless to argue with these people on this point because, for the most part, you are not going to change their basic attitude about it. Even if you win, you don't win anything. Even if you get your opponent to agree that Fourth Amendment rights (or some other rights) are being violated by the police, it can be dismissed as simple bad management. That is, they will argue that we should manage it a little better, but we still ought to continue the war on drugs. Constitutional arguments in general do not effectively address the point that the drug war is morally and practically wrong at its very foundations. CliffSchaffer's Home Page WT02-B01-14IA031-000655-B031-18http://206.61.184.43:80/schaffer/activist/how2men.htm 206.61.184.43 19970122110146 text/html 5640HTTP/1.0 200 OKDate: Wednesday, 22-Jan-97 11:01:39 GMTServer: WebSitePro/1.1f (S/N wpo-0deb)Allow-ranges: bytesContent-type: text/htmlLast-modified: Saturday, 28-Dec-96 07:28:19 GMTContent-length: 5423 Speaking Out Against Drug Legalization Contents | Feedback | Search DRCNet Library | Schaffer Library | The Drug Legalization Debate Speaking Out Against Drug Legalization , or; How To Hold Your Own In a Drug Legalization Debate by The US DEA and Reply to How To Hold Your Own by Clifford A. Schaffer What This Document Is In August, 1994, the Drug Enforcement Administration held aspecial conference to try to deal with the fact that they weregetting beaten -- badly -- every time they tried to come out fora drug policy debate. In the last few years, they have beenbeaten in these debates so often that it is really anembarrasment to the whole drug warrior crew. They don't have asingle argument which stands up to close scrutiny. The reason they were getting beaten is because people beganusing the Persuasive Strategies and they got better educated onthe issue. As a result of the Persuasive Strategies being used bylarge numbers of people across the US, they were getting publiclyhammered every time they came out for a debate. It was really anembarrassing trend, so they had to try to do something about it. Now they have laid out, in detail, their ten biggest argumentson the issues raised in the debate. These arguments will now belaid to rest. Because their book was in large part a response to myPersuasive Strategies, I have undertaken to write a reply totheir book. In short, they still don't have a single argumentwhich stands up to close scrutiny. The debate is over and it istime for them to admit it. Section 1  Introduction  Acknowledgements  Letter of Introduction  Reply to the Letter of Introduction Section 2  Why This Guide is Necessary  The DEA Position  When/Where/How To Use  Remember Section 3  Anti-Legalization Forum  What Motivates Legalization Proponents?  Questions to Ask Claim I - CRIME, VIOLENCE AND DRUGUSE GO HAND IN HAND CLAIM II: WE HAVE MADE SIGNIFICANTPROGRESS IN REDUCING DRUG USE IN THIS COUNTRY. NOW IS NOT THETIME TO ABANDON OUR EFFORTS. CLAIM III: LEGALIZATION OF DRUGS WILLLEAD TO INCREASED USE AND INCREASED ADDICTION LEVELS CLAIM IV: ANY REVENUES GENERATED BYTAXING LEGALIZED DRUGS WOULD QUICKLY EVAPORATE IN LIGHT OF THEINCREASED SOCIAL COSTS ASSOCIATED WITH LEGALIZING DRUGS. CLAIM V: THERE ARE NO COMPELLINGMEDICAL REASONS TO PRESCRIBE MARIJUANA OR HEROIN TO SICK PEOPLE. CLAIM VI: LEGALIZATION ANDDECRIMINALIZATION OF DRUGS HAVE BEEN A DISMAL FAILURE IN OTHERNATIONS. CLAIM VII: ALCOHOL HAS CAUSEDSIGNIFICANT HEALTH, SOCIAL AND CRIME PROBLEMS IN THIS COUNTRY,AND LEGALIZED DRUGS WOULD ONLY MAKE THE SITUATION WORSE CLAIM VIII: DRUG CONTROL SPENDING ISA MINOR PORTION OF THE U.S. BUDGET, AND COMPARED TO THE COSTS OFDRUG ABUSE, SPENDING IS MINUSCULE. CLAIM IX: DRUG PROHIBITION IS WORKING CLAIM X: DRUG LEGALIZATION WOULDHAVE AN ADVERSE EFFECT ON LOWINCOME COMMUNITIES KNOW WHAT YOU'RE GETTING INTO BEFORE SPEAKING AGAINSTLEGALIZATION Some Do's and Don'ts: INVITATIONS: HANDLE WITH CARE DEFINITIONS More to Come ............ Contents | Feedback | Search DRCNet Library | Schaffer Library | The Drug Legalization Debate WT02-B01-15IA031-000655-B031-120http://206.61.184.43:80/schaffer/activist/black1.htm 206.61.184.43 19970122110230 text/html 12504HTTP/1.0 200 OKDate: Wednesday, 22-Jan-97 11:02:23 GMTServer: WebSitePro/1.1f (S/N wpo-0deb)Allow-ranges: bytesContent-type: text/htmlLast-modified: Saturday, 28-Dec-96 07:26:03 GMTContent-length: 12286 How to Approach the Black Community How to Approach the Black Community by Clifford A. Schaffer Introduction There have been many people who have rightly criticized thefact that the drug policy reform movement has not made majorallies in the black community - despite the fact that the blackcommunity is clearly the most severely impacted by the drug war.Instead, the reaction in the black community is often one of evengreater calls for law enforcement presence and even greatersupport for the drug war. While this is largely true, it is simply a matter that mostblack people (like most white people) don't realize how we got towhere we are today with the drug problem. As soon as it isexplained in terms that are relevant and understandable to them,they readily understand and agree with the need for reform -specifically, not putting nearly so many people in prison. I have always found it relatively easy to get black people,particularly black leaders, to support drug policy reform. Theywill not support "legalization", but they will supportspecific steps of reform which both they and the"legalizers" agree are necessary. They already have aproblem with too many liquor stores in their communities, so theywill not support ideas which look like you are going to open up alegal chain of crack houses. They can be expected to argue forthe point that we simply need to stop and look at what we aredoing, and seriously question the whole program. They will alsosupport and argue for constructive, rather than destructiveapproaches to the problem. Ultimately, many black leaders will tell you privately thatthey support "legalization", if they are just given thefacts as a basis for their view. However, they will still have asignificant problem with the public presentation. One churchleader told us that his church had once issued a health kit whichincluded various first aid items, educational materials, phonenumbers to call, a lot of other things, and a condom. He saidthere was a storm of controversy about nothing but the condom andthey eventually had to take it out of the package because theywere spending all their time explaining it and defending it topeople, so they couldn't get anything else done. They ultimatelyfigured that it would be better to distribute the same packagewith everything but the condom. It is sad, but it is a functionalreality of the community they live in. It is one task to persuadethem of the need for reform. It is another task to help them findways that they can address the issue with their own community. How to Find Them, Approach Them, and Win Them Over Do your homework. Be up to date on the latest stats, issues, and arguments as they relate to the black community. Look in the phone book for any churches or other social organizations located in, or allied to, the black community. Call the head of the organization and arrange an appointment. Most of them, particularly churches, will give you one if you just ask. Be prepared with charts, graphs, statistics, historical information, and reference sources, so you have an interesting and persuasive presentation. Cover the racial origins of the laws, with appropriate citations and quotes. Cover the current situation with black men, including the lifetime risk of prison for black men - and how the probability of a drug conviction relates to that total risk. Don't expect them to trust white people. After the last 200 years, they are justified in being a little suspicious at times. Ask them to trust themselves and check everything you say. Then give them the reference sources to do it. Don't use the "L" word, the "D" word, or the "M" word. Use the "R" word - Reform - in terms that are specific to the concerns of the black community. Talk about constructive (treatment and education) rather than destructive (prison) approaches to the drug problem. They know that you (like most of those goody-good white people who come down to meddle in their community) are going to be gone tomorrow and not living with the consequences of whatever takes place in their community. Your arguments must, at all times, be expressed in terms which are meaningful and relevant to them. Understand their position. They CANNOT be seen as promoting or condoning drug use in any way at all. If you tell them you support the right of everyone to get loaded, you will find yourself in the parking lot in a matter of seconds. Remember that the Christian belief is very strong in the black community (though they do tend to have a somewhat more vigorous approach to their religion than those stuffy white people). The argument about what Jesus would do - build bigger prisons, or build hospitals and schools - will strike a resonant chord with many of them. Contrast love, compassion, and healing, with punishment, prison, and destruction. Help them to find a way to talk about it publicly. The issue of the disparity in the sentencing, and the sheer numbers of black men going to prison alone means that we should AT LEAST back up and take an honest look at what we are doing in the drug war. We must build, not destroy. And we must examine the entire drug war, not just the crack laws. Get them involved in our alliance. Get them connected to the Internet, if possible, (usually not possible), or get them on the mailing lists of the relevant organizations. Find someone from their group who will take the initiative in maintaining and responding to communications. Tell them about the online library and the fact that it has large amounts of information about the racial roots of the drug war, as well as other information. Questions I have listed below, a number of the common questions whichwill come up in such an interview, whether they are explicitlystated or not. What is their biggest concern? Their biggest single concern at this point is the ongoingmassive destruction of black men. Black men are being rendered"economically dead" by the massive imposition of prisonsentences. Their point of view may be somewhat skewed, in thatthey may view this as a result of the drugs, not the laws, and itmay not have occurred to them that, as bad as drugs are, criminalpunishment is not the way to address the problem. Why did this white boy come all the way over here to tellthis to me? Because I am concerned about the drug war for my own reasons,and I have the good sense to recognize that there are otherpeople who would also have concerns, for their own reasons. Wewill both achieve better results if we work together towardcommon goals. And, just as a matter of common sense and commondecency, I think it is pretty stupid to lock up half of all theblack men in America. There has to be a better way. Why should I trust you? Don't trust me. Trust yourself. I will simply give you apoint of view and the evidence which I think firmly supports it.I think the evidence will shock you, but I don't ask you tobelieve it. I will give you the reference sources where I got it,and I encourage you to do your own research and let me know ofany facts or issues that I have missed. My strongest allies havealways come from the people who went to the library and verifiedwhat I said. Why should black people support drug policy reform? Because the drug problem is tearing up the black community and we need to find a better approach - whatever it may be. Because the drug laws were based on racism from their inception, so there is no reason to expect them to be balanced and productive laws today. Because every major study of drug policy said that this policy only caused more harm than good, particularly for poor communities. Because it is what Jesus would do. Because we want to rebuild black men and make them productive citizens, not destroy them. Are you asking me to support legalization? Not at all. I am asking you to recognize the simpleproposition that prison has become a bigger threat to black menthan the drugs themselves. Black men can, and do, recover fromdrug problems and go on to live productive lives. They have amuch harder time recovering from a long stretch in prison. Weneed to discourage drug use but we do not need to destroy theirlives in order to save them. But some of these guys are dangerous and need to be lockedup! I fully admit that there are a good number of black men outthere who are dangerous and should be locked up for the good ofsociety. But we have now reached the point where about half ofall the young black men in America will have spent at least onestretch in prison before they are thirty. I find it hard tobelieve that we have to lock up half of all the young black menin America for the good of society. Whenever the numbers get thatlarge, we must stop and ask ourselves if this is really the bestcourse of action. Don't we need some jails? Certainly we do. But we learned long ago that, as bad asalcohol is, Prohibition only caused more problems than it solved.In the current situation, we can use our money to put one moreblack man in prison, or we can use the same amount of money toprovide education or treatment to more than one hundred blackmen. Suppose that someone gave us the decision on where we shouldspend the next million dollars of tax money on this problem -what should we do? Should we provide education and treatment forup to two hundred people, or should we put two more drug dealersin jail? How can I speak about this publicly? Talk about the terrible damage being done by not only the crack laws, but the drug laws in general. The crack laws are the worst example, but they are only one small part of a bigger system that is severely impacting black men. Talk about the need for education and treatment, not prison. Talk about the need for responses to the problem which build people rather than destroy them. Talk about the racial roots of the drug laws - how these laws were built on racism from their very inception, and how the image of the Negro Cocaine Fiend in 1914 is repeated in the image of the crack-fiend today. Talk about the need for an open and honest investigation of this entire drug problem - not just the mandatory minimums for crack. It is the entire drug policy which is wrong and it is the entire drug policy which must be fairly, openly, and honestly investigated. CliffSchaffer's Home Page WT02-B01-16IA031-000655-B031-184http://206.61.184.43:80/schaffer/activist/answers.htm 206.61.184.43 19970122110257 text/html 8726HTTP/1.0 200 OKDate: Wednesday, 22-Jan-97 11:02:48 GMTServer: WebSitePro/1.1f (S/N wpo-0deb)Allow-ranges: bytesContent-type: text/htmlLast-modified: Monday, 16-Dec-96 08:40:57 GMTContent-length: 8511 Answers to Specific Arguments on Drug Legalization Answers to Specific Arguments on Drug Legalization by Clifford A. Schaffer If we legalize/decriminalize drugs then everyone will becomedrug addicts. Every major study of drug policy agreed that there is no evidenceto support this belief and, even if drug use did increase, decriminalizationwould still be a better approach. In Europe, several countrieshave decriminalized drugs and actually seen a significant dropin drug use. We need a combined approach of education, treatment, prevention,and stiff law enforcement. This is a smoke screen, designed to cloud the issue and make youropponent seem like they are taking the most rational, balancedapproach while you are the one who is suggesting the extremistmeasures. Don't let them get away with it. You can kick all oftheir extraneous arguments out of the way and refocus the issue We agree one hundred percent on education, treatment, and prevention.The only place where we part company is on prisons. My opponentwants to build prisons larger than the Nazi concentration campsof World War II. I don't think that is necessarily a good idea. We have to keep these drugs illegal to protect our children. I agree. That's why I am looking for a better solution -- becausewhat we are doing now is obviously not working. In fact, the currentpolicy is one of the main reasons that drug users find it profitableto get kids involved in drugs and distribute drugs free on schoolcampuses. I believe that we can find a better approach which wouldstop this. My son/daughter was turned into a psycho by drugs so we haveto stamp out this evil menace. (Keep in mind that the person who says this kind of thing is probablyunder tremendous emotional stress so it would not be polite orproductive to suggest that their kid was probably a psycho allalong. Keep a gentle, sympathetic demeanor.) We have made these drugs as illegal as they can be and these kindsof tragedies still happen. The fact that your son/daughter becamea victim of these drugs shows, in itself, that the current policydid not work for you and your family. All it really does is tomake it harder to provide treatment for the people who need it.I believe that there may be a better way to handle the problem,that just might have saved your son/daughter. Don't you thinkthat we should at least explore the possibility of a better wayto handle the problem? Or: What happened to your child is certainly a tragedy. But tell me,would your child have been better off if they spent twenty yearsin prison? I used to be a junkie until I was saved from the life of eviland I know that drugs should not be legalized! 1) It is illegal now and that didn't stop you. All it really doesis keep most people from getting help sooner because we are spendingall of our money on prisons and we cannot provide adequate treatment. 2) Would you be better off if you had spent twenty years in prison?If we really did it the way you are suggesting, you would stillbe in prison and would not be here to talk to me. You just want to legalize it -- you commie scum! Of course, I have my own ideas about what might be a good solutionto the problem, but that is not the point. The point is that weneed to bring all of our best minds together to consider yourideas for a better solution, as well as mine. The only way thatwe will ever find a better approach is by an open and honest discussionof the evidence and all of the possible approaches to the problem. They tried this in Europe with Needle Park and it didn't workso they are going back to throwing people in prison. Absolutely not true. Europe, in general, is committed to decriminalizationand we invite anyone to talk to the law enforcement officialsin Rotterdam, Amsterdam, or Liverpool, and see for themselves.There have been some policies which the European officials admitdid not work as well as others, such as Needle Park, but theyare still committed to a non-criminal approach to drugs. In addition,England, Italy, Switzerland, Spain, Germany, and Colombia haveall taken steps toward the legalization or decriminalization ofdrugs. In addition, both the head of Interpol and the BritishAssociation of Chiefs of Police have called for an end to drugprohibition. What do you think we should do about drugs? I have my own ideas about what might be a good solution to theproblem, but that is not the point, because I don't have all theanswers and nobody else does either. The point is that we needto bring all of our best minds together to consider your ideasfor a better solution, as well as mine. The only way that we willever find a better approach is by an open and honest discussionof the evidence and all of the possible approaches to the problem. For starters, we might just take the recommendations of any majorstudy of drug policy that you like and start from there. (Thenhand them a list of the studies of drug policy.) Well, why don't we legalize murder, and robbery, and all theother crimes, and then we won't have a crime problem. Drug use and murder are not the same in any sense so this is asilly comparison to begin with. But let's consider this argumentson its merits. There are about 25,000 homicides in the UnitedStates each year, and there are about thirty million people whouse illegal drugs. If we had thirty million murderers or robbers, we would have tofind another way to deal with the problem, simply because thecriminal justice system could not handle the load. This is thecase with the drug problem. It doesn't matter whether we wantto put all the drug users or dealers in prison, it simply is notpossible to do it by any stretch of the imagination. But that avoids the real issue. The real issue is what is themost effective way to deal with the problem. Even if we all agreethat drugs are bad, all of the evidence states that prison onlymakes the problem worse. We should make all the drug users get treatment and put allthe drug dealers in jail. Let's suppose I agree with you one hundred percent and I willrun out right now and place the order for the new prison cellswe will need. Now, please tell me, exactly how many prison cellswill we need to build to carry out your plan? If they say: I don't know. That is precisely the problem. No one has ever thought it throughas to what it will take to succeed with prison. Aren't you really promoting drug use? Not at all, and let me give you example. I personally think thatcigars are one of the most disgusting things I have ever encountered.They are addictive, dangerous to the health of the smoker andthe people around them, and they smell awful. I will do everythingI reasonably can to keep people from smoking them in my presence,and to encourage them to quit. However, at the same time, I havethe good sense to recognize that it would not accomplish anythingto throw George Burns in jail. We can't legalize drugs because it would send the wrong messageto our children. How many millions of people should we put in prison to send justthe right message? Is this really the best way you can think of to send a messageto children? If you can't do any better than that, perhaps weshould be spending our money on some simple courses in basic communicationor child-rearing. We have so many problems with alcohol and tobacco already.Why do you want to add to that? Maybe you missed something. These drugs are already here. Eventhe DEA admits that it has never had a significant impact on thedrug markets at any time. It is a not a question of adding toanything. It is a question of finding the most effective way todeal with a problem we already have.WT02-B01-17IA031-000655-B031-201http://206.61.184.43:80/schaffer/activist/dangers.htm 206.61.184.43 19970122110320 text/html 10582HTTP/1.0 200 OKDate: Wednesday, 22-Jan-97 11:03:07 GMTServer: WebSitePro/1.1f (S/N wpo-0deb)Allow-ranges: bytesContent-type: text/htmlLast-modified: Saturday, 28-Dec-96 07:25:55 GMTContent-length: 10364 Pot (Drugs) are Dangerous - How to Deal with the Argument Pot (Drugs) are Dangerous - How to Deal with the Argument by Clifford A. Schaffer You have heard the argument before: Pot is dangerous. It causes cancer, auto accidents,grows hair on your palms, and makes you go blind. This is a guide on how to deal with this argument in allsorts of easy ways. Some of these arguments were developed duringdebates with doctors, so some of them assume that the opponent isa doctor. GeneralDiscussion First, it is generally pointless to get tied up in debatingthe details of health issues or, in general, any supposed dangerof drugs. The reason is that you get so wound up in tradingscientific references that you never get to the real bottom line-- prison. Dr. So-and-So (who the audience doesn't know anyway)says X, Dr. Whositt, says Y -- so what? Net result -- you convince nobody. Once you have won yourmain point, and established that criminal punishment is not aneffective approach to the problem -- no matter what you haveassumed about the dangers -- then you can go back and, at yourleisure, knock down their health evidence as well. My approach -- conceding all their evidence up front -- doesa complete end run. They expect me to argue that pot doesn'tcause cancer, etc. When I don't, and jump to the bottom linepolicy issue (prison), they are completely disarmed. They reallydon't know what to do. They never thought about their logicalnon-sequitir (Because XXXXX is dangerous, therefore prison is thesolution) and are completely unprepared to deal with argumentswhich address the logical disconnect. Once they are sitting therewith a stunned expression on their face -- knowing they have beencompletely cut off -- then I come back with the mop up campaignof addressing the health risks and comparing them with otherhealth risks for which we do not put people in jail. By thattime, they will be doing little but nodding their head andagreeing. I remember one debate in which my opponent showed up with awhole stack of medical references on the harmful effects ofdrugs. A few minutes into the debate he closed his folder andnever opened it again. Of course, as always, he conceded andagreed with me. TheSpecific Responses Now for the specific responses: Ok, you convinced me. Let's assume everything you say is true and it grows hair on your palms besides. How many millions of people do you suppose we ought to throw in prison for best results? Let's assume all the evidence you presented is 100 percent accurate. The evidence you presented shows that pot is perhaps three times as carcinogenic as cigarettes. What does this mean in terms of policy? Does it mean that the penalties for pot should be three times the penalties for cigarettes? Then, of course, there should be even higher penalties for cigars and chewing tobacco, right? So the argument is XXXXXX causes cancer. Therefore, the law is really based on trying to prevent people from doing things which might give them cancer, right? Should we have laws against staying out in the sun too long, eating cheeseburgers, or smoking tobacco? The reasons you have stated never did have anything to do with why the laws were passed in the first place. Please answer two questions: Why were the drug laws passed in the first place? When did the concerns over cancer become the reason behind the laws? If your concern is really the carcinogens, then we can just require that the active ingredient be distributed in its pure form. Or what if someone only uses it by distilling the active ingredient (a simple process) and thereby takes no carcinogens? Shouldn't they be free from penalties? Gosh, you convinced me. Let's solve the problem right away. We will elect you King so you can do _anything_ you want. And ... every pot smoker in America is lined up outside your door with a bag of dope in one hand and a signed confession in the other. Now what? Every major study of drug policy agreed that prohibition only multiplied the bad effects which already exist with drugs. For example, overdoses become more likely because users don't know what they are getting; there are no standards for drug purity so there is greater harm from contaminants, addicts are less likely to receive effective treatment, etc. The more you assume about the harmful effects of drugs, the more imperative it becomes to address them in a non-criminal manner. Your evidence states that pot may be a problem while driving. Let's assume (for the sake of argument) that this is true. Do we attempt to solve the problem of drunk driving by throwing wine and beer drinkers in jail? Why not? (Can you say "misapplication of resources"?) The argument that pot was found in the bloodstreams of any group of people who died from any cause is not indicative of anything other than that they might have used pot some time within the last two months before they died. It does not say anything about all the people who may have pot in their bloodstreams and still be alive and well. It doesn't even say anything about _why_ they died. For comparison purposes, as any competent doctor knows, we need control groups. We must be wary of false comparisons (as any competent doctor should know). For example, we had one previous example in which large numbers of people were dying with pot in their bloodstreams. It was called Vietnam. Pot smokers had a high death rate, but it had nothing to do with pot. Pot causes cancer. Therefore, the best approach to the problem is to put millions of people in prison. This is the basic argument. Can you say "non-sequitir"? Where did you get the idea that if something is a health hazard, we ought to throw people in prison? Name all the other health problems for which prison is the recommended treatment. Please make a list of the comparable health problems caused by say, alcohol, and then match the health problems with the appropriate criminal penalties. Then maybe you can tell me why every major study of drug policy in the last fifty years recommended decriminalization. (See the list of Biggest Studies of Drug Policy on my web page.) You know, we can dispense with all the details and cut to the bottom line. Rather than argue the details of what it _might_ cause, we can take a look at the actual stats on what it _does_ cause. When we look at the official stats, such as deaths from any pot-related cause, the numbers are trivial in comparison with the damage done by alcohol and tobacco. We are spending 99 percent of our budget on one percent of the real drug problems. If YourOpponent is a Doctor 16) Hey, Doc! What is the first rule of addressing a healthproblem? First, do no harm. Right? Putting people in prison doessignificant harm long before they are likely to get cancer. If my opponent is a doctor I will hammer him on points justlike the one above. If he is really concerned about pot as ahealth issue then, by God, he ought to be ready to address thatpart of the problem as he would any other health issue. Would heput people in prison for non-marital sex in order to preventvenereal disease? Obviously he wouldn't. Hit him with his ownvalues and evidence. And, if he is a doctor, I would hammer him repeatedly on thefact that he really didn't know anything about the subject. Like: So tell me why the Consumers Union Report on Licit andIllicit Drugs said that prohibition was the worst thing we coulddo for drug-related health problems. You haven't read it haveyou? The big problem here is ignorance, Doctor. It is one thingto read some medical literature about the harm these things cando and it is quite another to make the leap to an effectivepublic policy. Your problem, Doctor, is that you have read someof the medical evidence but haven't read the evidence on drugpolicy. Ignorance is a shameful thing in someone with as mucheducation as you have. In short, if I am in a debate with a doctor, he will fallbefore I am done -- because he is a doctor. I will goad him intoreading the CU Report by taunting him, calling him ignorant,cajoling him, or anything else I have to do. I will force him toeither read what I have read or look like a public fool. Oncethey read it, they always concede. For example, see my muchearlier post "Cliff Converts Doc". It was written by adoctor who fought me tooth and nail and then wound up tellingeveryone that I was right. Excerpts of my debate with him areposted on my web page. CliffSchaffer's Home Page WT02-B01-18IA031-000655-B031-235http://206.61.184.43:80/schaffer/activist/showstop.htm 206.61.184.43 19970122110335 text/html 15231HTTP/1.0 200 OKDate: Wednesday, 22-Jan-97 11:03:26 GMTServer: WebSitePro/1.1f (S/N wpo-0deb)Allow-ranges: bytesContent-type: text/htmlLast-modified: Saturday, 28-Dec-96 07:24:57 GMTContent-length: 15013 Show Stopper Questions for Your Opponent ShowStopper Questions for Your Opponent by Clifford A. Schaffer These are the questions that drug warriors are simply unableto answer. They stop them cold every time. Please keep in mind with all of these questions that youropponents will try their best to squirm out of an answer. If youare talking to a politician, they will typically try to put out aten-minute smoke screen and hope no one recognizes that theynever did answer the question. If they try the smoke screen, trythe approach listed under Smokescreen: How manymillions of people do you think we ought to put prison for drugsto have the best results? I have asked many people this question over the years. It isat that point that they usually fall out of the debate. No onecan answer this question with anything that makes any sense,except zero. The first, and most obvious thing they do, is to tryto talk their way around it. This is not an essay question. According to various estimates there are at least twelvemillion regular users of illegal drugs, and possibly as many asforty million. We now have about 1.5 million people in prisonsand jails across the country, and all the jail cells are alreadyfull. It is immediately obvious to everyone that we cannot affordto put forty million people in prison, even if it was a goodidea. In fact, we cannot afford to put twelve million people injail, either. Most people, when asked this question, will immediately backoff of the idea that we should put drug users in prison, simplybecause it is obvious that there is no way we could jail enoughof them to make a dent in the problem. "Just send the drugdealers to prison." they will say. "OK," I ask. "How many do you suppose thereare?" They usually don't know, so you have to lead them a littlebit. Under the law, all drug users are technically dealersbecause anyone who ever passed a joint to another person at arock concert is considered a "drug distributor". Undermost state laws, it matters little what the context was, orwhether the person received any profit from passing the joint tothe next person. So, potentially, that would mean we wouldimprison up to forty million people -- obviously impossible. Therefore, we determine that we can't go by the current legaldefinition of a drug dealer, but we would have to make arequirement that we only go after those who are really in theregular business of selling drugs, either on a part-time, orfull-time basis. If we assume that about ten percent of the usersare "dealers" by this definition (a fair estimate),that would mean that there are somewhere between 1.2 million and4 million drug dealers. In order to succeed then, we would haveto build up to four prisons and jails for every one which nowexists -- and hope that solved the problem. One person, ex-DEA agent Michael Levine suggested that wejust jail the hard core drug users, a number he estimated atabout 2.7 million. I asked him if he really thought it was a goodidea to build two or three prisons for every one which nowexists, jail almost three million more people, and hope thatwould solve the problem. It seemed to me obvious that itwouldn't, since it would leave between ten and forty millioncasual drug users to go about their business. A few won't back off and will insist that we should jail allforty million people, if we have to. Some have even insisted thatwe should also jail another hundred million who indulge intobacco or alcohol. These people will look like fools in front ofthe vast majority of audiences, and just cause most people tocome over to the side of reform. Their Answer Any answer to this question is bound to be wrong. If theymention a low number, point out that we already have hundreds ofthousands of people in prison for illegal drugs and millions havebeen arrested and prosecuted. That obviously did not stamp outdrugs, so a small increase in the prisoners will not have anygood effect. A general line of BS. Drug warriors will do anything they can to get out ofanswering the simplest question about our drug policy. Don't letthem get away with evading a direct question. Come back to thepoint until they either give you an answer or admit they don'thave a clue. We are embarked on a campaign which is based on thebelief that we can put enough people in prison to effectivelycontrol the drug problem. The question is simple: How manyprisoners is the current plan going to take? They have asked us, the taxpayers to write a blank check forprisons. As the people writing the check for these taxes, it isonly fair for us to ask for the amount that is going to go on thecheck. Just tell us how many prison cells are going to berequired. No one knows the answer to that question. Bull. It is perfectly easy to calculate the number of prisoncells needed to address criminal problems. For example, there areapproximately 25,000 homicides in the US each year which meansthat we need a maximum of about 25,000 prison beds to hold theperpetrators. A similar estimate could be drawn for the number ofrobbers, rapists, etc. In all of these cases, the number ofprison cells required to hold the perpetrators is something ourcountry can manage. This is not the case with the drug laws. Your question assumes that we will imprison forty millionpeople. No, the question doesn't assume anything. I want you to tellme how many people you think we ought to put in jail, and thentell me your assumptions. As many as we have already. Does that mean you would be willing to end all further drugarrests beyond the amount we have now? Once the police reach thisquota, should they stop arresting drug offenders because we knowwe only have room for so many? Any number of million. If they mention five, ten, or twenty million, multiply thenumber they mention by $500,000 and tell them the cost of thatapproach. For example, the cost to incarcerate 1 million peopleis five hundred billion dollars; 2 million is one trillionDollars, 10 million is five trillion dollars, and so forth. Thencrucify them for wanting to build prisons larger than the Naziconcentration camps. I don't know. If they say they don't know, then say, "That isprecisely the problem. No one, including you, has ever sat downto figure it out. If you did, you would find out soon enough thatit is just plain impossible to solve the problem this way." Smokescreen Excuse me for interrupting, but that was not an essayquestion. The question can be answered with just a simple number.What will it take, 5 million, 10 million, 20 million? How manymillions of people will have to go to prison to solve the drugproblem this way? For DrugEnforcement Officers: What would you do if you got your fondestwish? What would do if, tomorrow morning, you woke up and everydrug user in America was lined up outside your door with a bag ofdope in one hand and a signed confession in the other? Their Answer Their immediate response is usually, "I would arrestthem, of course!" That is a perfect opportunity to ask "OK, how many doyou suppose there would be? I am just asking because I want tohelp you get whatever you need to do the job right." That will lead into the general discussion shown in theprevious question. For DevoutChristians: What would Jesus do if we gave this problem to Him?Would He build bigger prisons? Or would He build hospitals andschools? I usually preface this question by saying, "You are abetter Christian than I am, and you probably know more aboutJesus than I do. So you tell me . . ." Give them credit forthe strength and correctness of their belief. Their Answer Most Christians will be stunned by the simplicity and powerof this argument. Most of them will be able to immediately seethe sense behind what we are saying. Some of the immediatereactions I have gotten from Christians, including ministers,are: "When you put it that way, the answer is obvious." "That's pretty cut and dried, isn't it?" "Schools and hospitals, obviously." Most of the answers will be in that vein. A few Christians are exceptionally bigoted people and willinsist on hell-fire and damnation for anyone who dares totransgress their ideas of sin. They are in the definite minorityand the vast majority of people will see their reactions asextreme. On one occasion, a prominent minister told me that he thoughtperhaps Jesus might build bigger prisons because of the story ofSodom and Gomorrah. "Correct me if I am wrong," I said,"but I believe the story of Sodom and Gomorrah is in the OldTestament, not the New Testament." He got the point that theministry of Jesus was all about love and healing. One minister told me that he thought Jesus would build acertain number of prisons in order to keep the dangerous peoplefrom harming others. "That's probably true," I said,"but what about the prisoners -- up to two-thirds of them --who are there purely for non-violent drug offenses?" I havehere a list of every major study of drug policy in the last fiftyyears. Every one of them recommended decriminalization. Do youagree that the overwhelming weight of the scholarly evidence ondrug policy supports decriminalization? Before you answer, let me remind you that there are onlythree possible answers to this question. The first possible answer is yes, you agree. The second possible answer is no, you do not agree, in whichcase you should be able to provide a list of studies of drugpolicy comparable in quality and quantity to the list I haveprovided. The third possible answer is that you don't have a clue whatthe scholarly evidence says because you have never read the mostbasic research on the subject. Their Answer The answers that I have gotten to this question include: The scholarly evidence is not important. (From BobMartinez, former Drug Czar) Is the scholarly evidence not important in science, medicine,and every other field of law? Or is it not important only when itcomes to drug policy? I don't think anyone really knows the answer. Can you name any major study of drug policy which supportedwhat we are currently doing? (They probably can't.) So we haveten major studies, including the largest studies ever conductedby the governments of the United States, Britain, and Canada,which supported decriminalization and none that supported thecurrent policy. Wouldn't you say that is the overwhelming weightof the evidence? Everyone has their list of studies which they can make upto show anything they want. OK, so show me any comparable list of studies that you havein support of the drug war. (So far, in more than six years ofdebates, no opponent has ever mentioned a single major study ofdrug policy which supports the current drug war.) I don't have a clue. That is precisely the problem. You want to tell us what drugpolicy should be when you have not even bothered to read the mostbasic research on the subject. Here is a list of studies . . . . A few people have tried to bluff their way through by citingstudies about organized crime, alcohol, or something else. Theymay also cite magazine articles, books by particular authors,editorials or other opinion pieces, etc. Examine each onecarefully. Is it really a comprehensive study of the history andfacts relating to these drug laws, or is it just one person'sview? Did it consider all evidence and all views? Was itcomprehensive, or was it a simple magazine article of a fewpages? Did the author have an axe to grind or something to gainfrom the opinion expressed? Does the work contain a completediscussion of the history of the laws? Does it consider the lawsin the context of similar facts about tobacco and alcohol? People have mentioned a lot of different things in responseto this question, but none of them have met the criteria of aserious study of drug policy. Smokescreen Excuse me for interrupting, but that was not an essayquestion. That was multiple choice. What is your answer; yes, no,or don't have a clue? It costsabout half a million dollars to put a single drug user in prison,which includes $150,000 for arrest and prosecution, about$150,000 for a new prison cell, and about $30,000 per year timesat least five years. For the same cost we can provide treatmentor education for more than one hundred people. Which do you thinkis the better deal? Their Answer: Almost no one will attempt to argue that prison for oneperson is better than education or treatment for several hundred.Most often they will say, "It's not that simple, you can'tjust say that because you are not going to put one person inprison that you automatically have the money for treatment oreducation." You answer: It IS that simple. Right now, California and several otherstates are closing schools, libraries, and medical facilities inorder to build more prisons. The money is being taken fromeducation and treatment to fund more prisons. CliffSchaffer's Home Page WT02-B01-19IA031-000655-B031-267http://206.61.184.43:80/schaffer/activist/speech1.htm 206.61.184.43 19970122110347 text/html 21315HTTP/1.0 200 OKDate: Wednesday, 22-Jan-97 11:03:39 GMTServer: WebSitePro/1.1f (S/N wpo-0deb)Allow-ranges: bytesContent-type: text/htmlLast-modified: Saturday, 28-Dec-96 07:24:52 GMTContent-length: 21097 Speech on Drug Legalization Fullerton Community College Speech by Clifford A. Schaffer This is one of my typical speeches First, I would like to inform everyone that the real subjecthere today is not drug decriminalization, or legalization, orre-legalization, or anything like that, because we still don'tknow if we will ever do any of those things. What is certain isthat, at the current rates of incarceration, we will build thelargest prisons in the world. The issue is prison. It is not upto us to justify decriminalization. It is up to those who supportthe current policy to justify putting millions of people inprison behind a drug policy which everyone admits cannot work. One of the reasons that I am here is because of my mother. Ihave heard many people say that the crusade against drugs is amoral issue. William Bennett, our first national Drug Czar, saidthat it is important to stamp out drugs because it is the moralthing to do. I will show you that there is nothing moral aboutit. On April 20, 1992, my mother told me she wanted to die. Shecalled me that evening and asked me if I would understand if shecommitted suicide. My mother is sixty-five years old and shelooks and acts at least ten years younger than her age. She stillworks because she enjoys her job. Why then does she want to die? A few years ago she had a minor operation on her ribs and,during the operation, some nerves were damaged. It wasn'tanyone's fault, it is just one of the ordinary risks of surgery.It could happen to anyone. Now the nerves fire constantly, atnear-maximum intensity. She says it feels as if someone isholding a blowtorch to her ribs -- twenty-four hours a day. Shecan no longer wear clothes which touch her skin. She can nolonger walk in a warm spring rain because the pain of a singleraindrop is too much to bear. Something as simple as a hug fromher smallest granddaughter will make her fall to the floor intears. She has spent the last few years traveling across the UnitedStates to find a cure. The doctors have tried a long list oftreatments including surgery, drugs, ointments, electricity, andmany other things. None of them worked very well and many of themwere dangerous. The best of them was a nerve block. The nerveblock required my mother to lay on her stomach while the doctorsinjected anesthetic directly into the nerve causing the problem.The needle had to be placed precisely on the nerve so it usuallyhad to be moved around for a few minutes to get just the rightspot. It reached the limits of human pain. The pain was so greatthat her body rigidly locked up, with her senses overloaded. Shecould not scream, breathe, or even see. On two occasions they punctured her lung with this procedure,and once they actually stopped her heart. To revive her, theygave her CPR, which means they had to pound on her ribs. When sheawoke she screamed at them to kill her. She said that she wasbitter for months because they had not let her die when they hadthe chance. She has since left written instructions that, if herheart ever stops again, she is not to be revived. Still, she saidthe nerve block is worth it, because it gives her relief foralmost three days and, besides, there is always the chance thatshe will luck out and they will kill her again. Only one treatment has ever worked to ease the pain. Thattreatment is morphine. Morphine does not make her into a drugaddict. It does not make her into some kind of mindless zombie.It does not even make her high. It just allows her to live arelatively normal life, free from the pain in her side. Whencompared with the other available treatments, morphine is thecheapest, safest, and most effective treatment for her condition. He doctors will not give her morphine, for two reasons. Thefirst reason is that they are afraid she will become addicted. Astudy conducted at Johns Hopkins Medical School showed that theaddiction rate for the medical use of morphine was less thanone-half of one percent. Even when patients do become addicted,morphine addiction can be easily managed in a proper medicalenvironment, so addiction is not a legitimate medical concern. The second reason they will not prescribe morphine is thatthey are afraid of the drug police. They know that the DrugEnforcement Administration and the local police can seize theirproperty and destroy their careers over a single questionedprescription, and the police do not even have to file criminalcharges to do it. It not only can happen, it does happen. Lastyear, the Drug Enforcement Administration sent two doctors toprison for prescribing Tylenol 3. That is Tylenol with codeine.Tylenol 3 is a prescription drug in only two countries in theworld, the United States and South Africa, and the United Statesis the only country which has ever sent a doctor to prison forprescribing this common medicine. There are many other caseswhere doctors have had their lives and careers ruined overequally trivial matters. My mother has mixed emotions when I speak out about herproblem. She says that she really does not want anyone's sympathybecause, since she has had this problem, she has discovered thatthere are so many more people who are in worse condition than sheis. Some people with AIDS get this same kind of condition allover their bodies. Every day of their lives is worse than anyhorror movie that you have ever seen. They can't get morphineeither. Seven thousand five hundred people go blind from glaucomaevery year because the best medicine - marijuana - is illegal.And the list goes on. There are literally millions of people with chronic pain,cancer, AIDS, glaucoma, and other conditions for which the safestand most effective medicine is a drug which is now illegal.Hundreds of thousands of them violate the drug laws every daybecause they need these medicines to live. On behalf of all of the families affected by AIDS, andcancer, and glaucoma, and a dozen other diseases, I am here totell you that this drug policy is indecent and it must bestopped. There is nothing moral about a drug policy which makessick people choose between prison and death. Drug policy is a complicated issue and we will not have timetoday to resolve all of the points under discussion. In the pastfifty years, however, there have been several occasions whenmajor commissions have been formed specifically to study theevidence and the options for drug policy and to makerecommendations. There have been both public and privatecommissions, domestic and foreign, performed by people of allpolitical persuasions from liberals to conservative law-and-orderRepublicans, and people who aren't even on our political map.They all recommended decriminalization. I would like to read to you some of the studies which havereached this conclusion: The LaGuardia Committee Report, commissioned by MayorFiorello LaGuardia, written by the New York Academy of Medicine,and published by the City of New York in 1944. The Baroness Wootton Report, published by thegovernment of the United Kingdom in 1967. The Report of the Canadian Government Commission ofInquiry into the Non-Medical Use of Drugs, published by theCanadian Government in 1969. Dealing With Drug Abuse: A Report to the Ford Foundation,published by the Drug Abuse Survey Project in 1972. The Consumers Union Report on Licit and Illicit Drugs,published by the Editors of Consumer Reports Magazine in 1972.This is a landmark study, a "must-read", used as abasic textbook at major universities. The Report of the National Commission on Marihuana andDrug Abuse, commissioned by President Nixon, and published bythe U.S. Federal Government in 1973. The Facts About Drug Abuse, published by the UnitedStates Drug Abuse Council in 1980. An Analysis of Marijuana Policy, published by theNational Research Council of the National Academy of Sciences in1982. The Report of the California State Research Advisory Panel,commissioned by the State of California, and published in 1990. The recommendations in these reports were endorsed by (amongothers) the American Medical Association, the American BarAssociation, The American Association for Public Health, theNational Education Association, and the National Council ofChurches. I might also add that the last two reports of the NationalCommission on AIDS have also recommended that we adoptnon-criminal approaches to drug abuse. We may debate the details of the many issues of drug policyall day, but one basic fact is undeniable. When all of the issuesand all of the evidence is considered, the overwhelming weight ofthe scholarly evidence on drug policy supports decriminalization. The first question that we need to ask ourselves is: How didwe get into this mess? Any study of the history of the drug lawsshows that they were based on two primary factors; racism andignorance. You may have wondered why marijuana, heroin, and cocaine areillegal while other equally dangerous drugs such as tobacco andalcohol are legal, and even promoted by the Federal Government.The primary reason is that alcohol and tobacco were associatedwith white people while the other drugs were associated --wrongly -- with people of color. Opiates were first outlawed because of the fear that Chinesemen were luring white women to their ruin in opium dens. Ruin wasdefined not as opium addiction, but as associating with Chinesemen. In the early years of this century, many of the majornewspapers printed lurid articles about superhuman Negro CocaineFiends who would take large amounts of cocaine which would causethem to go on a violent sexual rampage and rape white women.Police departments across the nation switched from .32 caliberpistols to .38 caliber pistols because as one Police Chiefstated, "Those cocaine niggers sure are hard to kill."Newspaper stories of the day told lurid tales of Jewish peddlersselling cocaine to poor southern blacks. There was also amovement to ban caffeine for the same reasons. There was noevidence to back up the myth of the Negro Cocaine Fiend simplybecause most black people did not have the money to buy cocaine.Any black man who did rape a white woman would have had to besuicidal because in 1905 there were 105 recorded lynchings ofblack men for unspecified offenses. Marijuana was later outlawed largely as a repressive toolagainst Mexican laborers who were competing with American workersfor jobs during the Depression. Racism was one of the primary themes of the campaign againstdrugs until the campaigns for civil rights in the 1950's and1960's made it unacceptable. At that point, the drug warriorsturned to other myths to defend their cause. You have heard someof those myths today. It is important to remember that many ofthe myths you heard today were made up in the 1950's and 1960'swhen it began to be apparent that the old myths just wouldn't cutit any more. These laws never did have anything to do with publichealth and safety. GRAPH We next need to understand the facts on the issue. My firstgraph shows the number of deaths caused by drugs, both legal andillegal, in the United States in a typical year. Tobacco kills about 390,000 people. Alcohol kills about 80,000. Sidestream smoke from tobacco kills about 50,000 people whodon't even smoke. Prescription drugs kill at least 10,000. Cocaine kills about 2,500. Heroin kills about 2,000. Aspirin kills about 2,000 Marijuana kills 0. Even the DEA itself says that there hasnot been a recorded death due to marijuana in the history of theUnited States. All of the illegal drugs combined killed about 4,500, orabout one percent of the number killed by tobacco. Tobacco killsmore people every year than all of the people killed by all ofthe illegal drugs in the Twentieth Century. More Colombians diefrom the effects of American tobacco than the number of Americanswho die from Colombian cocaine. As you may know, tobacco isheavily subsidized and promoted by the United States Government.The US Government demands that other countries buy more Americantobacco even while we threaten them with war for sending us theirmarijuana and cocaine. Right now we have about 1.3 million people in prison. Morethan 600,000 of them are there for non-violent drug offenses. Forevery person who died from illegal drugs last year, one hundredand fifty people went to prison. Most of them were black men. You may hear a good deal of take about the dangers of illegaldrugs. First let me state that the medical evidence is very clearthat, by any standard of measurement, alcohol and tobacco aresubstantially more dangerous to both the individual and tosociety than any of the illegal drugs. We have known this for atleast twenty-five years. This is not to say that use of any drugis entirely safe. We could safely assume that almost anything weput into our bodies is going to have some health risk, to agreater or lesser degree. That is not the issue. Just because something is hazardous does not automaticallymean that the best approach to those hazards is to throw millionsof people in prison. In fact, every major study of drug policyhas concluded that prison only makes those hazards worse andincreases the damage done to society. As one commission stated,the more we learn about the dangers of drugs, the more it willbecome apparent that massive prisons are a medical and socialdisaster. It is precisely because of those health hazards that wemust not send people to prison for drug offenses. We might win the war on drugs if we could be successful inone of three areas. First, we could try to stop the production of drugs inforeign countries. There is no credible evidence anywhere whichwould suggest that we could stop, or even greatly reduce, theproduction of drugs in foreign countries. The Federalgovernment's own evidence shows that this is impossible and it isa waste of money to try. Second, we could try to stop drugs at the border. There is nocredible evidence anywhere which would suggest that we couldstop, or even greatly reduce, the flow of drugs across ourborder. The Federal government's own evidence shows that this isimpossible and it is a waste of money to try. Third, we could try to stop the sale of drugs within theUnited States, even while we know that it is impossible to stoptheir production, or to keep them outof the United States. Thereis no credible evidence anywhere which would suggest that wecould stop, or even greatly reduce, the sale of drugs within theUnited States. Again, the evidence shows that this is impossibleand, not only is it a waste of money to try but, in fact, the waragainst drugs actually causes far more harm than good. The largest part of that harm falls upon the African-Americancommunity. GRAPH I have here a few graphs which were taken directly from USFederal Government statistics. The first graph shows the numberof people in prison over the last fifty years. The number ofpeople in prison was relatively stable for about fifty years,until the 1970's when President Nixon started the first majorcampaign against drugs. Then the number of inmates began to risesharply. It was also during the 1970's that a major recession hitthe country and African Americans, being at the bottom of theeconomic totem pole, were the first to lose their jobs and thelast to be rehired when the economy changed. As a result of thestresses on unemployed fathers, African-American families beganto fall apart and we saw the first great rise of black familiesheaded by single mothers. This became especially significantbecause of what happened in the 1980s. In the 1980s the rate of incarceration went through the roof.Since 1980 we have tripled the number of people in prison and wenow have the largest prisons in the world. We will almost tripletheir size again before the year 2000. GRAPH The next graph shows the racial breakdown of our prisons, andprojects those figures into the future, based on current trends.By the year 2000, our prisons will be larger than the Naziconcentration camps of World War II. About two-thirds of all ofthe people in our prisons will be black men, most of themarrested for non-violent drug offenses. For every black man whogoes to college, at least three will go to prison. Two-thirds ofall of today's black male teenagers will be dead, disabled, or inprison before their thirtieth birthday. The largest single groupof them will go to prison for non-violent drug offenses. Even as we speak, one-fourth of all of the young black men inAmerica are in prison, on probation, or on parole. In some innercities such as Washington, D.C. and Baltimore, which were testcases for the war on drugs, more than half of all the young blackmen in the city are under the supervision of the criminal justicesystem. It is estimated that more than ninety percent of theblack men in these cities have already been incarcerated at leastonce. When an African-American man goes to prison he becomeseffectively permanently unemployable because nobody will hire ablack man with a prison record. Most of the young black men inour nation's capitol are already economically dead as a directresult of the war on drugs. They become social pariahs, unwanted by employers and even bythe women in their own communities. They are unable to restorethemselves and the families that we will need to rebuild ourinner cities. The economic destruction of African-American mencaused by the war on drugs is perhaps the singlest biggest reasonthat African-American families continued to disintegrate in the1980's even in the midst of an economic boom. Even conservative black leaders are now beginning to say thatthe war on drugs is genocide and the new form of slavery and theyare right. Because of our misguided and ignorant drug policies,we have already destroyed the better part of an entire generationof African-American men. In 1973 President Nixon's National Commission on Marihuanaand Drug Abuse said that the real drug problem is not heroin, orcocaine, or marijuana. The real drug problem, they said, is theignorance of our public officials who have never bothered to readthe evidence. Today, we can prove that this is still true. I would like my opponent to answer one simple question. Ihave here a list of every major study of drug policy in the lastfifty years including the largest studies ever conducted by theUS Federal Government and the State of California. They allrecommended decriminalization. Do you agree that the overwhelming weight of the scholarlyevidence on drug policy supports decriminalization? Before you answer, remember that there are only threepossible answers to this question. The first possible answer is yes, you agree that theoverwhelming weight of the scholarly evidence supportsdecriminalization. The second possible answer is no, you do not agree and,therefore, you can provide a list of scholarly studies equal inquality and quantity to the list I have provided. The third possible answer is that you don't have a clue whatthe scholarly evidence says because you have never read the mostbasic research on the subject. What is your answer? Do you agree that the overwhelmingweight of the scholarly evidence on drug policy supportsdecriminalization? CliffSchaffer's Home Page WT02-B01-20IA031-000655-B032-71http://206.61.184.43:80/schaffer/activist/groups1.htm 206.61.184.43 19970122110439 text/html 5781HTTP/1.0 200 OKDate: Wednesday, 22-Jan-97 11:04:31 GMTServer: WebSitePro/1.1f (S/N wpo-0deb)Allow-ranges: bytesContent-type: text/htmlLast-modified: Saturday, 28-Dec-96 07:25:41 GMTContent-length: 5564 Presentations to Social Clubs about drug legalization Presentations to Social Clubs How to make presentations to social groups such aschurches, Lions Clubs, Rotary, and other similar groups. By Clifford A. Schaffer How to find them. Many of them will be listed in your local phone directories.If no chapters of a particular group are listed in your area, itdoesn't necessarily mean they don't exist. You can also look inthe Encyclopedia of Associations, at your local library, tocontact their national headquarters and ask for any chapters inyour area. What kind of groups typically have meetings where people canmake presentations? Here are just a few examples: Lions, Rotary, Elks, Moose, churches, synagogues, Chambers ofCommerce, Business groups, other social clubs, political parties,etc. Any place where more than a few people gather for nearly anypurpose may be an opportunity to make a presentation. How to get a date to speak to their group. First, put together a coherent, sensible presentation ofmaterial pertinent to your area of interest. It is best topresent factual, interesting material, rather than politicaldiatribe. Visual displays and graphics are always good to helpkeep the audience's interest. Second, call them. You will be surprised at the number ofsocial groups which are looking for, or receptive to, speakers.Calling them is the toughest part for many people, but it isreally easy. The worst that can happen is that they will say no,and you have heard that before. What is interesting to these groups? Many of these groups want speakers for their regularluncheons.all the time for their lunch and, therefore they covera wide variety of topics over the year. You will often find asituation where there is someone who is designated to find goodspeakers for the meetings who invariably has a hard time findingenough interesting speakers to fill the bill. Therefore, in manycases, there is a wide degree of latitude in what these groupswould like to hear. The facts about hemp are usually interestingto these groups, but there are any number of other subjects whichwould also get a good reception with a good presentation. Dress and act conservatively. The people in these groups are business people for the mostpart, and will expect and appreciate a business like demeanor andapproach. Whether you like it or not, they are most likely torespond favorably to conservatively dressed and"normal" looking and acting people, as opposed to the"hippy" look. Use Visual Aids Charts, graphs, pictures, and other visual aids can be veryhelpful in getting your point across. There are a number ofcharts and graphs on these pages as samples of things you mightuse. Read the Persuasive Strategies and Debate Materials These social groups tend to be politically and sociallyconservative so wild-eyed arguments about how it is everyone'sright to get loaded will not get a good reception. The bestapproach is a soft, factual approach which presents some part ofthe vast amount of information which most people don't know aboutdrugs. Don't promote or even defend the use of drugs, drugdealers, or anything else that your audience will find hard toaccept. You will often have a long way to go to convince them, sodon't try to bring them too far, too fast. But I am afraid to make presentations to groups. What are you afraid of? That you will look like a fool? (Asif that hasn't happened before.) Seriously, speaking in front ofa group is one of the items which produces the highest levels offear in many people. They realize everyone is looking at them andthey get nervous and freeze up. The more nervous they get, themore they worry about it, and the more nervous they get. Forget it. If you are afraid of embarrassing yourself andlooking like a fool, don't worry. In the first place, most peopledon't have to stand up in front of a group to look like fools, solooking like a fool is nothing new. Get over it. Everyone lookslike a fool now and then. The truth is that most members of mostaudiences are so awestruck by anyone who can get up in front ofan audience and speak (because they know they couldn't do itthemselves) that they will never notice that you are nervous - atleast not to the degree that you feel nervous. Experience will get you over it. The first presentation isthe roughest, and from that point it gets progressively easier.By this time I have done so many, and encountered all thequestions that come up so many times, that I could do thesethings in my sleep. There are a lot of other people who are alsoquite adept at presentations and they started out as shywallflowers just like you. Give it a try. You will find it is alot of fun. CliffSchaffer's Home Page WT02-B01-21IA031-000655-B032-102http://206.61.184.43:80/schaffer/activist/whenab.htm 206.61.184.43 19970122110455 text/html 7466HTTP/1.0 200 OKDate: Wednesday, 22-Jan-97 11:04:44 GMTServer: WebSitePro/1.1f (S/N wpo-0deb)Allow-ranges: bytesContent-type: text/htmlLast-modified: Saturday, 28-Dec-96 07:24:39 GMTContent-length: 7249 The Washington Hemp Education Network The Washington Hemp Education Network Operating Abstract Abstract The following text defines the structure and mission of anon-profit educational organization known as the Washington HempEducation Network (W.H.E.N.). This organization consists ofvolunteer members. Mission Statement The mission of the Washington Hemp Education Network(W.H.E.N.) is to empower the people of Washington State, througheducational activities about the history, status, and uses (bothcurrent and potential) of the Hemp plant (cannabis sativa, alsoknown as marijuana), to make informed choices about the issuessurrounding re-legalization of Hemp in Washington State. Recognition of Benefit The Washington Hemp Education Network recognizes asbeneficial all responsible commercial, medicinal, and spiritualuses of the Hemp plant conducted for peaceful ends. Program and Goals To achieve the stated mission, the Washington Hemp EducationNetwork will plan and implement legal, nonviolent projects that: Raise public awareness of the history and beneficial uses of the Hemp plant; Educate the public to recognize and reject misinformation about Hemp; Facilitate changes in current laws to allow the people of Washington State to grow Hemp openly and engage in normal market activities with Hemp products; Through education and coalition, help to empower people who have been disempowered by misguided government policies concerning Hemp; Promote research and development of sustainable, environmentally responsible Hemp cultivation, and of beneficial products derived from Hemp. Project Criteria All projects planned and implemented by the Washington HempEducation Network will be consistent with the Mission,Recognition of Benefit, and Program and Goals statements definedherein. Endorsement and Support The Washington Hemp Education Network will endorse andsupport only those projects undertaken by individuals or otherentities that are consistent with the Mission, Recognition ofBenefit, and Program and Goals. Method of Operation This organization will meet regularly and will operate on theprinciple of consensus. As defined by the Center for ConflictResolution, Madison, WI, consensus is "a decision-makingprocess in which all parties involved explicitly agree to thefinal decision. Consensus decision making does not mean that all parties arecompletely satisfied with the final outcome, but that thedecision is acceptable to all because no one feels that his orher vital interests or values are violated by it." A board of directors will not be elected; rather, thefounding charter members will constitute the decision-makingbody, will serve as the projects and issues forum facilitationgroup, and will exercise no power other than that of presidingover meetings as defined by the Method of Operation, and ofapproving membership applications and filling vacancies in thecharter member group when a charter member leaves the group. Other future members may be added to the decision-making bodyof charter members if a consensus decision for such action ismade by the charter members. Members other than charter membersare encouraged to participate in discussions on issues that arebeing addressed during the decision-making process; participationin the final consensus decision is limited to charter members. Consensus Procedures o For each meeting, the charter members will appoint a rotating clerk, who will convene the meeting and govern the discussions during the meeting. The clerk is responsible for compiling and disseminating the agenda and supporting materials at least four days prior to the meeting. o If one or more members feel that a decision must be reached, the clerk must clearly state the issue to be decided and allow each member to speak uninterrupted about the issue. After each member speaks once about the issue, it can be debated if necessary by the group; however, members must not interrupt other speakers and must wait until granted the floor by the clerk before speaking. o Members must listen attentively and strive to understand each point of view, knowing that through the consensus process each decision must ultimately be a compromise of all points of view. o The clerk will develop a decision statement as the debate proceeds. The clerk will then document the evolution of the debate and will modify the position of the group by incorporating each point of view into the decision statement. o When all points of view have been made known, and the decision statement has reached a static state, the clerk will call for consensus on the statement. Three possible positions may be taken by the charter members: Consent, Object, or Stand Aside: o Consent indicates the member agrees to support the decision as the best compromise that can be achieved by the group. o Object indicates the member will not allow consensus to occur; if ONE member objects, the decision is discarded and no action is taken on the issue by the organization at that time. o Stand Aside indicates the member cannot agree with the decision but will not prevent the decision from being adopted by the group; the decision stands as long as no one indicates Object. These procedures should suffice for most issues facing thecharter members of W.H.E.N. If a situation should arise thatcannot be resolved by the above procedures, the clerk willreference the consensus handbook published by the Center forConflict Resolution. Charter members who are absent fromannounced meetings are by default relinquishing their consensusvote for the affected meetings only. Dave Hall, Olympia, WA: LEGALIZE IT, TAX IT, THEN LEAVE ME THE HELL ALONE!! CliffSchaffer's Home Page WT02-B01-22IA031-000655-B032-134http://206.61.184.43:80/schaffer/activist/junkemal.htm 206.61.184.43 19970122110505 text/html 3438HTTP/1.0 200 OKDate: Wednesday, 22-Jan-97 11:04:58 GMTServer: WebSitePro/1.1f (S/N wpo-0deb)Allow-ranges: bytesContent-type: text/htmlLast-modified: Saturday, 28-Dec-96 07:25:28 GMTContent-length: 3221 How To Reduce Junk E-Mail How To Reduce Junk E-Mail From: Ryan Rossman <rossm_ry@catseq.catlin.edu> The 3 keys to reducing "junk" email. Accurate Subject headings. If you send it to the whole list, make sure it applies to the whole list. Be substantial, ask yourself am I contributing to the list or detracting? Subject Lines: One way to make it easier to get to the meaty information youwant is to have *accurate* subject lines. If the subject line ofyour post says Re: Proposed Strategies and you are talking aboutsomething completely different, or are branching off from thisdiscussion create a new subject heading. Example: Instead of just Re: Proposed Strategies which doesn't reallytell anyone what the content of the message is about. Try... Discussion of CD Tactics (was Re: Proposed Strategies) This is very helpful, in discovering and only reading theposts you want to read. Personal Posts: Short, one or two line posts that only make a personalstatement torwards one or two people should be done in private.The main goal is to respect other members of the group enough soas to not post something that they are just going to have delete. There are two ways to avoid problems with being personal. If all you really want to do is make a short 1 or 2 line personal rseponse to someone don't send it to the entire list just send it to that person. If you are making personal comments make sure that there is also something substantial that is pertinent to everyone included in the post. Basically if it doesn't have something that applies to thewhole list, don't post it to the whole list. Please don't hestiate to be controversial or disagree withothers, this is called freedom of speech and its why a revolutionwas waged, but do NOT use drctalk-l for excessive personalbanter. If it has substance with a little banter, I don't think we have a problem.Meaning that you can say nice "Amens!" and "Way togo!" **IF** you also include something a little bit moremeaningful. If there is no substance and a lot of banter youprobably shouldn't have sent it to the whole list. This includesthe 1 or 2 line personal notes. If we still have a problem with "junk" posts andthe traffic volume is still too high there are more stringentmeasures that can be imposed. CliffSchaffer's Home Page WT02-B01-23IA031-000655-B032-162http://206.61.184.43:80/schaffer/activist/howlte.htm 206.61.184.43 19970122110528 text/html 7319HTTP/1.0 200 OKDate: Wednesday, 22-Jan-97 11:05:16 GMTServer: WebSitePro/1.1f (S/N wpo-0deb)Allow-ranges: bytesContent-type: text/htmlLast-modified: Saturday, 28-Dec-96 07:25:37 GMTContent-length: 7102 How to Write Letters to the Editor How to Write Letters to the Editor A personal note by Cliff Schaffer: Over the years, I have written a lot of letters to the editorand about three out of four of them get published. A lot ofpeople have asked me what are the good techniques for writingletters to the editor. The first thing I tell people is toremember that they fit about ten letters in a typical editorialsection (out of the hundreds they receive) so the ones theypublish either: 1) Are the best single expressions of what many people said. 2) Make some point exceedingly well. 3) Are signed by some prominent person. In all cases, the letters are usually short and to the point,and the editors have edited them even further to make themshorter. Most people who write letters to the editor wouldprobably like the satisfaction you get when you see your letterpublished. That way, at least you are certain that they read it.However, it is also apparent that the media can be influenced byletters they do not acknowledge. We have found many times that asimple letter to someone in the media wound up in major mediacoverage weeks or months later. I was going to write up a formal set of rules for how towrite letters to the editor, but I found someone who had done italready. He did quite a good job in saying the same essentialthings I would have said. =================================== How to Write Letters to the Editor by Richard Rider Short, concise letters are always more likely to be publishedthan long, meandering ones; try to keep them under 150 words. Thelonger letters are also more likely to be edited. It's betterthat you do your own editing. Ever notice how you read letters to the editor in the paper?Most people read the shorter letters first and then perhaps laterread the longer ones. Thus your shorter letter has a betterchance of being read. WHAT TO WRITE? Unlike single-issue or special-interestgroups, libertarians can select from an enormous range ofsubjects. Replying to editorials, agree or disagree, is veryeffective. Every day the news offers us all too many topics on which tocomment. Be timely; try to respond within two or three days of thearticle's publication. Pick an issue of particular importance toyou - don't be afraid to let some passion show through. Here are some stylistic considerations: 1. State the argument you're rebutting or responding to, asbriefly as possible, in the letter's introduction. Don't do alengthy rehash; it's a waste of valuable space and boring toboot. 2. Stick to a single subject. Deal with one issue per letter. 3. Don't be shrill or abusive. Editors tend to discardletters containing personal attacks. Even though you're dying tocall Jesse Jackson a preachy parasite, stifle the urge. 4. Your letter should be logically organized. First a briefrecitation of the argument you are opposing, followed by astatement of your own position. Then present your evidence. Closewith a short restatement of your position or a pithy comment ("Jimmy Breslin says possession of firearms should belimited to law enforcement officers. I say when only the policehave guns, the police state is just around the corner."). 5. Use facts, figures and expert testimony whenever possible.This raises your letters above the "sez you, sez me"category. For instance: "Anthony Lewis calls for taxing therich as a way to balance the budget. Is he aware of the fact thatif we confiscated the entire income of the top wage earners inthis country (those with income above $200,000), this would runthe federal government for exactly 8 days?" Readers respect the opinions of people with special knowledgeor expertise. Use expert testimony to bolster your case("George Will claims we need to draft to defend America. ButGeneral Edward C. Meyer, Army Chief of Staff, recently stated . .."). 6. Proofread your letter carefully for errors in spelling,punctuation and grammar. Newspapers will usually edit to correctthese mistakes, but your piece is more likely to be published ifit is "clean" to begin with. Read your letter to afriend, for objective input. One suggestion is that a letter shouldn't be mailed the sameday it is written. Write, proofread and edit the piece. Then putit aside until the next day. Rereading your letter in a freshlight often helps you to spot errors in reasoning, stiltedlanguage and the like. On the other hand, don't let the lettersit too long and lose it's timeliness. 7. Try to view the letter from the reader's perspective. Willthe arguments make sense to someone without a special backgroundon this issue. Did you use technical terms not familiar to theaverage reader? Should your letter be typed? In this day and age, generally yes. Double or triple space the letter if it is short. For faxing purposes, we appreciate it if the letter is all on one page, so single spacing might be the only option available. Direct your missives to "Letters to the Editor," or some similar sounding title. 10. Always include your name, address, day-time phone numberand signature. The papers will not publish this information, butthey may use it to verify that you wrote the letter. If we arefax broadcasting your letter, do not put a date on it. We mayhave to wait a day or two before broadcasting it out, dependingon how many letters are waiting for dissemination. 11. Most important - WRITE! Do not try to do a perfectletter. Just give it a good effort and send it off. Letterwriting is the one thing that any one of us can do on our ownwithout the need to work through a group. No committees arenecessary. Just do it! Don't be discouraged if your letter isn't published. Theeditor may have received more responses on that issue than hefeels he can handle. If we are faxing your letter, you will almost certainly bepublished somewhere. The only drawback is that we do not have agood feedback system, so you may not know which of the paperspublish your letter, particularly the smaller ones. -DRider@AOL.com CliffSchaffer's Home Page WT02-B01-24IA031-000655-B032-228http://206.61.184.43:80/schaffer/activist/GHANDI1.HTM 206.61.184.43 19970122110553 text/html 31241HTTP/1.0 200 OKDate: Wednesday, 22-Jan-97 11:05:42 GMTServer: WebSitePro/1.1f (S/N wpo-0deb)Allow-ranges: bytesContent-type: text/htmlLast-modified: Saturday, 28-Dec-96 07:25:50 GMTContent-length: 31023 A Summary of M.K. Gandhi's Technique for Political Action A Summary of M.K. Gandhi's Technique for Political Action By Mary Sibley February 1995 PREFACE I have prepared this description of the political actiontechnique of M.K. Gandhi at the request of Dave Hall fordistribution to the DrugReform Coordination Network (DRCNet) andother drug policy reform advocates who may have an interest inGandhi's technique. I have read much about Gandhi's technique andknow that I still do not fully comprehend its application andimplications. My knowledge is especially scanty in the area oforganizational structures through which Gandhian campaigns wereconducted, although I surmise that Gandhi's campaignorganizations were highly structured. I am currently seekingtexts describing and analyzing Gandhi's organizationalstructures. If anyone has such a text, I would appreciate accessto it. If anyone has studied Gandhi's life and work and readssomething within this that seems to be wrong, misleading, or amisinterpretation, I would welcome suggestions. In addition, Iwould be glad to participate in further discussion. CREDITS For assistance in organizing my thoughts, I give credit toJoan V. Bondurant, whose book "Conquest of Violence: TheGandhian Philosophy of Conflict" (second edition, 1965,Princeton University Press) I consulted occasionally whilewriting this. In the text that follows, annotations are sparse.If anyone is interested in reading more about a particular topic,let me know and I will provide references. INTRODUCTION How this Discussion Is Organized This discussion is organized into three sections. The firstsection discusses the cultural context and other conditions underwhich Gandhi conceived and conducted political campaigns. Thesecond section discusses the fundamental principles of a Gandhiancampaign. The last section discusses the steps in a Gandhiancampaign and includes my opinions about the similarities betweenthese steps and steps that have been taken by drug policy reformadvocates. A Short Definition of Gandhi's Political TechniqueGandhi's political technique is a process of creatively engagingwith others to transform an unjust cultural, economic, social, orgovernmental system into one that is more just. Scope of Gandhi'sTechnique Gandhi is most famous for his political activism withrespect to ending British rule in India. He used the techniquenot just to work toward reform and ultimately removal of Britishrule in India, but also in many conflict situations betweenIndians only. For example, he organized and led programs designedto change how the upper class Hindus treated the lower classHindus. Gandhi himself considered his most important work theconstructive programs designed to remove the underlying causes ofpoverty and to rebuild strong local economies in impoverishedareas. Without this work, poor Indians would not have had thesustenance needed to participate in the many campaigns that ledto home rule. Martin Luther King applied techniques similar toGandhi's in the United States when working to end civil rightsinjustices based on race. Many of King's programs, speeches, andwritings strongly resemble Gandhi's, with terminology and otherspecifics tailored to the issues and systems at hand. Another20th century leader who has successfully used similar techniqueswhen engaging a cruel and conscience-less government is VaclavHavel. The injustices that these leaders were working to overcomeoccurred in widely varying cultures, social systems, andgovernments. Because I assume that most readers are specificallyinterested in political strategies with regard to changing unjustlaws in the U.S., the following discussion focuses on theapplication of Gandhi's techniques in conflicts with governments. SECTION 1. CONTEXT AND CONDITIONS The Cultural Context in which Gandhi Developed His Techniques India is multi-cultural with most cultures based onreligions. The Hindus are the largest group, followed by theMuslims, who constitute a large minority. Then come a muchsmaller number of Sikhs. Many other religious groups exist, butthey are very small in numbers. People of these religions hadlived side-by-side in relative peace for thousands of years whenthe British arrived. As the British became establishedeconomically, they started an insidious campaign to divide theIndian people along religious lines, especially by planting inMuslims fear of discrimination from Hindus should the British notkeep the Hindu influence in check. The British were quitesuccessful in promoting disunity between the Hindus and Muslims,a legacy that to this day engenders hatred and bloodshed. TheSikhs were selected to be the native component of theBritish-controlled police force. The Sikhs were a large enoughminority to provide enough police for British purposes, and yet asmall enough group that Sikh police were patrolling andincarcerating primarily Hindus and Muslims. After a couple ofhundred years of British encroachment on the cultures,inter-cultural fear and suspicion that had not existed before theBritish became the norm. Gandhi's Starting Place in Society Gandhi was born a Hindu. The Hindu society is stratified(some say "calcified") into classes referred to ascastes. The caste into which one is born determines the jobs onemay have, the education one may pursue, the privileges one isallowed, the places one may gather water, the people with whomone may eat, etc. The highest caste is the Brahmans; the lowest,the untouchables. Outside of these are the outcastes. Theoutcastes are those who violated the rules of their caste to theextent that the authorities within the caste cast them out.Thereafter, they are to be shunned by others in the caste--no onemay help them, they are not allowed to work within the caste,etc. Gandhi was a member of the Bania caste, which participatedin business and government in his home state. Gandhi was publiclyordered an outcaste when he was in his late teens because he wentto Britain to study law; his caste's leaders said it was againstthe religion to leave the country. The leaders actually went sofar as to inform the caste members that if they saw him off whenhe left for England, they would be fined! Gandhi wrote in hisautobiography, "The order had no effect on me, and I took myleave . . ." ( M.K. Gandhi, "An Autobiography: TheStory of My Experiments with the Truth," Part I, ChapterXII, [1927] translation by Mahadev Desai, published in the U.S.in 1957 by Beacon Press, Boston). SECTION 2. FUNDAMENTAL PRINCIPLES Gandhi adhered to four fundamental principles familiar to theWesterner. Three are truth, non-violence, and self-suffering. Thefourth is concerned with means and ends. All campaigns conductedunder his guidance were consistent with these principles(occasional errors arose due to the experimental nature of thetechnique and limitations in campaigners' previous experience).These fundamental principles are summarized below. Truth Gandhi did not fully define the "truth" but insteadsaid that he was seeking after it. He was seeking after itthrough socio-political action, just as others might seek afterit through a mystical or spiritual path, the study ofmathematics, or the creation of art. I gather from my readingsthat the goals of most his contemporaries were much moreimmediate and concrete (like a cost-of-living increase forworkers in a textile mill, the right for untouchables to walkpast a temple used by Brahmans, the replacement of British rulewith home rule, etc.). The replacement of British rule was amighty goal. Those who held it accepted the need for a largenumber of intermediate goals that they collectively agreed (oftenafter long and arduous debate) would contribute directly orindirectly to achievement of the mighty goal. Some of theintermediate goals included things that even the most uneducated,illiterate, and impoverished could grasp immediately, like: (1)Having all Indians weave their own cloth rather than buy Britishcloth (most Indians made their own clothing) and (2) Repealing asalt taxation and regulation scheme that drove the cost of saltso high that the poor could not afford it. Salt is an essentialdietary element in India's climate and can be collected fromIndia's ocean beaches or retrieved from inland deposits by anyoneafter a bit of instruction. The salt laws brought the Britishsignificant revenues. Enforcement of the salt laws included finesand incarceration for those who were caught making or collectingsalt for personal use and most especially if the person wasproducing and distributing marketable amounts outside of thegovernment's regulatory structure. Non-Violence Gandhi maintained that no human or group of humans could knowthe complete truth. No matter how close one thinks one might beto the truth, one could be in error either wholly or in somelesser way that is not immediately apparent. Because of this, hemaintained that no one could use violence toward others to presshis or her view of the truth forward. This principle excluded allacts of violence, and Gandhi's definition of violence was broad.As one might expect, physical violence could not be used againstan opponent. He also maintained that there should be no violencein one's expression and words. The non-violence principlerequired that an opponent be treated with utmost respect. Smearcampaigns aimed at defamation of character were not in hispolitical action toolbox, just as murder of lawmakers, judges,bureaucrats, and police were not in his toolbox. Gandhi'snon-violence is a full antonym for violence. Not only doesnon-violence refrain from destructive acts, it is aggressivelyand provocatively constructive. Thus, Gandhi's campaigns did notseek to defeat an opponent, but instead to convert the opponentto a more just position and to challenge the opponent to act uponthe new position. In addition, Gandhi held that there must be anopportunity for an opponent to save face, so long as nofundamental principle or aim of the action was therebycompromised. Self-Suffering Self-suffering is an integral element of Gandhi's techniqueand a necessary corollary to provocative non-violent action.Self-suffering can take the form of material and socialsacrifice. For example, loss of employment, property, or incomeas a result of holding to one's view of the truth is a form ofself-suffering. Self-suffering reaches its personal extremes inincarceration, physical injury, and the sacrifice of one's life.Gandhi wrote: "Suffering injury in one's own person is . . .of the essence of non-violence and is the chosen substitute forviolence to others." (M.K. Gandhi, "Non-violence inPeace and War," 2nd edition, Ahmedabad: Navajivan, 1944, p.49). He also wrote, "Non-violence in its dynamic conditionmeans conscious suffering. It does not mean meek submission tothe will of the evil-doer, but it means the pitting of one'swhole soul against the will of the tyrant." (M.K. Gandhi, in"Young India," August 11, 1920 ). Self-suffering ispreferred over submitting to humiliation and pr ovides a way topreserve one's personal dignity in the face of those who wouldtreat one unjustly. Throughout his writings and campaigns, Gandhiemphasized that inviting self-suffering is something that mustnot be done lightly. One who invites self-suffering must beprepared for the fullest possible sacrifice that may result fromone's actions. Means and Ends Gandhi believed that means do not serve ends, rather meanscreate ends. Thus, to attain an end that is positive andtruthful, one must use means that are positive and truthful. Thisphilosophy can be summarized by his statement, "the meansare the ends in the making." Means that create ends have twointeresting implications. First, one cannot define a just,non-violent end and then use unjust and violent means to attainit--for the end will be in character with the means used. Thisview precludes taking actions under the philosophy summarized inthe statement "the ends justify the means"--aphilosophy that seems to permeate current U.S. policy-making.Indeed, the "ends" being created by current governmentpolicy with regard to some drugs are very different than theofficially stated goals. A second implication is that, while one must always be movingtoward a goal of pure truth and justice, the end cannot bedefined precisely in advance. Each action one takes creates thenext action and that one, the next, each action always in keepingwith the last and moving progressively closer to truth andjustice. Through actively engaging with fellow activists and theopponent, one grows in understanding of what must be done, a stepat a time, to create the most just and truthful end. The technique becomes dynamic when it succeeds in provokinginternal change in the opponent. Thus the knowledge andunderstanding of both the activist and the opponent growsimultaneously toward truth and justice. However, the techniqueis not self-propelling; it is usually used in a context of astagnant, inert, or deliberately destructive force and requirestremendous energy. The activist must constantly reassess theopponent's comprehension and adjust the program so that it ismore than reactive to the opponent's change--every change must beviewed as an opportunity to press the campaign further forward. What Gandhi's Contemporaries Thought About the FundamentalPrinciples A few of Gandhi's contemporaries adhered to the fundamentalprinciples as inviolable guides by which to conduct one'spersonal life as well as one's social or political actions.However, the majority of his contemporaries accepted thefundamental principles as policies. They recognized the successof the principles in empowering the disempowered and realizedthat, even if viewed as policies, the principles were the key towinning "home rule" with an unarmed and impoverishedarmy of the disenfranchised. This acceptance as policy rather than principle caused Gandhisome dismay. When the activists with whom he was working rejectedthese even as policy, he would leave the political sphere andreturn to his constructive work toward remedying the devastatingeconomic problems in the villages of India. Eventually, hiscontemporaries always asked him to return to the politicalsphere. SECTION 3. STEPS OF A GANDHIAN CAMPAIGN The Progress of a Campaign Upon discovering an opportunity for reform or change, acampaign is conducted through several steps. Each step is anecessary prerequisite to the next, for each must fully developthe context in which the next occurs. The early steps develop thepublic stage upon which later steps, if they become necessary,can be played out. Some of the steps initiated early in thecampaign, especially education, continue throughout the campaign.The progression is designed to maximize early in the campaign allopportunities for the opponent to make positive changes and saveface without campaigners moving to more provocative measures. Thecareful progression provides fullest opportunity for thecampaigners to adjust their position if they discover that theyhave inadvertently violated a fundamental principle. It givescampaign leaders the opportunity, through engaging with theopponent early in relatively low-risk situations, torealistically assess their own strengths and weaknesses and thoseof the campaigners and to determine what more provocative stepscan and cannot be taken successfully. A Summary of the Steps of a Gandhian Campaign The steps of a campaign are: -- Investigation of the facts, situation, and conditions -- Education of the campaigners, the public, and the opponent -- Negotiation and arbitration -- Preparation of the campaigners for more provocativemeasures -- Agitation -- Issuing of an ultimatum -- Economic boycott and forms of strike -- Non-cooperation -- Civil disobedience -- Creation of alternate structures In India, these steps eventually led to the establishment ofa parallel government in some places, which provided Indians withsome of the experience needed to assume self-government whenBritish rule was removed. The steps of a campaign are described in the paragraphsbelow. In brackets I have mentioned my current opinion of wheredrug policy reform advocates have made the most progress.Investigation of the Facts, Situation, and Conditions A Gandhiancampaign is founded on an objective assessment of the facts. Allfacts are considered; none are rejected or downplayed if they donot fit the expectations of the campaigners--to do so would be tomove away from the complete truth. The situation of campaignersand those experiencing the injustice are examined. As full anunderstanding of the situation as possible is developed among allinvolved. The conditions at the time--public awareness andopinion, the situation of the opponent, and other relevantfactors are all considered and weighed. [Drug policy reform advocates seem to me to be strongesthere. The only difficulty I've seen is the occasional attempt toreject or downplay a pertinent fact that doesn't quite"fit," but this is usually remedied through discussionamong reform advocates.] Education of the Campaigners, the Public, and the Opponent With the facts in hand and the situation and conditions fullyexamined, education begins. All who join the campaign must beeducated; they become representatives through their associationand must be fully informed. The public is often unaware of ormisinformed about injustices; they must be educated to understandwhy change is needed. Many opponents are similar to thepublic--they are unaware or misinformed. Gandhi felt that therewere only a few pponents who would actually want injustices to beperpetuated or continue. Gandhi was an optimist and believed eventhose few could be converted. [Drug policy reform advocates areweak here, but getting stronger. At the International Conferencefor Drug Policy Reform last November, attendees recognized theneed to raise public awareness about injustices of the drug war.I understand that organizations like NORML are following up withactivities geared toward education of the general public. TheWashington Hemp Education Network (W.H.E.N.) was started by agroup of marijuana policy reform activists in Washington Statewho recognized the need for education. My personal experience hasbeen that many of the people who join W.H.E.N. recognize theinjustices and are looking for the facts. Others join becausethey have much knowledge and want opportunities to educate andpersuade others. Some relish entering the opponents' sphere andeducating! Also, Cliff Schaffer's persuasive strategies providean excellent example of guidelines that have been tailored tomove the opponent toward the truth given an opponent's entryposition in a discussion. Such guidelines must be assessed andmodified periodically to ensure that they keep pace with theinevitable progress the opponents will make when so persuaded.] Negotiation and Arbitration Remedy for the injustice is sought first through establishedchannels within the existing system. Petitioning for change ofunjust laws, challenging unjust laws in the courts, and otherlegislative or legal methods fall under this step. [Drug policy reform advocates working on reform of marijuanalaws have done plenty of negotiation and arbitration at thefederal level and in many states. I am not aware of as high of alevel of negotiation effort for substances like heroin, cocaine,etc.] Preparation of the Campaigners for More Provocative Measures Immediately upon recognizing the existence of a conflictsituation that might lead to more provocative measures, Gandhi'stechnique calls for intense preparation. The motives ofcampaigners are examined, weaknesses of the group are identified,and exercises in self-discipline undertaken. The goal of thisstep is to assess and develop the campaigners' ability to adhereto fundamental principles and to continue action in the face ofsignificant risks. There is much discussion of the issues athand, the current situation and conditions, and of the potentialresults of various courses of action. [I have not heard of drugpolicy reform advocates undertaking such self-examination andparticipating in mutually agreed upon exercises inself-discipline. I have heard discussions and analyses aboutpotential actions that fall under subsequent steps.] Agitation Agitation includes legal high-profile activities such asrallies and picketing. Such events are opportunities for theleaders to assess the group's readiness to proceed with higherprofile and more difficult steps without deteriorating intoviolence. Mass gatherings also provide an opportunity to begininstructing campaigners who have not been trained previously inthe fundamental principles, to communicate developments in thecampaign, and to explain the next step. [I haven't heard much about this kind of agitation. AgitationI have heard about has involved small numbers of people and, asfar as I know, it has not been part of a sequence of steps suchas described here. I do not believe that Hemp Fests, even if noone smoked, would meet the criteria by which Gandhi definedagitation because they are not part of a highly focused politicalcampaign and do not have a strong educational focus.] Issuing of an Ultimatum A strong appeal is made to the opponent. The appeal is quiteexplicit. It states the problem, identifies a constructivesolution and the responsibilities of each party in the solution,and explains what the campaigners will do if the opponent doesnot participate in the solution. The ultimatum should includeprovision for the opponent to save face within the scope of thefundamental principles. The opponent is fully informed about thenext step. In fact, from this step forward, every single steptaken is preceded by a full advance disclosure to the opponent ofwhat will be done, when, and where. Before each step commences,the opponent is offered the opportunity to change. [If drug policy reform advocates started a Gandhian campaigntoday, I believe that they would be years from being able toissue ultimatums that actually carried any weight.] Economic Boycott and Forms of Strike In India, Indians boycotted foreign cloth with such successthat they had a significant impact on the mills in Britain.Strikes have been used extensively in the U.S. for in all kindsof reform campaigns A scene in the movie "Gandhi" showsthe power of a nationwide strike. [To conduct an economic boycottrequires economic alternatives for the boycotters. To conduct aneffective strike, a campaign needs great numbers of campaignersand who have economic alternatives. As far as I can tell, drugpolicy reform advocates are generally dependent on the dominanteconomic structures and so are weak on this point.] Non-Cooperation Non-cooperation involves refusal to support the portions ofthe system that require reform or accept benefits from thesystem. For example, during the campaign to remove British rule,Indians resigned from government posts, removed their childrenfrom government schools, returned awards and medals that they hadreceived from the government, and so on. Economic boycott andstrikes described in the previous step can be regarded as formsof non-cooperation. [The judges who refuse to try drug cases areengaged in non-cooperation. People who refuse to provide urinesamples as a condition of employment are engaged innon-cooperation.] Civil Disobedience Civil disobedience extends non-cooperation to the active andopen breaking of selected laws. Gandhi set complete and voluntaryobedience to laws as a prerequisite for civil disobedience. Lawsto be broken were selected very carefully for their position atthe heart of the problem or for their symbolic value. Civildisobedience involves a deliberate courting of arrest and, uponarrest, no defense is offered in the courts. In fact, fulladmission of guilt is required. The prosecutors, juries, andjudges are challenged to see the injustice of the law that theyare defending against the civil disobedient and to cease theircooperation with the injustice. In mass campaigns involving civildisobedience in India, prisons filled up very quickly. Veryoften, the leaders were arrested in an attempt to dishearten thecampaigners and end the campaign. Sometimes they were arrestedupon delivery to the authorities of their notice of intent todisobey! Other times, the government ignored them completelywhich, of course, encouraged more people to join the campaign. Ifthe government ignores the first civil disobedients, theprovocative nature of increasing numbers of civil disobedientseventually compels the government to act. And compelling theopponent to act is the point of civil disobedience. Two importantorganizational points must be mentioned here. Every campaign inwhich the leaders may be arrested must provide succession ofleadership. A succession procedure must be planned in advance sothat civil disobedience continues apace no matter how manyleaders have been arrested. The second point involves support forthe families of the civil disobedients. There must always bepeople who are willing to forego civil disobedience and remainfree to take care of the children, the aged, and the ill. Supportpeople should be identified in advance and should, under nocircumstances, court arrest. [Medicinal marijuana suppliers and users come to mind as apossible example of civil disobedients, although an analysiswould reveal that very few of these civil disobedients actuallymeet all of the criteria set forth by Gandhi.] Creation of Alternate Structures If, after all of these steps, the existing system fails tobecome more just, an alternate means of ensuring justice must bedeveloped. This is especially important when the existing systemis so corrupt that people are disobeying it not just as part of acampaign, but simply because they find themselves unable toconduct their lives peacefully without disobeying it. Such asystem is approaching inevitable collapse by virtue of itsinherent flaws. Alternate structures must be built in advance notonly to provide for immediate needs, but also to prevent (or atleast mitigate) the potential release of destructive,anger-driven energy that often follows an oppressive system'scollapse. [Medicinal marijuana buyers' clubs provide an exampleof an alternate structure.] Demands of Gandhi's Technique on Campaigners Gandhi's technique exacts a great deal from a campaign'sleadership and those who follow them. They must tirelessly planand monitor the progress of the campaign, reassess their positionand the position of the opponent, and respond creatively andprovocatively to events as they unfold. Leaders must be flexibleenough to respond to change. At the same time, they must have the insight to know whichpotential responses might lead to stagnation of the campaign orwill compromise a fundamental principle--for either will lead tosetbacks. Leaders must be consummate communicators: with the opponent,the public, potential supporters, and those who have joined thecampaign--else misunderstandings and misinterpretations can ariseas the campaign is adjusted to changing conditions and events.Leaders must have an ability to organize, inspire, and use fullythe talents of an extremely diverse group of people who volunteertheir services to a campaign. People with widely varyingperspectives and beliefs must be transformed from a disorganizedscattering of supporters in conflict not just with thegovernment, but often with each other, to a coherent, responsiveunit that can target its actions and responses with great force.Finally, all in the campaign must have an ability to manage ordispel the tension and anger that can arise when their effortsappear to be frustrated, when there are disagreements amongcampaigners, and when they directly confront an often-hostileopponent. CONCLUSION Many drug policy reform advocates have been using politicalaction techniques similar (though not identical) to the stepsdescribed above. But drug policy reform advocates have notcatalyzed into a dynamic, coherent group that can actsynchronously to achieve a clearly defined goal. I believe that,if reform advocates' efforts were synthesized in a Gandhiansequence with an underpinning of the fundamental principles,success would be inevitable. --Mary CliffSchaffer's Home Page WT02-B01-25IA031-000655-B032-257http://206.61.184.43:80/schaffer/activist/bumper1.htm 206.61.184.43 19970122110601 text/html 4280HTTP/1.0 200 OKDate: Wednesday, 22-Jan-97 11:05:54 GMTServer: WebSitePro/1.1f (S/N wpo-0deb)Allow-ranges: bytesContent-type: text/htmlLast-modified: Saturday, 28-Dec-96 07:25:58 GMTContent-length: 4063 Bumper Sticker Ideas Bumper Sticker Ideas This page is a compilation of ideas people had for goodbumper stickers for a drug policy reform campaign. Enjoy. "Visualize Drugpeace," "It's the Prohibition -- Not Drugs," "Stop the War on Us," Prohibition love it or leave it. Peace on Drugs. CIA Cocaine in America. DEA: the competition Make love on drugs, Not war on drugs Fight real crime- End the drug war. - Ben Masel (I think) Just say know (or no thank you) Why can't we all just get abong? As Ira Glassner noted in his editorial printed in lastsundays NY times --in response to "It's Drugs Stupid"---Hey,"It's Prohibition Stupid." Legalize it, Don't Criticize it. Drug Prohibition is the Problem Not the Solution I read once that if you take a black sharpie and black-outthe "kids off" on the DARE bumper stickers, it reads, "DARE to keep drugs" Pro-MJ and I vote! Free the weed, the stalk and the seed! Free Pot (from tyranny) Drugs Are Real Expensive "Stop the Violence: End the Drug War" PROHIBITION = <the word "CONTROL" surrounded bya big slashed circle> REGULATION = CONTROL How about "DECLARE PEACE" superimposed over theimage of a pot leaf on one side and a hand with the V-shaped peace sign on the other? Stop drug violence End the drug war [Perhaps using red/white octagon STOP sign and yellow/blackdiamond END sign] DARE: Lying to kids about drugs [Lying to kids has to be in high contrast, bright yellow onblack] Save the trees Legalize hemp Prohibition _is_ our drug problem "It's Prohibition, Stupid" - (inspired by E.Nadelmann) Tax it. For Freedom of Diet -- Abolish Neo-prohibition! End the Drug War. Begin the War on Real Crime THE DRUG WAR BREEDS CRIME NOBODY'S SAFE FROM THE DEA WANT SAFE STREETS? END THE DRUG WAR! MAKE AMERICA SAFE: END THE DRUG WAR! OUR DRUG WAR: $100,000,000,000.00 DRUG LORD SUBSIDY PROHIBITION IS A FAILURE "WAR ON DRUGS" = WAR ON AMERICA LAND OF THE PRISONER HOME OF THE DRUG WAR (as in "land of the free, home of the brave".Superimposed on a waving American flag. In fact it would be really cool if"free" and "brave" were printed but scribbled out and"prisoner" and "drug war" were written in.) US OUT OF COLOMBIA - DEA OUT OF MENDOCINO ...Fight Crime, Not Drugs... ....End Drug Prohibition -- Before It's Too Late... How about: School free drug zone. >Prohibition: Didn't work Then >Of Drugs Doesn't Work Now! >Freedom still works better - Abolish Prohibition DEA OUT OF L.A. Save Our Children -- Stop the Drug War, or Save our Community -- Stop the Drug War CliffSchaffer's Home Page WT02-B01-26IA031-000655-B032-296http://206.61.184.43:80/schaffer/activist/actlist.htm 206.61.184.43 19970122110613 text/html 65160HTTP/1.0 200 OKDate: Wednesday, 22-Jan-97 11:06:03 GMTServer: WebSitePro/1.1f (S/N wpo-0deb)Allow-ranges: bytesContent-type: text/htmlLast-modified: Saturday, 28-Dec-96 07:26:49 GMTContent-length: 64942 LIBERTY ACTIVISTS' LIST LIBERTY ACTIVISTS' LIST v 1.36 06/1995 So you're sick of the "War on Drugs"? Here's aninternational list of over 200 organizations which support druglaw reform, although most of them are in the US. Look for one inyour area. Please distribute this list widely, and send in anygroups which are not listed already. There's an active group herefor almost any taste. Joining your favorite organization is best,though if you're worried about persecution, just send anonymousmoney or a letter of appreciation. Take advantage of yourdemocratic rights while you still have some! If you're already in a law reform organisation, you can usethis list to contact others with similar interests, and shareinformation or facilities. Just knowing that there are othersworking on these issues can be a big morale booster. The power of pro-liberty organisations can be multiplied manytimes by fast and efficient communication, which spreads news andpromotes co-ordinated action. Electronic mail and conferencing isthe most efficient way to achieve these necessary abilities. Forexample, this list doubled its size in eight months ofcirculation over the Internet. I strongly encourage active groupsand individuals to use this powerful technology. This listing was originally kicked off with a list of groupsreproduced with permission from the February, 1992 issue of HighTimes magazine (contact details at the end of the list). Since then, it has grown considerably through the kindness ofthose who have contributed additional entries, including ChrisKlausmeier, Macca Macpherson, Dave Thomson and Keith Lim. Please reproduce and distribute widely with thisacknowledgment. Post it on bulletin boards if you can. PLEASE SEND NEW LISTINGS I don't know any more about most of these groups, than whatappears here. If you know about other active groups not listedhere, or if any entries need correction, please e-mail me atschaffer@smartlink.net, or mail to the address below, forincorporation in future editions of this list. Aldis Ozols GPO Box 127 SYDNEY 2001 AUSTRALIA * * * * * *AUSTRALIA* Adelaide University NORML c/- Clubs Association University of Adelaide Adelaide 5000 Internet: daroussy@teaching.cs.adelaide.edu.au groo@smug.student.adelaide.edu.au Australian Hemp Products 227 Grinsell Street Kotara, Newcastle, NSW 2289 Phone: +61 49 52 7802 Fax: +61 49 52 5211 (Grant Steggles) Australian Parliamentary Group for Drug Law Reform c/- Michael Moore, MP GPO Box 1020 Canberra ACT 2601 Phone: +61 6 205 0166 Fax: +61 6 205 0431 Notes: A group of Members of Parliament supporting the reform of drug laws. BIO-Logical PRODUCTS PO Box 768 Potts Point NSW 2011 Phone: +61 2 983 9857 Fax: +61 2 440 0140 Notes: Sells clothing made of hemp, and distributesinformation about the uses of hemp for paper, fuel, etc. Brisbane HEMP PO Box 332 Albert St 4002 Phone: +61 7 844 7499 Notes: Meetings at 50 Baynes St, West End on Monday nights at7.30pm. Flinders NORML c/- Clubs and Societies Association, Inc. Flinders University Bedford Park, SA 5042 Hemp For Paper Consortium c/- Harmsens 430 Tinderbox Road TINDERBOX TAS 7054 Phone: +61 02 29 2063 IDUN Communication Centre, NUAA PO Box 822 Bondi Junction 2022 New South Wales Phone: +61 2 369 3455 Fax: +61 2 369 3282 (Dave Burrows) Note: Injecting Drug User Group Network, promoting drug lawreform, harm reduction, education, outreach, and research. Mullers and Packers Union, C/o Clubs and Societies, Monash University, Clayton, Victoria 3168 Internet: c/- smalshy@yoyo.cc.monash.edu.au (a 'donated'account - messages will be passed on to the Secretary of the club) Notes: President is Tony Carden. Last Contacted: 2/93 New South Wales NORML GPO Box 91 Sydney, NSW 2001 Notes: This group is no longer very active, though some members can be contacted at the above address. Nimbin HEMP PO Box 177 Nimbin, NSW 2480 Phone: +61 66 89 1602 South Australia HEMP PO Box 7013 Hutt Street Adelaide 5000 Phone: +61 8 293 2838 Also: PO Box 1019 Kent Town 5071 Notes: Membership $10(conc) $15(waged) Last contact: Apr 95 West Australia HEMP PO Box 115 Mirrabrooke 6061 Phone: +61 9 344 1445 West Australia NORML PO Box 907 Morley, WA 6062 (Carl Turney) *BELGIUM* International Anti-Prohibitionist League (Europe) 97 Rue Belliard, Rem.512 1040 Brussels Phone: (32 2) 230 4121 Fax: (32 2) 230 3670 *CANADA* Assembly of the Church of the Universe 329 Wentworth St. North Hamilton, Ontario L8L 5W1 CANADA (416) 521-1804 (Rev. Bros. Walter A. Tucker & Michael A.Baldasaro) Notes: officially registered religious organisation Last Contacted: Dec 93 B.C. Anti-Prohibitionist League P.O. Box 8179 Victoria, B.C. V8W 3R8 CANADA (604) 382-7758 Last Contacted: Apr 94 Canadian Association for the Legalisation of Marijuana(C.A.L.M.) (B.C.) R.R. 1, Site 850D, Comp 2 Grand Forks, B.C. V0H 1H0 CANADA Last Contacted: Sep 93 Canadian Foundation for Drug Policy 70 MacDonald Street Ottawa, Ontario K2P 1H6 CANADA (613) 238-5909 (temporary number until a separate one isacquired) Fax: (613) 238-2891 (also temporary) Last Contacted: Dec 94 Canadian Hemp Association 312 Adelaide St. W. Suite 608 Toronto, Ontario M5V 1R2 CANADA cha@io.org (416) 977-4159 (Robin Ellins) Notes: A national organization to facilitate and promote thegrowth of a hemp industry in Canada. Last Contacted: Jun 94 (C.H.A. post to alt.hemp) Cannabis Canada Suite 420 21 Water St. Vancouver, BC. V6B 1A1 CANADA (Dana Larsen) Internet: Dana Larsen <muggles@hempbc.com>,http://www.hempbc.com Notes: The magazine of Canada's Cannabis Culture. 84 pages oncannabis paper. Citizens On Drugs (C.O.D.) 64 Augusta Ave. Toronto, Ontario M5T 2L1 CANADA (Tim Potts, Kenn Quayle) Phone: (416) 504 6131 Fax: (416) 703 7832 Internet: greenie@io.org Notes: Meetings are on the first and third Wednesday of each month at 7:00 pm at the Niagara Neighbourhood Health Centre(674 Queen St. W.). Fane of the Psilocybe Mushroom Association P.O. Box 8179 Victoria, B.C. V8W 3R8 CANADA Notes: officially-registered religious organization;publishes Sporeprint newsletter Last Contacted: Apr 94 Freedom Party of Ontario P.O. Box 2214, Station A London, Ontario N6A 4E3 CANADA (519) 433-8612 Notes: officially-registered Ontario political party;supports individual choice without either condoning or condemning cannabis use. Friends International 370-1027 Davie St. Vancouver, B.C. V6E 4L2 CANADA (604) 681-3704 (Leeroy Campbell, Jan Campbell) Notes: publishes Hempfest Times newsletter Last Contacted: Jun 94 HEMP BC 324 W Hastings Vancouver BC V6B 1K6 CANADA Internet: memery@hempbc.com, http://www.hempbc.com (604) 681-4620 (Marc Emery) (604) 681-4604 (fax line) Last Contacted: May 95 Notes: Canada's Largest retail and wholesale cannabis store.Carries everything related to cannabis, marijuana, and hemp. HEMP Canada PO Box 37154 769 Southdale Road East London, Ontario N6E 1B0 CANADA (519) 686-1415 (Mike Bourque - Director) Last Contacted: Apr 94 Hemp Lobby Hornby Island (604) 335-1276 (John West) Last Contacted: May 93 Hemp to Save the Rainforest 830 Gulfview Place Victoria, B.C. V8Y 2R6 CANADA (Thurles Loughran) Last Contacted: Mar 94 Hempsters #114-1472 Commercial Drive Vancouver B.C. V5L 3X9 Last Contacted: May 94 International Anti-Prohibitionist League (Canada) c/o Marie-Andree Bertrand PO Box 6128 University of Montreal Criminology Dept. Montreal, Quebec H3C 3S7 CANADA Last Contacted: Sep 93 League for Ethical Action on Drugs (LEAD) 1047 Yarmouth Street Port Coquitlam, B.C. V3C 5H4 CANADA (604) 942-1910 (Dana Larsen) Notes: uses a harm-reduction philosophy in lobbying for drugpolicy reform Last Contacted: Jun 94 Libertarian Party of Canada 922 Cloverley St. North Vancouver, B.C. V7L 1N3 CANADA (604) 980-7370 Last Contacted: Sep 93 Ligue antiprohibitioniste du Quebec 4566 rue de la Roche Montreal, Quebec H2J 3J6 CANADA (514) 454-7744 NAUN 155 Sherbourne Street #310 Toronto M5A 3W2 CANADA (Stean Collins) Note: Injecting Drug User Group Network, promoting drug lawreform, harm reduction, education, outreach, and research. NORML B.C. Depot 4, P.O. Box 7193 Victoria, B.C. V9B 4Z3 CANADA (604) 474-4771 (Norm Cholette) Last Contacted: Sep 93 NORML Canada R.R. #1 King City, Ontario L0G 1K0 CANADA (416) 833-3167 (Umberto Iorfida) (416) 833-3577 (Computer line) Last Contacted: Sep 93 Patriotic Canadians for Hemp Box 293 Ucluelet B.C. V0R 3A0 CANADA (604) 726-7239 (Chris Bennett, Tracy Chester) Notes: a.k.a. Sister Sativa's Genuine Hemp, Mama Indica'sHempseed Treats Last Contacted: Jun 94 Society of Free Thinkers (SOFT) P.O. Box 327 Paradise Newfoundland and Labrador (NfLb) A1L 1C7 CANADA Notes: Not solely dedicated to drug law reform. Methodsinclude posters, letters and leaflets. Anonymity is granted to members, uponrequest. Last Contacted: Jan 93 Simon Fraser University League for Ethical Action on Drugs(SFU LEAD) c/o SFSS Clubs Administration Simon Fraser University Burnaby, B.C. V5A 1S6 CANADA (604) 291-3181 (SFSS General Office: messages) Notes: area of interest is in finding policy alternatives tothe WoD that do not infringe on civil liberties. Last Contacted: Jun 94 *CANADA - INDIVIDUALS* J. Wayne Marsden (604) 668-6886 Notes: Libertarian Party candidate Last Contacted: Sep 93 *DENMARK* Fri Hash Bevaegelsen (Movement for legalization of marijuana) Hampens plads 1, Christiania Baadsmandsstraedet 43, 1407 KBH K Phone: +45 32966614 Internet: Nicolaj Tscherning Moller<frihashb@inet.uni-c.dk> *FINLAND* Suomen kannabisyhdistys PL 20 SF-00770 Helsinki Internet: sky@katto.kaapeli.fi WWW: http://katto.kaapeli.fi/~sky/ *FRANCE* Collectif d'Information et de Recherche Cannabique (CIRC) (Association for Marijuana Research and Information) 118-130 av. Jean Jaures 75019 PARIS CEDEX 19 Phone: +33 1 42 38 04 83 Fax: +33 1 42 38 02 99 Minitel: 3615 CIRC MLC: Mouvement for a Controlled Legalization President: Francis Caballero. Attorney. 59, av. Victor-Hugo 750016 Paris FRANCE Phone: +33 1 42 22 48 23 *GERMANY* AKZEPT (Bundesverband fu"r akzeptierende Drogenarbeit und humane Drogenpolitik e.V.) Friedrichstrasse 165 10117 Berlin Phone: +49 30 229 9043 ARCHIDO (Archiv und Dokumentationszentrum fu"r Drogenliterature.V.) Universita"t Bremen Fachbereich 8 Postfach 33 04 40 28334 BREMEN Phone: +49 421 218 3173 Fax: +49 421 218 4265 Notes: Working on a federal level for drug legalisation inGermany. Bundesarbeitsgemeinschaft Kritischer Polizistinnen und Polizsten (Hamburger Signal) e.V. c/o Reinhard Borchers Gaertnerstrasse 21 D-20253 Hamburg Phone: +49 40 422 5843 Fax: +49 40 422 9322 Internet: R.Borchers@cl-hh.comlink.de Notes: An organisation of German Policemen and Policewomen. Last contact: Feb 95 EIGDU C/- DAH Secretariate Berlin Dieffenbachstrasse 33 10967 Berlin Phone: +49 30 690087 56 Fax: +49 30 690087 42 (Werner Hermann) Note: Injecting Drug User Group Network, promoting drug lawreform, harm reduction, education, outreach, and research. H.A.N.F. e.V. Hanf als Nutzpflanze foerdern c/o Gecko Headshop Osterfelder Str. 2 42103 Wuppertal Phone: +49 202 304295 Fax: +49 202 316795 Kommunale Drogenpolitik (Verein fu"r akzeptierende Drogenarbeit e.V.) Kreuzstra(ss)e 29 28203 Bremen Phone: +49 421 76045 Fax: +49 421 75727 *HOLLAND* See *NETHERLANDS, THE* *ISRAEL* Israel Organization For the Reformation of Pot Laws, The PO Box 11438 Ariel 44839 Phone: +972 3 936 5407 Last contact: Jan 95 *ITALY* CORA - Coordinamento Radicale Antiproibizionista c/o Partito Radicale Transnazionale (Transnational Radical Party) Via di Torre Argentina 76 00186 ROMA (ITALY) Phone: +39 6 689791 Fax: +39 6 68805396 Telex: +39 6 610495 PRLIFEI Note: CORA also has a BBS. Its phone number is +39 669920412, or on the Internet, "telnet agora.stm.it". Inparticular, look at 'Conference Drugs' and 'News Cora' for info on Coraactivities. *NETHERLANDS, THE* IRDRHR (International Institute for Resource-sharing on Drugsand Human Rights) Drugs Peace Institute PO Box 15563 1001 NB Amsterdam giro 6663463 *NETHERLANDS, THE - INDIVIDUALS* Guido H. Koppes Tuinstraat 47-07 5038 DA Tilburg Phone: +31 13 356331 Internet: Guido Koppes <guido@freenet.scri.fsu.edu> *NEW ZEALAND* ADUN C/- Mainline communications 33 Hill Cresent, New Lynn Auckland 1007 Phone: +64 9 826 0977 Fax: +64 9 826 0977 Internet: Barry F Ryker <spike@bazza.ak.planet.co.nz> Note: Injecting Drug User Group Network, promoting drug lawreform, harm reduction, education, outreach, and research. Auckland University NORML C/- AUSA Private Bag 92019 Auckland University Auckland Christchurch NORML c/- PO Box 22301 Christchurch Internet: C/- Greg Kerdemelidis<gkerde@genix.equinox.gen.nz> Dunedin University NORML c/- OUSA PO Box 1436 Dunedin Hamilton NORML PO Box 19088 Hamilton Notes: Branch contact is Kath (phone 855 0762). Nelson Polytech NORML Contact: c/- Nelson Polytech Students' Association Last Contacted: September 1993 NZ NORML PO Box 19467 Avondale Auckland 7 Phone: (09) 828 4707 (Mike Finlayson) Notes: Palmerston North contact is: Linda Davis c/- StudentMail, City Court Hostel, B2-4, Massey University. Hawkes Bay contact is: Johnny Ropitini c/- Ropitini, Kakirawa Flats, Miriama Rd, RD 11, Paki Paki, Hastings. Wellington NORML C/- P.O.Box 11639 Wellington Notes: Located at Shop 272, Cuba St, Welington. Open everyFriday night 5.30 pm to 8.00 pm, and Saturday morning from 10.00 am to1.00 pm. *NORWAY* Fremskrittspartiets Ungdom Box 8867 Youngstorget N-0028 Oslo Phone: (+47) 22 41 07 69 Fax (+47) 22 42 32 55 Notes: This is the youth organisation of the Progress Party.A recent committee meeting voted in favour of cannabis legalisation,and it is likely that the national assembly of the youth organisationwill accept this as policy in early 1994. The mani body of the party doesnot as yet support this. *SLOVENIA* STIGMA Saranoviceva 5 61000 Ljubljana Slovenia Phone: +386 61 133 7011 Fax: as for voice phone (Dare Kocmur) Note: Injecting Drug User Group Network, promoting drug lawreform, harm reduction, education, outreach, and research. *SWITZERLAND* Verein Schweizer Hanf Freunde (Swiss Association of Hemp Friends) Postfach 323 9004 St. Gallen Last Contacted: Jan 93 *UNITED KINGDOM* Alchemy 261 Portobello Road London W11 Bridge (Drug Advice) Equity Chambers Piccadilly Bradford Phone: +44 274 72 3863 Campaign to Legalise Cannabis International 54c Peacock Street Norwich NR3 1TB CODD (Committee for an Open Debate on Drugs) BCM Entwine, London WC1N 3XX European Movement for Normalisation of Drug Policy (BritishSection) c/- Dr Russell Newcombe c/- 10 Maryland Street LIVERPOOL L1 9BX Phone: +44 51 709 3511 Fax: +44 51 709 4916 Legalise Cannabis Campaign BM Box 2455 London WC1N 3XX Phone: +44 71 585 1031 Libertarian Alliance 25 Chapter Chambers Esterbrooke Street London SW1P 4NN Phone: +44 71 821-5502 Fax: +44 71 834-2031 Internet: liberty@capital.demon.co.uk National Council for Civil Liberties 21 Tabard Street London SE1 4LA Phone: +44 71 403 3888 Peoples Right To Smoke Marijuana PO Box 23 Chigwell, Essex IG7 5EH Release (Drugs Legal & Emergency service) 169 Commercial Road London E1 6BW Phone: +44 71 377 5905 (daytime), +44 71 603 8654 (24-hourhelpline) *UNITED STATES OF AMERICA* Note: This portion of the list has been extensively revised by Chris Klausmeier, with extensive help and prodding fromBrian at University of Massachusetts at Amherst Cannabis ReformCoalition. Advocates for Self-Government 3955 Pleasantdale Road, #106-A Atlanta, GA 30340 Phone: (404)417-1304, (800)932-1776 Fax: (404)417-1305 Notes: The Advocates for Self-Government is a non-profiteducational organization. Our purpose is to present the freedomphilosophy honestly and persuasively to opinion-makers so that they can encounter, evaluate, and when ready embrace the ideals of self-government. Contributions are tax deductible undersection 501(c)(3). Last Contacted: July 1993 Alabama TEACH Rt 3 Box 620 Blountsville, AL 35031 (Johnny Bynum) Alaskans for Hemp Awareness 1013 E. Dimond Blvd. #227 Anchorage, AK 99515 Phone/Fax: (907) 248 HEMP Internet: 73237.422@compuserve.com (Len Karpinski) Notes: Since 1990 Albert Hofmann Foundation Notes: This organisation no longer accepts members and nolonger sells reference books. For psychedelic-related issues, please refer to the entry for the Multidisciplinary Association for Psychedelic Studies, below. Last contact: May 95 Alliance for Cannabis Therapeutics PO Box 21210 Washington, DC 20009 Phone: (202) 483 8595 Notes: Working to reform laws which prevent medical access tocannabis. American Anti-Prohibitionist League 4017 SE Belmont, Box 103 Portland, OR 97214 Phone: (503) 235 4524 Internet: Floyd.Landrath@f69.n105.z1.fidonet.org (Floyd Ferris Landrath) American Cannabis Research Experiment PO Box 3240 Charlottesville, VA 22903 Internet: jeg5s@uva.PCmail.virginia.edu American Cannabis Society PO Box 9208 Madison, WI 53715 American Civil Liberties Union 132 West 43rd St. New York, NY 10036 Phone: (212) 944 9800 Notes: While not explicitly a drug law reform group, the ACLU promotes human rights and supports alternatives to currentlaws. American Hemp Council PO Box 71093 Los Angeles, CA 90071-0093 Phone: (213) 288 4152 American Medical Marijuana Movement (San Francisco Headquarters) 3745 Seventeenth Street San Francisco, CA 94114 Phone: (415) 864 1961 Americans Against Hemp Prohibition P.O. Box 2062 Westminster, MD 21158 Phone: (410) 857 6484 Fax: (410) 346 7968 Ann Arbor NORML PO Box 6014 Ann Arbor MI 48106 Phone: (313) 677 0099 [RB] (Rich Birkett) Antiochans for Hemp Awareness Antioch College Community Government Yellow Springs, OH 45387 Phone: (513) 767 6427 Arizona NORML 703 W 12th Place Tempe, AZ 85281 Arkansas NORML PO Box 191031 Little Rock, AR 72219 Phone: (501) 562 3868 [GS]; (501) 371 0701 [WD] (Glen Schwarz - President; Wayne Davis - Legal Sponsor) Notes: Victory for Hemp! AZ 4 NORML PO Box 50434 Phoenix, AZ 85076 Phone/Fax: (602) 491 1139 BBS: (602) 921 2878 [Hemp Pipeline] (William R. Green) Beloit College Cannabis Club 700 College St. Beloit, WI 53511 Internet: C/- Vincent Whitacre<whitacre@stu.beloit.edu> Bill of Rights Society PO Box 44485 P.C., CA 91412 Boulder Hemp Initiative Project P.O. Box 729 Nederland, CO 80466 Phone: (303) 784 5632 Internet: bhip@darkstar.cygnus.com (Blair Wilson, Laura Kriho) Notes: Holds weekly meetings at 6.30 pm on Tuesdays inHellems Room 81 on the CU campus in Boulder. Bryan / College Station NORML PO Box 9077 College Station, TX 77842 Phone: (409) 268 HEMP (Craig Edge) Buffalo BACH 336 Esser Avenue Buffalo, NY 14207 Phone: (716) 873 0255 (Marilyn Craig) Business Alliance for Commerce in Hemp (BACH) PO Box 71093 Los Angeles, CA 90071-0093 Phone: (213) 288 4152 (Chris Conrad) California Marijuana Initiative 23342 Angeles Forest Hwy. Palmdale, CA 93550 California F.E.A.R. Phone: (714) 544 2577, (415) 380 9108 or (805) 496 2595. Notes: Fights against unjust forfeiture laws. See entry under'F.E.A.R.' California NORML 2215R Market St. #278 San Francisco, CA 94114 Phone: (415) 563 5858 Internet: canorml@igc.apc.org Cannabis Action Network (CAN WEST / National Headquarters) 2560 Bancroft Way #46 Berkeley, CA 94704 Phone: (510) 486 8083 Fax: Same Internet: caninfo@ccnet.com (Debby Goldsberry) Notes: CAN is a grassroots organization working to educateand mobilize concerned individuals to create change. We work withactivists in every area of the country to do national educational tours,regional conferences, rallies and other events. Last contact: Feb 95 Cannabis Action Network (CAN South / Southern RegionalOffice) 1025 Foucher New Orleans, LA 70115 Phone: (504) 899 1960 (Kevin Aplin) Notes: See above Last contact: Feb 95 CARE Art L. PO Box 1612 Bellflower, CA 90706 Cato Institute 1000 Massachusetts Ave. Washington, DC 20003 Phone: (202) 546 0200 Fax: (202) 546 0728 CCDS/BB 41 Sutter St., Suite 1688 San Fransisco, CA 94104 Central Valley NORML 4546 E. Ashlan Suite 3219 Fresno, CA 93726-2700 Phone: (209) 22 NORML (226 6765) Internet: CVNORML@aol.com Note: Public meetings on the second Monday of each month at7:00 PM at: The Matachi House, 985 N. Van Ness, Fresno, CA Christic Institute 8773 Venice Blvd. Los Angeles, CA 90034 Phone: (310) 287 1556 Fax: (310) 287 1559 (Bill Davis) Citizens Advocating the Protection of Privacy 12611 Research Blvd. #121 Austin, TX 78759 Phone (512) 448 4804 Notes: Specifically concerned with employer drug testing, especially by Motorola and Texas Instruments. Citizens Advocating the Protection of Privacy (Arizona) Internet: CAPPAZ@delphi.com Claremont Hemp Council c/o Chris Klausmeier Platt Campus Center Harvey Mudd College Claremont, CA 91711 Phone: (909) 398 4831 [CK]; (909) 624 3306 [MH] Internet: cklausme@jarthur.claremont.edu (Chris Klausmeier, Mark Hornaday) Notes: Registered 5-college organization at ClaremontColleges. Clergy for Enlightened Drug Policy St Luke's Methodist Church Wisconsin Ave. and Calvert St., NW Washington, DC 20007 Phone: (202) 333 4949 Club de Hashischins POB 313 Old Bridge, NJ 08857-0313 Internet: hash@whitebase.ukp.com Columbia University Harm Reduction Education Session (CUHRES) 203 Ferris Booth Hall Columbia University New York, NY 10027 Internet: (til May 95) C/- Noah Ben Potter<nbp2@columbia.edu> Notes: An undergraduate discussion group addressing societalresponses towards "problem behavior," at-risk populations,possible ways of "deinstitutionalizing" individuals. Community for Creative Non-Violence 425 Second Street, NW Washington, DC 20001 Phone: (202) 393 1909 Community Improvement, Inc. 104 E. Fowler Ave, Suite 203 Tampa, FL 33612 Phone: (813) 931 8028 Cures Not Wars 9 Bleecker Street New York City, NY 10012 Phone: (212) 677 7180 (answering machine) Notes: Focussed on `harm reduction. Organizes the annual `Stop the Drug War' rally and concert in New York'sWashington Square Park in May. Dallas/Fort Worth NORML PO Box 280586 Dallas, TX 75228-9186 Phone: (214) 502-4211 (Dana George) Daytona Beach Hemp Awareness Council PO Box 10384 Daytona Beach, FL 32120 Delaware Valley NORML 154 Uploand Ave Horsham, PA 19044 Des Moines Area Greens PO Box 25058 West Des Moines, Iowa 50265 Phone: (515) 270 8791 (Greg Nepstad) Drug Policy Foundation 4455 Connecticut Ave NW, Suite B-500 Washington, DC 20008-2302 Phone: (202) 537 5005 Fax: (202) 537 3007 Internet: 76546.215@compuserve.com, DPLetter@aol.com Notes: With donations of $25 or more you get a year'ssubscription to The Drug Policy Letter. Drug Policy Foundation (New York office) 888 Seventh Ave, Suite 1901 New York, NY 10106 Phone: (212) 887 0685 Fax: (212) 489 8455 Drug Reform Coordination Network (DRCNet) (also Foundation for Drug Policy Awareness) PO Box 381813 Cambridge, MA 02238-1813 Phone: (617) 648 2655 Fax: (617) 648 2713 Internet: drcnet@netcom.com Notes: Publishes "The Activist Guide" monthlynewsletter, and sends frequent announcements to its "rapid response team" by post,e-mail and fax. Full membership $25/year, $18 for newsletter only, $10 for rapidresponse team only, all material free by e-mail. DRCNet seeks local-action coordinators and volunteers for educational outreach andcoalition building activities. Last contact: Mar 95 DU NORML Student Government Office DUC -- North 2055 East Evans Denver, CO 80210 Phone: (303) 778 7574 (Todd Hall) Duke-CAN PO Box 92266 Durham, NC 27708 Internet: David Shaner Lebauer (President)<dsl4@acpub.duke.edu> End Drug Crime PO Box 1623 Albany, NY 12201 Phone: (518) 434 3279 Families Against Destructive Drug Rehab (FADD) 4654 Dower Drive Ellicott City, MD 21043 Families Against Mandatory Minimums (FAMM) 1001 Pennsylvania Ave., NW, Suite 200-S Washington, DC 20004 Phone: (202) 457 5790 Fax: (202) 457 8564 (Julie Stewart - President) Notes: National grassroots network working to overturnmandatory sentencing. In Oregon, contact is Lorraine Heller (292 5364). Family Council on Drug Awareness PO Box 71093 Los Angeles, CA 90071-0093 Phone: (213) 288 4152 Farmville BACH c/o Peter Gillis Longwood College Farmville, VA 23909 F.E.A.R. 265 Miller Avenue Mill Valley, CA 94941 Phone: (415) 388 8128 Internet: k.bergman@genie.geis.com Notes: While not specifically a drug law reform organisation,FEAR opposes the Civil Forfeiture laws which have been imposed inthe name of the "War on Drugs". Last contact: Jan 95 Flint Hills NORML SGS Union PO Box 70 Kansas State University Manhattan, KS 66502 Phone: (913) 532 5254 (Terry Weber) Florida Legalization Organization c/o Michael Geison PO Box 350 LaCrosse, FL 32658-0350 (Mchael Geison) Notes: Working to relegalize cannabis through publiceducation, Voter registration, and statewide hemp rallies. Foundation for Drug Policy Awareness (see Drug Reform Coordination Network) Freedom Fighters of America 235 Park Ave. So., 5th Flr. New York, NY 10003 Friends of Hemp PO Box 981 Mars Hill, NC 28754 Phone: (704) 652 8919 Fully Informed Jury Association (1 - National HQ) PO Box 59 Helmville, MT 59843 Phone/Fax: (406) 793 5550 or (800) TEL JURY (Don Doig, Larry Dodge, Kathy Ballard) Notes: Not explicitly a drug law reform group, the FIJApromotes awareness of the rights of Juries to judge the law itself. Fully Informed Jury Association (2) 4730 W Northern #1063 Glendale AZ 85301 Phone: (602) 930 1268 Fully Informed Jury Association of Iowa (Iowa FIJA) John Hartog PO Box 16223 Des Moines, Iowa 50316 Phone: (515) 262 4660 The Future of Freedom Foundation PO Box 9752 Denver, CO 80209 Gainsville NORML / Florida Legalization Organization PO Box 350 La Crosse, FL 32658-0350 (Michael Geison) Georgia NORML (aka St Petersburg NORML) PO Box 821 Lithia Springs, GA 30057 Phone: (404) 739 1870 (James Bell) Green Panthers! P.O. Box 9845 Washington D.C. 20016 Phone: (202) 363 0068 Fax: (202) 265 1078 (Loey Glover, Terry Mitchell - National Coordinators) Notes: We are the ONLY militant resistance to the War onDrugs. NOTE: Above address/phone may no longer be correct.Apparently the new phone number is: (513) 522 6264. GVSU NORML Student Activities Office Kirkhof Center Grand Valley State University Allendale, MI 49401 (Dave Speas) Hager for Congress, c/o Libertarian Party PO Box 636 Bloomington, IN 47402-636 Internet: hagerp@moose.cs.indiana.edu Notes: Paul Hager is a candidate for the Libertarian Party, and is pushing hemp law reform as a major element in hiscampaign. Hawaii NORML PO Box 2056 Pahoa, Hawaii 96778 Phone: (808) 965 8600 Fax: (808) 965 6242 (Roger Christie) Help Eliminate Marijuana Prohibition 5632 Van Nuys Blvd. Van Nuys, CA 91401 Hemp Advocates PO Box 10176 South Bend, IN 46680 Hemp Coalition, The PO Box 2382 Albany, NY 12220 Hemp Environmental Activists PO Box 4935 East Lansing, MI 48826 Phone: (517) 484 8287 (Don Patterson) Notes: We work for industrial uses of hemp, marijuana formedicine, and personal privacy rights. Hemp Hemp Hooray! c/o Craig Howard PO Box 1912 Mason City, IA 50401 Phone: (515) 696 5755 Hemp Renaissance Marin County, California Phone: (415) 721 1936 Internet: c/- pearl@crl.com Hemptek Industries Inc PO Box 27809 Dept HT-4C San Diego, CA 92198-1809 HJA NORML PO Box 11 Hollidaysburg, PA 16648-0011 (J.S. Vipond) Hoosier Cannabis Relegalization Coalition PO Box 5325 Bloomington, IN 47407 Internet: hagerp@iuvax.cs.indiana.edu (Paul Hager or Dennis Withered) Houston NORML PO Box 1952 Bellaire, TX 77402 Phone: (713) 465 8418 (Rich Potthoff) Human Environmental Mandate Proponents 1004 E. Preston St. Baltimore, MD 21202 Phone: (410) 547 6706 Modem: (410) 685 2894 (Larry Monoghan) Idaho BACH 3310 Driftwood Dr. Coeur d'Alene, ID 83814 Phone: (208) 773 3974 (Tom Klein) Indiana NORML, Inc. 3601 N. Pennsylvania St Indianapolis, IN 46205 Phone: (317) 923 9391 Fax: (317) 924 2920 (Dana York, Steve Dillon) Indianapolis NORML 3746 North College Avenue Indianapolis, IN 46218 Illinois Drug Ethics Alliance PO Box 4205 Urbana, IL 61801 Phone: (217) FOR JOSH (367 5674) Internet: Joshua Sloan <jsloan1@prairienet.org> Notes: Pro-relegalization. Illinois Marijuana Initiative / Illinois NORML PO Box 2242 Darien, IL 60559 Phone: (708) 836 8426 Internet: mmonningh@igc.apc.org, mrosing@igc.apc.org Institute for HEMP PO Box 65130 St. Paul, MN 55165 Phone: (612) 222 2628 Internet: insthemp@igc.apc.org (John Birrenbach) International Society for Individual Liberty 1800 Market Street San Francisco, CA 94102 Phone: (415) 864 0952 Fax: (415) 864 7506 Internet: 71034.2711@compuserve.com [71034,2711 viaCompuserve] (Vince Miller, Jim Elwood) Notes: Promotes liberty in 80 countries. Produces literatureseries including "Ending Our Drug Nightmare" and"Looting of America". Iowa Grassroots Party / Ames NORML PO Box 1136 Ames, IA 50014 Phone: (515) 233 6081 (Dr. Derrick Grimmer) Notes: Iowa's largest vote-getting 3rd party since itsinception in 1990. Iowa NORML / Iowans for Medical Marijuana Carl E. Olsen PO Box 4091 Des Moines, IA 50333 Phone: (515) 243 7351 Internet: carlolsen@dsmnet.com, iowanorml@commonlink.com, 73043.414@compuserve.com, Carl_E._Olsen@commonlink.com Note: Iowa NORML publishes a quarterly newsletter. Island Group 1803 Mission St. Suite 175 Santa Cruz, CA 95060 Phone: (408) 427-1942 Kalamazoo Cannabis Action Network C/- Western Michigan University Faunce Student Services Box 84 Kalamazoo, MI 49008 Lawrence, KS NORML PO Box 442478 Lawrence, KS 66044 Phone: (913) 832-9074 Internet: David Almquist <lawnorml@databank.com> Notes: We publicly protest the laws against hemp everySaturday night and noon on Sundays in downtown Lawrence with an array ofsigns including "Honk For Hemp". Last contact: Jan 95 Legalize? SIG PO Box 3240 Charlottesville, VA 22903 Internet: jeg5s@uva.PCmail.virginia.edu Notes: This is a MENSA Special Interest Group, open only toMENSA members. Libertarian Party 1528 Pennsylvania Ave. SE Washington, DC 20003 Phone: (202) 543 1988 or (800) 682 1776 Notes: USA's 3rd largest political party, pro-legalizationplatform. Libertarian Party of Iowa PO Box 1041 Waterloo, Iowa 50704 Phone: (319) 235 2894 Fax: (319) 232 8407 (Randy Herod) Little Sisters of the Mother Herb Route 1 Box 2142 Crewe, VA 23930 (Sandy Hayer) Phone: (804) 645 1038 Lone Reefer, The PO Box 515 Harmony, PA 16037 Phone: (412) 766 1842 Louisiana Cannabis Action Network 1025 Foucher New Orleans, LA 70115 Phone: (504) 899 1960 Last update: Apr 95 Los Angeles NORML 8749 Holloway Drive West Hollywood, CA 90069 Phone: (213) 652 8654 (Bruce Margolin) Maine Vocals PO Box 189 Anson, ME 04911 (Don Christen) Mankato State NORML PO Box 3663 Mankato, MN 56002-3663 (Ed Kroce) Notes: Active NORML chapter at a southern Minnesotauniversity. Working on informing the public, elected officials, and makingmarijuana relegalization a public debate. Marijuana Policy Project PO Box 77492 Washington, DC 20013 Phone: (202) 462 5747 Fax: (202) 232 0442 Internet: MPProject@AOL.COM Notes: The MPP's mission is to provide the marijuanalaw-reform movement with full-time, organized lobbying on the federal level.Membership dues are $50 annually or $5 monthly. Members receive themonthly newsletter, "Marijuana Policy Report." Last contact: Feb 95 Marylanders for Drug Policy Reform 2499 Davidsonville Road Gambrills, MD 21054 Phone: (410) 721-0129 Massachusetts Cannabis Reform Coalition (MASS CANN) 1 Homestead Road Marblehead, MA 01945-1122 Phone: (617) 944 2266 (CANN) (Bill Downing, Steven Epstein) Medical Marijuana Restoration Association 3745 17th St. San Francisco, CA 94114 Phone: (415) 864 1961 (Dennis Peron) Michigan Hemp Coalition PO Box 4935 East Lansing, MI 48826 Phone: (517) 484 8287 (Dan Patterson) Notes: MHC is a coalition of all the hemp groups in Michigan. Mid-South Tennessee NORML PO Box 254 Pulaski, TN 38478 Phone: (615) 565 3898 (Kenny Breeding) Milwaukee NORML 207 E Buffalo Street PO Box 92251 Milwaukee WI 53202 Phone: (414) 273-HEMP (Tom Scannell) Minnesota Grassroots Party PO Box 6197 Minneapolis, MN 55406 Phone: (612) 722 4477 Fax: (612) 729 2048 (Steve Anderson) Internet: stevea@geom.umn.edu Notes: Minnesota's largest vote-getting 3rd party since its inception in 1986. Last contact: Mar 95 Minnesota NORML PO Box 80522 Minneapolis, MN 55408 Phone: (612) 822 3396 Fax: (612) 777 4853 (Tim Davis) Notes: Affiliate of national NORML, active in publicoutreach, lobbying, and relegalization agitation. Missouri NORML 15 N. 10th Street Columbia, MO 65201 Phone: (314) 443 6866 Fax: (314) 443 1413 (Dan Viets) Mood For A Day POB 903 West Jordan, UT 84084 Phone: (801) 254 0278 Notes: Local hemp group, publishes a quarterly tabloid,"Regrowth", subs. $5 MOTHERS AGAINST MISUSE and ABUSE (M.A.M.A.) 2255 State Road Mosier, OR 97040 Internet: mama@igc.apc.org Notes: Founded in 1982 - Approach based on personal responsibility and informed decision making. Last Contacted: July 93 Movement Support Network Center for Constitutional Rights 666 Broadway, 7th Floor New York NY 10012 Multidisciplinary Association for Psychedelic Studies, Inc.(MAPS) 1810 Tippah Avenue Charlotte, NC 28205 Phone: (704) 358 9830 Fax: (704) 358 1650 Internet: RICKMAPS@aol.com, st.maps@cybernetics.net Notes: A non-profit organisation of scientists and otherresearchers interested in the study of psychedelic drugs and theireffects. National Drug Strategy Network 1899 L Street, Suite 500 Washington, DC 20036 Phone: (202) 835 9075 Fax: (202) 833 8561 Note: We publish "NewsBriefs," a monthly newsletterwith news about drug abuse, drug enforcement, and drug policy from around theworld. National Organization for the Reform of Marijuana Laws(NORML) 1001 Connecticut Avenue, NW, Suite 1119 Washington, DC 20036 Phone: (202) 483 5500 Fax: (202) 483 0057 1-900: (900) 97 NORML [$2.95/minute] Internet: natlnorml@aol.com (Richard Cowen - Executive National Director) Notes: Oldest and most active drug reform organization. Nevada NORML Sean B. Kind 4542 E. Tropicana Ave. Box 142 Las Vegas, NV 89121 (702) 698-1500 Notes: Newly organized and eager to grow! New Age Patriot PO Box 419 Dearborn Heights, MI 48127 Phone: (313) 563 3192 (Bruce W. Cain) New Jersey NORML PO Box 680 Navesink, NJ 07752 Phone/Fax: (201) 827 4780 [(800) 742 2002 in New Jersey andPhiladelphia] (Ken Krug) New Options Inc PO Box 19324 Washington, DC 20036 Phone: (202) 822 0929 No More Drug War Foundation PO Box 18780 Denver, CO 80218 NORML Colorado 137 W. County Line Rd. #500 Littleton, CO 80126 Phone: (303) 470 1100 (Mark Culverhouse) NORML Green Bay PO Box 22081 Green Bay, WI 54305 Phone: (414) 498 0648 (Bobbie Brien) Notes: Working for the legalization of hemp/pot. Northcoast Ohio NORML PO Box 771154 Cleveland, OH 44107-0049 Phone: (216) 521 WEED (John Hartman) Internet: john4norml@aol.com Notes: Promotes annual freedom festival to benefit NORML,conducts rallies, offers legal referrals and drug test info. Meets the fourthThursday of every month at the Lakewood Public Library, 15425 Detroit Rd,Lakewood, OH. The meetings start at 7pm and are open to the public. North Idaho NORML 3310 Driftwood Drive Coeur d'Alene, ID 83814 Phone: (208) 773 3974 (Tom Klein) North Iowans for Cannabis Education (NICE) PO Box 1912 Mason City, IA 50401 Phone: (515) 696 5755 (Craig Howard) Notes: We found the "Grow Hemp for the War" poster. NAUN C/- NASSEN 55 Dock Street #112 Tacoma, WA 98402 Phone: (206) 272 4857 Fax: (206) 272 8415 (Dave Purchase) Note: Injecting Drug User Group Network, promoting drug lawreform, harm reduction, education, outreach, and research. Ohio Hempery 14 N. Court Street #327 Athens, OH 45701 Phone: (614) 593 5826, (800) BUY HEMP [Info Hotline] (Donald Wirtschafter) Notes: Sells a variety of legal hemp products, e.g. paper,linen, twine. Ohio NORML PO Box 36 New Plymouth, OH 45654 Phone: (614) 385 4167 (Cliff Barrows) Ohio University NORML 415 Carriage Hill Drive Athens, OH 45701 Phone: (614) 592 5118 (James Davis) Oklahoma NORML PO Box 12545 Oklahoma City, OK 73157 Phone: (405) 840 4367 (Michael Pearson) Oklahoma Tulsa Chapter NORML 1023 West 23rd Tulsa, OK 74107 Phone: (918) 583 9041 (C. Rabon Martin) Omaha Hemp Movement 3144 N. 57th Street Omaha, NE 68104 PARTIE Party / Save Our Constitution! PO Box 46853 Mt. Clemens, MI 48046 Phone: (313) 463 3486 (Marvin "Marvin Marvin" Surowitz) Notes: People's Alliance to Reform, Transform, and ImproveEverything Partnership for a Free America c/o Sameer Parekh 829 Paddock Lane Libertyville, IL 60048-3743 Phone: (708) 362 9659 Internet: pfa@ddsw1.MCS.COM Partnership for a Lie Free Government PO Box 29 Fairfield, KY 40020 (Chuck Porter) Notes: Supports Gatewood Galbraith for governor, and allpoliticians who will speak the truth. Partnership for a Responsible America (Texas) [Part RATEX] PO Box 926042 Houston, TX 77292 Phone: (713) 683 9639 (Richard Lee) Partnership for a Responsible Drug Policy 792 8th St. Lake Oswego, OR 97034 Phone: (503) 697 3974 (Anthony Taylor) Patriots of Truth for United Earth, The Bob and Peggy Ross Po Box 262 Rose Lodge, OR 97372 Pay for Schools by Regulating Cannabis (PSRC) PO Box 86741 Portland, OR 97286 Phone: (503) 229 0428 Notes: Voter-initated ballot to legalize and tax cannabis inOregon. Last contact: Mar 95 Penn State University NORML 529 South Pugh Street State College, PA 16801 Phone: (814) 867 2266 (Robert Kampia) Pittsburgh NORML PO Box 4839 Pittsburgh, PA 15206 Notes: Affiliated with Pennsylvania NORML. Pot o' Gold Newsletter PO Box 5448 Evanston, IL 60204 Fax: (708) 328 1922 Internet: pfraterdeus@igc.org Progressive Economic Alliances Cultivating Energy PO Box 623 Kula, Maui, HI 96790-0623 Phone/Fax: (808) 878 3630 Project for a Calculated Transition Green Haven Correctional Facility Drawer B Stormville, NY 12582 Quad Cities Hemp Coalition Box 3592 Rock Island, IL 61201 Religious Coalition for a Moral Drug Policy 3421 M St. NW, Ste. 351 Washington, DC 20007 Rocky Mountain HEMP Network (also Green Democrats ofColorado) 1090 S Wadsworth Blvd #D Lakewood, CO 80226-4308 Phone: (303) 838 1235 Saint Paul NORML PO Box 2865 St Paul, MN 55102 Phone: (612) 776 5467 Saint Petersburg Association for Cannabis Emancipation(S.P.A.C.E.) PO Box 505 St. Petersburg, FL 33737 Last update: Apr 95 San Diego NORML 4895 Guymon St. San Diego, CA 92102 Phone: (619) 263 5733 (Joe Cravotta) San Diego County NORML PO Box 171396 San Diego, CA 92197 Phone: (619) 281 8586, (619) 571 0088 Internet: sdnorml@pro-harold.cts.com (Charles Blue) San Diego Hemp Council Internet: sdhc@pro-harold.cts.com Sanduski County NORML PO Box 282 Freemont, OH 43420 Phone: (419) 334 8215 (Doug) Santa Rosa Junior College Hemp Club Address mail to: Santa Rosa Junior College Attn: Student Activities Office / Hemp Club 1501 Mendocino Avenue Santa Rosa, CA 95401 Save Our Constitution (1) PO Box 3079 Ann Arbor, MI 48106 Phone: (313) 746 9670 Save Our Constitution (2) PO Box 4935 East Lansing, MI 48826 Save Our Liberties 187 Acalanes Dr. #14 Sunnyvale, CA 94086-5520 Phone: (415) 964 3655 Notes: Sells "End the Drug War" Stamps forenvelopes (Not postage stamps). SIUC NORML Office of Student Development Student Center, SIUC Carbondale, IL 62901 Phone: (618) 529 4821 (Drew Hendricks, Jerome Handler [anthroplogy] - CampusAdvisor) Notes: Campus-based education about civil rights aspects ofmarijuana issue. Sonoma Civil Rights Action Project PO Box 410 Cazadero, CA 95421 Phone: (707) 847 3642 (Carol Miller) South Bend NORML PO Box 10176 South Bend, IN 46680 Phone: (219) 233 6581 [SG]; (219) 287 9809 [PS] (Sean Gloster, Pete Szaday) Southern California NORML PO Box 71093 Los Angeles CA 90071-0093 Phone: (213) 288 4152 (Lenny Shaw) Stop Forfeiture of Children's Homes PO Box 91 Waterbury, VT 05676 (Dr. Kathleen DePierro) Students for Drug Policy Reform University of Washington HUB 207 Box 121 FM-25 Seattle, WA 98195 Students for the Legalization of Marijuana (aka University of Illinois NORML) PO Box 4205 Urbana, IL 61801 Phone: (217) 352 4367 (Joshua Sloan) Susquehanna Valley NORML PO Box 10505 Harrisburg, PA 17105-0505 Phone: (717) 697 4255 (Casey) SVA Freedom Fighters 209 E. 23rd St. New York, NY 10010 Phone: (212) 679 7350 ext. 206 (Happy) Texas Hemp Campaign (aka Texas NORML) PO Box 13549 Austin, TX 78711 Phone: (512) 441 4099, (512) 837 4674 Internet: thc@hitex.austin.tx.us (Joe Ptak) Notes: Branches at Corpus - (512) 882 3009, Houston - (713)683 9639, and San Antonio - (512) 654 8720. Therapeutic & Ecological Applications of Cannabis Hemp(TEACH) PO Box 1297 Youngstown, FL 32466 (Robert Lawrence) Tide Water NORML PO Box 8861 Virginia Beach, VA 23450 Phone: (804) 425 9978 (Karen Trimper) TN NORML RR 1 Box 47A Goodspring, TN 38460-9801 Tree Free EcoPaper 121 S.W. Salmon, Suite 1100 Portland, OR 97204 Phone: (1-800) 775 0225 Internet: treefreeeco@igc.apc.org Notes: Wholesale suppliers of hemp paper and hemp pulp.Samples and analysis certificates available. Truth In Marijuana Education (TIME) PO Box 7036 Chico, CA 95927 Phone: (916) 345 1154 (Ed Ostler) Notes: Not for profit, hemp info. publisher/distributor. Notethat _High Times_ gives the address as PO Box 2036, Zip code 95972- this may be incorrect. Tucson Hemp Coalition Box 78093 Tucson, AZ 85703-8093 UB NORML SUNY at Buffalo Student Association 111 Talbert Hall Amherst, NY 14260 UMSOM (aka Michigan NORML) 11280 McKinley Taylor, MI 48180 Phone: (313) 287 9077 (Chuck Kyle) Union County NORML 271 Indian Trail Unionville Road Indian Trail, NC 28079 Phone: (704) 821 8478 (Jerry Morse) University of Kansas NORML (KUNORML) PO Box 45 Lawrence, KS 66044 Phone: (913) 841 8278 (Laura Green) Internet: kunorml@falcon.cc.ukans.edu Last contact: Jan 95 University of Kentucky HEMP Student Organizations Office 9 Student Center Lexington, KY 40526 Phone: (606) 258 8227 Internet: bmkrem00@mik.uky.edu or lmcost00@ukpr.uky.edu University of Massachusetts at Amherst Cannabis ReformCoalition (UMACRC) SAO mailbox #2, 415 Student Union Building, UMass, Amherst, MA 01002 Phone: (413) 546-3413 (Aaron Wilson) Internet: verdant@titan.ucs.umass.edu Notes: Non-students welcome... drop in! University of Minnesota NORML CMU 235 300 Washington Ave. SE Minneapolis, MN 55455 Phone: (612) 673 9412 [Marni Frish] Fax: (612) 777 4853 (Marni Frish, Matt Neis) Notes: Promotes marijuana legalization. US HEMP 461 W. Apache Trail, Suite 130 Apache Junction, AZ 85220 Phone: (602) 983 7065, +1 (800) 501 HEMP Internet: ushemp@ibm.net Notes: Manufacture of hemp buttonfly jeans, willie nelsonline, Vans Hemp tennis shoes, jean jackets, shorts. Call for freecatalog of hemp goods. Vermont FEAR (Forfeiture Endangers American Rights) PO Box 537 Waitsfield, VT 05673 (Denny Lane) Notes: Community awareness, public forums, grassrootsorganizing. Vermont Legislative Liason RR #1 Box 638 West Charleston, VT 05872 (Daniel Shea) Phone: (802) 895 4173 Vermont Vocals 19 Bay St. Newport, VT 05855 Virginia BACH Route 1, Box 2142 Crewe, VA 23930 Phone: (804) 645 1038 (Lennice Werth) VPI and SU NORML PO Box 654 Blacksburg, VA 24063 Phone: (804) 953 9189 Internet: norml@vt.edu or samills@vt.edu Notes: Registered student organization; an affiliate of NORML Last contact: May 95 Washington Citizens for Drug Policy Reform PO Box 1614 Renton, WA 98057 Phone: (206) 622 1456 Fax: (206) 682 9937 Internet: 3281350@mcimail.com Notes: Executive Director - Hal Nelson; Attorney - JeffSteinborn; Business Manager - Tom Cluck; Technical Director - Gerald X.Diamond. Washington Hemp Education Network (W.H.E.N.) PO Box 1217 Olympia, WA 98507 Phone: (206) 589 8981 Internet: 72643.3237@compuserve.com Last contact: Jan 95 West Virginia HEMP Inc. 700 Kanawha Dr. Sutton, WV 26601 Phone: (304) 765 7444 (Roger Belknap) William Patterson College NORML 300 Pompton Road Student Government Association Office Wayne, NJ 07470 Phone: (201) 473 2452 (Darrin Feder) Wisconsin NORML PO Box 3481 Madison, WI 53703 Phone: (608) 257 5456, (608) 257 HEMP Internet: bmasel@igc.apc.org (Ben Masel) WWU/NORML Viking Union Box E-9 Western Washington University Bellingham, WA 98225 Phone: (206) 671 8921 Internet: norml@henson.cc.uwu.edu *USA - INDIVIDUALS* Carol Moore PO Box 65518 Washington, DC 20035 Larry Rowland PO Box 4392 Danville, VA 24540-0107 Phone: (804) 793 9509 Sandy Wells Coolidge House 307 Huntington Ave. Boston, MA 02115 Daytime (617)-859-8237 Evenings " " 4921 * * * * * _High Times_ is a monthly magazine produced in the US,devoted to psychedelic drugs and alternative culture issues. Their address is: c/- Trans-High Corporation 235 Park Avenue South New York NY 10003 USA Phone: +1 212 387 0500 Internet: hightimes@igc.apc.org For subscription details, call 1-800-827-0228 within the US. * * * * * Citizens for Truth in Drug Education (Maddi Webster & Steve Drury) P.O. Box 381813 Cambridge, MA 02238-1813 (617) 944-2266 DARE watchdog group Colorado Parents Against DARE (Gary Peterson) 1805 Crestmore Place Fort Collins, CO 80521 (303) 493-2290 North Carolina Parents Against DARE (Steve Wallace) 933-2997 CliffSchaffer's Home Page WT02-B01-27IA031-000652-B039-123http://206.61.184.43:80/schaffer/activist/dearep1.htm 206.61.184.43 19970122125853 text/html 8549HTTP/1.0 200 OKDate: Wednesday, 22-Jan-97 12:58:40 GMTServer: WebSitePro/1.1f (S/N wpo-0deb)Allow-ranges: bytesContent-type: text/htmlLast-modified: Saturday, 28-Dec-96 07:27:19 GMTContent-length: 8332 Speaking Out Against Drug Legalization Contents | Feedback | Search DRCNet Library | Schaffer Library | The Drug Legalization Debate Speaking Out Against Drug Legalization or How to Hold Your Own in a Drug Legalization Debate Introduction by Clifford A. Schaffer What follows in these pages is the Drug EnforcementAdministrations's booklet "How to Hold Your Own In a DrugLegalization Debate" which outlines the top ten reasons whythey think "legalization" is such a bad idea. I willexamine their statements, sentence by sentence, and presentcomments. Readers should note that, while the DEA has written abook on how to survive when defending the War on (Some) Drugs,the DEA has no interest in coming forward to actually engage insuch a debate. An open and honest public debate is the last thething the DEA wants. The DEA's Statement ACKNOWLEDGEMENTS Though compiled from many sources, this guide evolved from asingle event: the AntiLegalization Forum held at the FBI/DEATraining Academy in August 1994. Five major city police officialsprovided invaluable assistance to the project: Superintendent Matt L. Rodriguez, Chicago Police Department; Chief Ruben Ortega, Salt Lake City Police Department; Chief William K. Finney, St. Paul Police Department; Chief Joe Samuels, Oakland Police Department; and Chief Dennis E. Nowicki, Charlotte Police Department. Other participants, whose contributions to the discussions areacknowledged with gratitude, were from: Office of National Drug Control Policy National Institute on Drug Abuse National Families in Action California Office of Criminal Justice Planning Office of Drug Control Policy, State of Michigan Office of the District Attorney, Multnomah County, Oregon Kennedy School of Government, Harvard University BOTEC Analysis Corporation, Cambridge, Massachusetts DEA Headquarters DEA Seattle, Miami, and Chicago Field Divisions Facilitators: Kenneth F. Hickey, Esq., Washington, DC Kunz and Company, Arlington, Virginia The Walsh Group, Bethesda, Maryland LETTER OF INTRODUCTION Dear Reader: You and I are frequently faced with the need to address manyof the positions which are advocated by those calling for thelegalization of drugs. More and more, the debate on legalizationis being given public airing in the media. Average citizens, fedup with crime and drugs, are being told that legalization is areasonable alternative to the crime problem that so manycommunities are struggling against. You and I know that legalization is not an alternative, butrather a surrender which will further reduce our quality oflife. Ninety percent of the American people agree thatlegalization of drugs would complicate an already devastatingsituation. Health and social costs associated with the increasedavailability of drugs would break our economy. Crime would notdecrease. The moral fiber of our country would be torn apart. Those who advocate legalization have many motives. But theyfrequently do not have answers to a lot of the questions we areasking. Legalization is an abstract to many of them. But I cantell you firsthand, from my thirtyfour years' experience as alawenforcement officer at the state level, the damage caused bydrugs is real and lasting. It's not drug laws, or the enforcementof the drugs laws of our nation that are causing harm--it's thedrugs themselves. Because we're often called on to speak to the issues, I askeda number of professionals from the law enforcement, health, andacademic communities to come together for two days to discuss howwe can best address the arguments against legalization. I am wellaware that local law enforcement officials are on the front linein the battle against drug abuse. For that reason I asked severalpolice chiefs to participate in the Quantico Conference to givetheir expertise and guidance as we formulated our response tothese issues. This guide represents most of the issues andarguments raised during that time. This booklet is intended as aresource for you as you are faced with the questions and issuesassociated with the debate on the legalization of drugs. Whilemany professionals participated in the session, the viewsrepresented in this document are the position of the DrugEnforcement Administration. They represent the consensus of theassembled group and without necessarily attributing each andevery position to the personal views of each participant. Please feel free to use the guide in whatever way you feel itis appropriate. The debate on the legalization of drugs cannot bewon if we remain silent. Sincerely, Thomas A. Constantine Administrator Drug Enforcement Administration The Reply to the DEA's Statement REPLY TO THE LETTER OF INTRODUCTION The DEA really has no business spending taxpayer dollars topromote their own political agenda. The DEA acts as lobbyist andpublic relations firm for themselves and other special interestgroups which benefit from the drug war and it should be stopped. In the course of this public advocacy the DEA distorts thetruth on many occasions, lies shamefully at times and drawsinvalid conclusions from what is true. The purpose of thisbooklet was to try to stop the damage being done when the drugwarriors were caught in public spouting the old mythology of thedrug war, but we will demonstrate clear examples of the lies anddistortions here in their book. We agree that the debate on the legalization of drugs cannotbe won by anyone who remains silent. That is why we challenge theDEA to bring forth their best against our best in an open publicenvironment where these issues can be discussed at length. Wehave asked for an open debate on this issue since February 23,1993 when the Resolution for a Federal Commission on Drug Policywas first signed. It is only the DEA who is afraid to debate thisissue in public. We challenge the DEA to show the strength and truth of theirarguments by supporting our call for an objective FederalCommission where all of the issues and evidence can be fullyexamined. If they are right, the evidence will show it. Sincerely, Clifford A. Schaffer Contents | Feedback | Search DRCNet Library | Schaffer Library | The Drug Legalization DebateWT02-B01-28IA031-000652-B039-149http://206.61.184.43:80/schaffer/activist/dearep2.htm 206.61.184.43 19970122125906 text/html 19871HTTP/1.0 200 OKDate: Wednesday, 22-Jan-97 12:58:54 GMTServer: WebSitePro/1.1f (S/N wpo-0deb)Allow-ranges: bytesContent-type: text/htmlLast-modified: Saturday, 28-Dec-96 07:27:15 GMTContent-length: 19653 Why this drug legalization debate guide is necessary Contents | Feedback | Search DRCNet Library | Schaffer Library | The Drug Legalization Debate WHY the GUIDE IS NECESSARY            DEA Statement                         The Facts               This Guide was developed by the     The reason they developed this       Drug Enforcement Administration in  guide was very simple.  They are     response to requests by law         getting beat -- badly -- every time  enforcement executives, community   they show up for a debate.  The      leaders, substance abuse            evidence is simply  overwhelming     prevention counselors, parent and   that our drug policy needs serious   family advocates, and others for    reform, and it is starting to show.  DEA's help in responding to                                              legalization issues and questions.                                       We well understand that responding                                       to these issues and answering the                                        questions can be a challenge.                                            Questions about legalization often                                       touch on many issues: crime,                                             violence, criminal justice and                                           economic costs; health, behavior                                         and development; the quality of                                          family, community and social life;                                       and employment and productivity.                                         Few are prepared to answer such                                          diverse questions thoroughly, let                                        alone stay current on the research                                       and spot the flaws and distortions                                       in others' arguments. Yet,                                               questions are asked and they must                                        be answered. This Guide offers you                                       a strategy and resource for doing                                        so.                                                                      Discussions about legalization are  This is simply not true.  The drug   usually abstract and theoretical,   warriors are losing the public       which suits proponents of           debate on this issue because of the  legalization fine. A dialogue       most concrete, pragmatic reasons.    without boundaries or benchmarks    The drug war is a failure as an      works to their advantage. For       approach to the drug problem and     those engaged in the daytoday work  there is no way to redeem it.  We    of the real solution to America' s  could not afford to pursue this      drug problem--reducing the supply   policy to a successful conclusion,   and the demand for illegal drugs,   even if it was a good idea -- and    as well as addressing the criminal  it is not a good idea.  It isn't a   activity caused by drug             matter of what we want to do         trafficking and use--taking time    anymore, it is a matter of what we   out to discuss legalization         can do.                              questions can be a frustrating                                           undertaking. This Guide offers you                                       the resource information to                                              discuss this issue in a reasonable                                       and informed manner.                                                     THE DEA POSITION            DEA Statement                         The Facts               DEA is unequivocally opposed to     As the DEA itself points out later   the legalization of illicit drugs.  in their book, there is no clear                                         definition of "legalization" but,                                        whatever it is, they are against                                         it.                                                                                                                                               Actually, "legalization" is not the                                      issue, because we really don't know                                      if we will ever do it.  The issue                                        is really whether we need serious                                        reform of the current policy, no                                         matter what that reform may be                                           called.  It would be more accurate                                       to state that the DEA is                                                 unequivocally opposed to any reform                                      at all.                              Legalization in any form would      Whether a drug is perceived as       likely:                             having risks and costs is not a                                          product of the law, but of public    (1) reduce the perception of the    education.  Even if the law was a    risks and costs of use;             major  factor in those perceptions,                                      this still would not be a good                                           justification to throw individual                                        drug users in prison.                (2) increase availability of and    It should first be pointed out that  access to harmful drugs;            the DEA itself admits that it has    (3) increase demand, use, abuse     never had a major impact on          and addiction; and                  availability of drugs in the United                                      States and there is no hope that it                                      ever will.  In point of fact, this                                       policy often makes the illegal                                           drugs more available to                                                  schoolchildren than alcohol is.                                          The availability of alcohol to                                           children was one of the major                                            reasons that alcohol Prohibition                                         was repealed.                                                                                                                                     Whether availability, demand, use,                                       abuse and addiction would increase                                       depends upon what you mean by                                            "legalization".  If you mean that                                        there would be cocaine vending                                           machines alongside the tobacco                                           vending machines, and convenience                                        store clerks would wink as they                                          sold heroin to children in the same                                      way that they wink when they sell                                        tobacco, then drug use might                                             increase.   If the drug laws are                                         somewhat more sensible, there is                                         good evidence to believe that drug                                       use would drop.                      (4) remove the social sanction      There are many ways to have social   against drug abuse that is          sanctions reinforced in legislation  reinforced in legislation.          and everyone would agree that some                                       laws are necessary to achieve best                                       results with the drug problem.  The                                      question is whether it does any                                          good to enforce those social                                             sanctions with prison.  All the                                          evidence says that prison does more                                      harm than good.                      The present social problems in the  The Drug War benefits only two       United States, including crime,     groups of people -- The drug         health problems and poverty, are    barons, and the drug enforcement     substantial and can only worsen if  barons.  For the drug barons, the    drugs become legal. The arguments   drug war guarantees high profits     for legalization are a sad and      with comparatively low risk.  For    bitter offering to the most         the drug enforcement barons it is    vulnerable segment of our           their very livelihood.  It is the    population. Legalization would      reason they can spend billions of    increase risks and costs to         dollars on fancy drug-detecting      individuals, families and           technology, aircraft, and radar      communities--indeed, to every part  balloons, even while the figures     of the nation--without              clearly show that none of these      compensating benefits.              tactics provides any real benefit                                        to the situation.                    Any proposal with the potential to  The DEA has set up a straw man of    do these things is unacceptable.    what they deem "legalization" to     As public policy, it is             be.  In doing so, they have shown    fundamentally flawed.               that they really don't even                                              understand the arguments.  In the                                        fanatical protection of their own                                        interests, they have missed the                                          points entirely.                     WHO/WHEN/WHERE TO USE            DEA Statement                         The Facts               When DEA asked law enforcement      Basically, what the DEA is trying    executives, community leaders and   to say here is that the drug         prevention advocates exactly what   warriors were getting their butts    they want and need to address       kicked pretty thoroughly every time  legalization questions, the         they came out for a public debate    answers were clear. They said, "It  on this issue.  It was a major       is essential that the facts         embarrassment for them to have drug  regarding the true implications of  warriors being struck speechless     the legalization issue be made      and unable to respond every time     known. Help us to explain this      they got into a discussion in front  complex issue to our families,      of a public group. Whenever the      friends and fellow citizens. Put    drug warriors appeared, they would   it in words everyone can            be confronted by people who knew     understand. And give us the         the facts on the issue and made it   support we need to continue to      apparent that the drug warriors did  make the case until it doesn't      not know the facts.                  have to be made anymore."                                                                                    The drug warriors would also be      This Guide is the first step in     confronted by simple undeniable      helping to deliver the credible,    logic:  Even if you assumed the      consistent message about the risks  facts to be as the drug warriors     and costs of the legalization of    have stated them, our drug policy    drugs to people in terms that make  still does not make sense.           sense to them. The                                                       antilegalization message is                                              effective when communicated by                                           representatives of the Federal                                           Government, but takes on even more                                       credibility when it comes from                                           those in the community who can put                                       the legalization debate in local                                         perspective.                                                                                                                                      DEA will undertake the ongoing                                           work of responding to your                                               inquiries, updating and expanding                                        the guide as necessary and                                               evaluating its usefulness and                                            impact. We invite you to provide                                         your views on this publication.                                                                                                                   We hope the Guide will be used in                                        several ways. For local law                                              enforcement executives, community                                        leaders, prevention advocates and                                        others, the Guide should serve,                                          first, as an open invitation to                                          join in making the affirmative                                           case against legalization. Second,                                       it provides background and                                               practical answers to the most                                            commonly asked questions about the                                       legalization of drugs.                                                   REMEMBER            DEA Statement                         The Facts               There are a few things to remember  This is no surprise.  There has      when discussing the legalization    been a concerted media campaign to   issue.                              instil this belief in the American                                       public over the last several         First, according to reliable        decades by the DEA, its              public opinion polls, the majority  predecessors, and its allies.        of the American people and          Everyone should read the references  lawmakers agree that drugs should   listed at the back of the this       not be legalized.                   section just to see what a                                               long-term concerted and malicious                                        propaganda campaign can achieve.                                                                              Second, when discussing             Strangely enough, information is     legalization, it is important that  the one thing that all drug          all available information and       warriors seem to be short on in      experiences are brought out into    debates.  There are very few who     the open. This can be accomplished  can provide even the most basic      by asking the "tough" questions.    facts about the drug problem, such   Some of these questions are listed  as the number of people killed by    on page 8. Insist that any          drugs, the number of people in       discussion be based on a specific   prison, why drugs were made illegal  definition of how legalization      in the first place, etc.  The        should be implemented, not an       problem, in a nutshell, is the       abstract theory.                    ignorance of the drug warriors.      Third, don't lose faith. This is a  This was copied from my Persuasive   long and difficult effort we are    Strategies.  When I first wrote      undertaking to get our issues on    Persuasive Strategies a few years    the table and be heard. Eventually  ago I realized that, at the time,    the climate will change and         it was often hard to get people to   prolegalization arguments will      listen to rational arguments on      again be out of fashion. While the  drug policy.  I wanted to give       debate appears to be cyclical,      reform activists some encouragement  having more resonance in certain    to stay in the game until the        circumstances, we must continue to  debate turned their way, as I knew   impress upon audiences, and         it would.  As it turns out, I        ultimately the American people,     underestimated the whole situation.  that legalization would be a         Reform activists are beating the    devastating defeat to the           snot out of the drug warriors in     commitment that so many have made   every debate and don't really need   to living free, healthy and         a lot of encouragement and "faith."  unfettered in our nation.            I would agree that the drug                                             warriors probably need it.           Contents | Feedback | Search DRCNet Library | Schaffer Library | The Drug Legalization Debate WT02-B01-29IA031-000652-B039-178http://206.61.184.43:80/schaffer/activist/dearep3.htm 206.61.184.43 19970122125919 text/html 29400HTTP/1.0 200 OKDate: Wednesday, 22-Jan-97 12:59:07 GMTServer: WebSitePro/1.1f (S/N wpo-0deb)Allow-ranges: bytesContent-type: text/htmlLast-modified: Saturday, 28-Dec-96 07:27:08 GMTContent-length: 29182 Anti Drug Legalization Forum Contents | Feedback | Search DRCNet Library | Schaffer Library | The Drug Legalization Debate ANTI-LEGALIZATION FORUM            DEA Statement                         The Facts               In August 1994, in an effort to                                          identify compelling arguments                                            against legalization, DEA                                                sponsored a twoday                                                       AntiLegalization Forum at                                                Quantico, Virginia, for experts in                                       the field. Several police chiefs,                                        representatives from Government                                          agencies and private sector                                              authorities gave their time to                                           this important task. The                                                 participants were asked to refine                                        the arguments that can be made                                           against legalization and evaluate                                        ways to address the legalization                                         issue in an effective and                                                meaningful way.                                                          Three groups were formed to                                              discuss various aspects of the                                           legalization debate: Social/                                             Economic issues, Health Effects,                                         and Crime and Violence. All of the                                       arguments espoused by legalization                                       proponents impact on these three                                         areas, and many of the claims                                            outlined in this publication                                             crosscut the topics discussed by                                         the three groups. At the end of                                          the twoday session, group leaders                                        presented the recommendations of                                         each group.                                                              While individual groups arrived at                                       specific conclusions, there were a                                       number of general concerns and                                           ideas raised by all participants:                                         Those speaking against            At one time, drug warriors were      legalization needed to be positive  confident when they spoke about the  and confident about that position.  drug war.  They relied on            Legalization opponents must         inflammatory rhetoric and horror     constantly ask just how many drug   stories to get everyone to believe   addicts will be created under       drugs were bad and, therefore, the   legalization, how the government    best approach to the problem would   will support addicts' habits, and   be to put massive numbers of people  who will pay for the social,        in prison.  Then, about 1989, the    criminal and other costs of         tide began to turn.                  legalization.                                                             Legalization opponents often      This is an extraordinary statement   have a hard time being heard.       considering the fact that they       Although only a small minority of   parade every major drug bust before  academics, social scientists and    the media.  The DEA has always had   other public figures advocate       almost a media monopoly when         legalization, the conference        compared to the voices of reform.    participants felt that the                                               legalization advocates made better                                       use of the media in making their                                         opinions known than the far larger                                       group of legalization opponents. A                                       current climate of frustration                                           with crime, violence and drug                                            abuse is fueling the legalization                                        debate, and accomplishments in                                           controlling drugs do not get much                                        attention. The costs of the fight                                        against drugs are generally not                                          put in perspective, and the costs                                        of inaction are never discussed.                                         Nevertheless, conference                                                 participants agreed that a                                               positive, proactive campaign                                             against legalization can be very                                         effective.                                                                Legalization proponents are       Thank you.                           formidable opponents. The group                                          acknowledged that proponents of     The bit about public relations       legalization are generally          firms is a flat out lie.  Nobody in  wellprepared and credible people    the drug reform movement has the     whose arguments, though             money to afford it.  The movement    compelling, are faulty. Proponents  is made up almost entirely of        effectively use lawyers and public  volunteers.                          relations firms to espouse                                               liberalization of drug policies.                                          Misperceptions drive the debate.  The costs of solving the drug        The legalization debate is being    problem are not too high.  The       driven by the perception that the   costs of solving the drug problem    costs of solving the drug problem   are too high this way.  Everyone     in America are far too high. The    agrees that we should devote         group cited public mistrust of      significant resources to address     government and a perception that    the problem.  We do not believe      federal agencies attacking the      that the single most expensive and   problem are fragmented and have no  least cost-effective approach --     consensus about direction as        prison -- is the best approach.      reasons that the legalization                                            debate rings true with many         The DEA, as it has on many other     people. There are also numerous     occasions, is distorting the truth   misperceptions about the foreign    and outright lying about many        experience relating to drug         aspects of the drug issue in order   legalization and the system of      to advance its own interests.  The   prescription for heroin. Forum      Dutch Government has already filed   participants stressed the need to   an official protest against the      get the real story on the British,  misstatements of the DEA in this     Dutch and Swiss experiments out     booklet.                             into the open.                                                            Americans are frustrated by the   Judge James P. Gray likes to ask     drug problem. While an              audiences how many people believe    overwhelming majority of the        the current drug war is working.     American people are not convinced   On average, he says, about one or    that legalization is a good         two percent will raise their hands.  option, there is a sense of          It is pretty clear to most people   frustration that we have spent so   that this drug war causes more       much money on controlling drug      problems than it solves.             trafficking and use, yet violence                                        and crime continue. The group                                            noted that most Americans                                                erroneously think that                                                   legalization advocates are only                                          suggesting that marijuana be                                             legalized, and are generally                                             unaware of the dramatic impact                                           that legalizing cocaine and heroin                                       will have.                                                                The debate must not take place    This is a curious statement.  The    in the abstract. The debate on      DEA is saying that more than         legalization must be brought down   two-thirds of the people they want   from an abstract concept to a       to prosecute are gainfully           common sense scenario. Audiences    employed, tax-paying adults.  One    need to understand that 70 percent  would have to ask why the            of drug users are employed, and     government would have any interest   that the school bus driver who      in pursuing otherwise law-abiding    drives your children to school      taxpayers.                           could smoke marijuana; that the                                          surgeon who operates on you may     As for people driving your bus, or   have cocaine in his system; and     doing your surgery, there are laws   that the driver in back of you may  and other sanctions in place         be on speed. The debate needs to    against doing anything harmful to    demonstrate graphically how the     others while intoxicated on          common man will be impacted by      anything.  These laws would not      drug legalization.                  change under any scenario.                                                                                                                        Attempting to arrest everyone who                                        ever has a glass of wine is not an                                       effective approach to preventing                                         doctors from performing surgery                                          while drunk.  This is also true of                                       other drugs.                         WHAT MOTIVATES LEGALIZATION PROPONENTS?            DEA Statement                         The Facts               Some of the media, certain          The more interesting study of        quarters in academia and some       motives comes from analyzing the     frustrated Americans see            motives of those who have supported  legalization as an option which     these laws throughout history.  It   should be discussed. The panel      is apparent from the history of      discussed some of the factors       these laws that they were based on   possibly motivating advocates of    racism, ignorance, and the           legalization in order to            promotion of special interests.      appreciate the complexity of the    Everyone should read the history of  debate. The group noted that many   these laws to understand how we      who advocate legalization are       came to be where we are today.       attempting to "normalize" the                                            behavior of drugtaking and that                                          many are people who have tried                                           drugs without significant adverse                                        consequences.                                                            Others see potential profit in      And still others believe that        legalizing drugs and still others   government should abandon policies   simply believe that individual      which were based on ignorance,       rights to take drugs should be      fraud, and racism from the very      protected. The group also           beginning.  It also appeals to       acknowledged that the legalization  people who think that government     concept appeals to people who are   should not undertake to do anything  looking for simple solutions to     that is patently impossible.         the devastating problem of drug                                          abuse.                                                                   QUESTIONS TO ASK            DEA Statement                         The Facts               There was consensus among the                                            participants at the                                                      AntiLegalization Forum, too, on                                          the need to ask a number of                                              questions of those proposing                                             legalization. Too often, the                                             specifics of how to implement a                                          system for distribution and sale                                         of legalized drugs are never                                             discussed. Instead simplistic                                            rhetoric is used to deflect                                              serious consideration of the many                                        questions that must be thought                                           through before one can evaluate                                          the ramifications of their                                               proposals. This is the great                                             weakness of the prolegalization                                          position. Participants in the                                            Forum suggested that the following                                       questions be asked consistently in                                       order to illustrate the                                                  shallowness of the legalization                                          concept.                                                                 Should all drugs be legalized ?     The question is not whether any                                          drugs should be "legalized" because                                      the DEA itself states further down                                       in this book that there is no real                                       definition of "legalization."  Is                                        alcohol legal?  In some senses it                                        is, and in others it is not.  The                                        same is true of many other drugs.                                        If the DEA is right, we will never                                       "legalize" any of these drugs, so                                        they miss the point to focus on                                          "legalization."                                                                                                                                   The real question is prison.  Right                                      now we are embarked on a course                                          which will incarcerate millions of                                       people who, in the view of many of                                       the prison wardens in this country,                                      don't need to be in prison.  We are                                      turning loose violent felons so we                                       can incarcerate more drug users.                                         With these laws, we have the                                             opportunity to imprison literally                                        millions of people.  We must decide                                      how many millions of people we are                                       going to put in prison to make this                                      policy work.                                                                                                                                      As a personal matter, I don't much                                       like cigars.  I think they are                                           addictive, dangerous, smelly, and                                        disgusting. I cannot understand why                                      anyone would want to walk around                                         with one of those things stuck in                                        their face,  and I make my feelings                                      known to anyone who lights one up                                        in my presence.  At the same time,                                       I don't want to put George Burns in                                      prison.                                                                                                                                           No matter what policy we may                                             devise, or what name we may call                                         it, it is an undeniable truth that                                       putting people in prison does no                                         good at all.                         Who will determine which segments   Who determines the access to drugs   of the population will have access  now?                                 to legalized drugs?                 Under "legalization" it would be                                         the same people who do it for                                            alcohol and tobacco.                 Will they be limited only to        Are they limited to people over      people over eighteen ?              eighteen now?                                                                                                                                     Every major proposal for reform                                          assumes that minors should not have                                      access to drugs.  This is one of                                         the major reasons that many people                                       would like to see reform, because a                                      more sensible policy would do a                                          better job of keeping drugs away                                         from children.                       Will cocaine, heroin, LSD and PCP   Are they available now?  As the DEA  be made available if people         itself admits, their efforts have    request them?                       never had any major effect on                                            availability of drugs and it is                                          unlikely that they ever will affect                                      the drug market.                     Who will sell drugs? The            Who sells them now?                  Government? Private companies ?     You can't think of anyone who could                                      do a better job than the current                                         sellers?                             And who is liable for damages       The rules for liability should be    caused by drug use and the          consistent for all drugs.  If you    activities of those taking drugs?   get hit by a drunk or stoned                                             driver, it doesn't matter to you                                         which chemical caused the problem.                                       The damage is done in either case,                                       and should be addressed the same                                         under law.                           Who will collect the revenues       Who collects them now?               generated by the drug sales?        We have funded the richest criminal                                      organizations in the history of the                                      world with this policy. It is time                                       to take the money out of their                                           hands with a more sensible policy.   How will a black market for         The same way it is controlled for    cheaper drugs be controlled ?       alcohol and tobacco.                 Who will bear the costs to society  Under the current system the         of increased drug use?              taxpayers bear the entire cost, and                                      this system uses the single most                                         expensive, least cost-effective                                          approach to the problem -- prison.                                       For the same money it takes to                                           catch, try, and convict one drug                                         offender and to hold them in prison                                      for five years, we can provide                                           treatment or education for more                                          than one hundred people.  Which do                                       you think is the better deal?        How will absenteeism and loss of    It should be addressed the same way  productivity be  addressed by       it is for alcohol, tobacco, or any   business?                           similar problem.                     Will the local drug situation in a  Who dictates where drugs are sold    community dictate which drugs are   now?                                 sold where?                         The community itself should dictate                                      these matters, as they do with                                           liquor and tobacco outlets.          How will society care for and pay   First, there is no real evidence     for the attendant social costs of   that drug use would increase under   increased drug use, including       a more sensible policy.              family disintegration and child     Society is paying these costs        neglect?                            already.  Reform would seek to                                           reduce those costs by using                                              approaches which are more                                                cost-effective than prison.  Prison                                      does not do anything to address                                          these problems.                      Will people still need              This is a separate issue and,        prescriptions for currently         whichever way it goes, will not      controlled medications, such as     make much difference to the          antibiotics, if drugs are           fundamental problems of our current  legalized ?                         drug policy.  Antibiotics are an                                         entirely different class of drug                                         with an entirely different set of                                        uses and associated problems.                                            Therefore, it would be appropriate                                       to have a different policy for                                           them.                                Will legal drugs require            That depends on what you mean by     prescriptions?                      "legal".  For example, both alcohol                                      and penicillin are "legal" but have                                      different requirements for                                               purchasing them.                     Can anyone, regardless of physical  Who can purchase them now?           or medical conditions purchase                                           drugs?                              Can anyone, regardless of physical                                       or medical conditions purchase                                           alcohol or tobacco?  Alcohol and                                         tobacco are the big killers by a                                         wide margin. If we can manage to                                         find a workable policy for alcohol                                       and tobacco, then the other drugs                                        will be easy.                        How can we deal with the influx of  We won't have to.  The rest of the   people to the United States who     western world is going toward        are seeking legal drugs?            "legalization" faster than we are.   Can we begin a legalization pilot   Yes.  As the New York City Bar       program in your neighborhood for    Association recommended, we should   one year?                           allow states and communities to                                          determine their own approach to the                                      problem, as they do for alcohol, so                                      that we might have a number of                                           different programs from which to                                         draw ideas and information.  The                                         one thing we should not do is to                                         stay locked in to a single national                                      policy which -- by definition --                                         cannot work.                         Should the distribution outlets be  Where are the distribution outlets   located in the already              located now?                         overburdened inner city?                                                                                     Matters affecting the inner city                                         should be decided by the people in                                       the inner city.                      Contents | Feedback | Search DRCNet Library | Schaffer Library | The Drug Legalization Debate WT02-B01-30IA031-000652-B039-205http://206.61.184.43:80/schaffer/activist/claim1.htm 206.61.184.43 19970122125929 text/html 34107HTTP/1.0 200 OKDate: Wednesday, 22-Jan-97 12:59:19 GMTServer: WebSitePro/1.1f (S/N wpo-0deb)Allow-ranges: bytesContent-type: text/htmlLast-modified: Saturday, 28-Dec-96 07:28:34 GMTContent-length: 33889 Claim I - Crime, Violence and Drug Use Go Hand in Hand Contents | Feedback | Search DRCNet Library | Schaffer Library | The Drug Legalization Debate How to Hold Your Own In a Drug Legalization Debate THE TEN CLAIMS DEA Statement The three groups discussing legalization at Quantico touchedon a number of significant issues. It was evident to theparticipants that the prolegalization arguments have remainedfairly consistent over the years and that there are ten majorclaims that can be made in opposition of legalization. The Facts The participants have missed the point again. The argumentshave changed over the last few years in particular, which is whatbrought them to Quantico in the first place. DEA Statement We have attempted to provide the ten simple, compelling claimsto help you frame your arguments against legalization. The claimsare backed up by facts, quotes and statistics. Periodically,these will need to be updated to ensure that the most currentinformation is being used to craft arguments againstlegalization. The Facts In this booklet, the DEA puts its arguments on the line. Whenthese ten claims are gone, it will have no more argument forcontinuing this drug war. DEA Statement CLAIM I: CRIME, VIOLENCE AND DRUG USE GO HAND IN HAND The Facts In this claim, the DEA does the first of its major distortions- the lumping together of all drugs into the same group.Different drugs have different effects and, for some drugs, thereis clearly very little association with violence. Marijuana andtobacco are two examples of drugs with little reason to believethat they are connected to violence. The DEA does not mentionhemp (marijuana) in this Claim so we must assume that they agreethat this argument would not apply to hemp (marijuana) in anycase. Even if we accepted the DEA's arguments that drugs, and notprohibition, causes violence, the best way to reduce the crimeand violence would be to reduce the drug use. There is noevidence that throwing people in prison is the most effective wayto reduce drug use. All the evidence shows that treatment andeducation are more cost-effective. DEA Statement Proponents of legalization contend that if drugs werelegalized, crime and violence would decrease. They believe thatit is the illegal nature of drug production, trafficking and usethat fuels crime and violence. They state that turf wars, gangactivity and drugrelated crimes are the result of the illegalnature of the drug trade. Proponents state that users commitcrimes to pay for drugs now because they cannot easily obtainthem. If drugs were legal, they say, the enormous profitsassociated with drugs because of their illegal status wouldevaporate and, once gone, the black market and criminal activityassociated with drugs would also be eliminated. The Facts If this was really the number one concern of the DEA then theyshould be advocating tough prison sentences against alcohol. Of all psychoactive substances, alcohol is the only one whose consumption has been shown to commonly increase aggression. . . . Alcohol drinking and violence are linked through pharmacological effects on behavior, through expectations that heavy drinking and violence go together in certain settings, and through patterns of binge drinking and fighting that sometimes develop in adolescence. . . . Illegal drugs and violence are linked primarily through drug marketing: disputes among rival distributors, arguments and robberies involving buyers and sellers, property crimes committed to raise drug money and, more speculatively, social and economic interactions between the illegal markets and the surrounding communities. . . . Psychoactive Substances andViolence, published by the Department of Justice, Series:Research in Brief, February 1994 The image of the insanely violent drug user has been a commonargument for drug prohibition since the earliest days of the lawswhen the New York Times published front page articles about"Negro Cocaine Fiends, New Southern Menace", and quoteda sheriff saying, "Those cocaine niggers sure are hard tokill." (NY Times, February 17, 1914) It is an image whichhas been used to justify the cruelest kinds of responses tosocial problems, as shown by the sheriff's own words. It neverdid have any basis in fact. The Department of Justice's own research clearly shows thatthe only real connection between illegal drugs and violence isthe violence created by the fact that it is illegal. This is thesame kind of violence that we saw with respect to alcoholProhibition with the wars between rival alcohol distributors. Itwas during this period that the Thompson submachine gun became asymbol of gangs and Prohibition. All of that ended whenProhibition ended. Violent crime dropped 65 percent in the yearProhibition was repealed and it continued to drop every yearthereafter until World War II. (Need citation from Ethan N. onthis one.) We could expect similar results from the repeal ofdrug Prohibition. DEA Statement Participants in the AntiLegalization Forum, who are experts incrime and violence, disagreed strongly with the notion that crimeand violence would be reduced if drugs were legalized. It iswidely claimed by those advancing the case for legalization thatcrime is largely committed by drug traffickers protecting theirturf. Sadly, it is the experience of many local police officersthat crime is committed not only because people want to buydrugs, but more often because people use drugs. There is nodenying the fact that drug use changes behavior and exacerbatescriminal activity. The Facts The Department of Justice's own studies of the issue disagree.See the information presented above. DEA Statement The experts also believe that legalization will lead toincreased availability of drugs, which will, in turn, lead toincreased use. The use of drugs, especially cocaine, crack,methamphetamine, and PCP is often associated with violentcriminal behavior. There is ample evidence which demonstrates thelinks between drugs, violence and crime, and the links between acurrently legal substance--alcohol--and crime is well documented.Police can attest to the fact that alcohol plays a significantrole in domestic violence cases. Drug use would only swell thestatistics regarding crime, even if the drugs were legallypurchased. The Facts The Department of Justice's own studies of the issue disagree. DEA Statement Legalization proponents ignore the fact that the peoplecommitting violent crimes are career criminals who will not stoptheir illegal activities once drugs are legalized; they willinstead seek new sources of illicit revenue. Criminal activitywould not be reduced as a result of drug legalization any morethan gangster activity disappeared after the Repeal ofProhibition. The Facts This is the argument that if we "legalized" drugsthen the criminals would just find another line of work. There isnothing else which offers the opportunity to get rich so easily.By comparison, all the other crimes are hard work. The DEA says that criminal activity would not be"reduced" because gangster activity did not"disappear" after the repeal of Prohibition. Of course,anyone who has seen "The Untouchables" should know thatgangster activity was significantly "reduced" after therepeal of Prohibition, even if it did not "disappear".Therefore, we could expect similar results again. This is an interesting argument. We must keep drugs illegalbecause it gives work to criminals who might be doing somethingmore dangerous if we did not. That is, having these people selldrugs is a good thing because it keeps them out of biggertrouble. Relatively speaking then, selling drugs is not so bad asother potential crimes so we should make sure they keep doing it. Of course, then the question becomes: What would happen if weactually did stop the flow of drugs? Would we have to startmanufacturing drugs and distributing them through these samecriminals just to keep them from doing something worse insociety? According to this argument, we are better off if the drug warnever does succeed. DEA Statement The group discussed the fallacy that legalizing drugs wouldeliminate the black market environment which seems to fuel thedrug trade and its attendant violence. The existence of a blackmarket is heavily dependent on the parameters set by thelegalizers: which drugs would be legal, the potency level ofdrugs and the age at which legal drugs could be purchased. Ifdrugs were legal for persons over 18, for example, drugtraffickers would still target those 17 and younger; if onlymarijuana were legalized, drug traffickers would continue totraffic in heroin and cocaine. The Facts Who do the drug traffickers target now? What drugs do theytraffic in now? No sensible person pretends that any drug policy is going tosolve all the problems related to drugs. That is clearlyunrealistic. At the same time, there is no reason to undertakepolicies, such as we have now, which only make the situationworse. Let's face it. The DEA never has had any effective controlover the drug markets and they never will. By taking thisapproach the DEA has insured that only the outlaws will havecontrol of drug sales and distribution. DEA Statement Some facts which help to confirm the observations of the forumparticipants may be used in debates:  A report in the Journal of the American Medical Association(7/6/94) reports that cocaine use is linked to high rates ofhomicide in New York City and that "homicide victims mayhave provoked violence through irritability, paranoid thinking orverbal and physical aggression which are known to bepharmacologic effects of cocaine." The Facts The DOJ's own studies, mentioned above, tell a differentstory. What the DEA is alluding to here in the last part of thisparagraph is the fact that people are more likely to be victimsor homicide than to be perpetrators of homicide while under theinfluence of cocaine. The same statistic is true of alcohol. Whatit means is that people who get stoned on anything sometimes dostupid things, such as getting themselves killed. This is evenmore true of alcohol, but does not make a good reason to throwpeople in prison for drinking wine or beer. DEA Statement  An April, 1994 report titled "Violent Drug RelatedCrime" compiled by Drug and Crime Data Center andClearinghouse indicates that drugs are used by many offenderscommitting crimes. In 1991, the following percentages of Stateprison inmates involved in violent offenses reported that theyhad used drugs at the time the offense was committed. Violent Offenses: 28% Homicide: 28% Sexual Assault: 20% Robbery: 38% Assault 23% The Facts The Drug and Crime Data Center and Clearinghouse reports thatthey have no publication with this title. The Sourcebook ofCriminal Justice Statistics of 1992 lists the breakdown of druguse during commission of violent offenses. The figures showsthat, with the exception of robbery, about 75 to 90 percent ofall the reported drug use was use of alcohol, not illegal drugs.For robbery, the figures are roughly equal. People who commit violent crimes are likely to have a lot ofproblems in their lives, including use of illegal drugs as wellas higher rates of use of alcohol and tobacco. That doesn'tnecessarily mean that one problem is causally related to another. Even if we assumed, as the DEA implies, that all of this wasdue to illegal drugs, they don't mention comparison data for thenumber of people who took whatever drug and did not commit aviolent crime. Even if we assumed the DEA is right, there is no evidence thatthe best way to control the problem is to put people in prison. DEA Statement  Data from the National Institute of Justice (US Departmentof Justice) Drug Use Forecasting (DUF) program underscore thecrimedrugs link. Of a sample of males arrested in 24 US cities in1991, the percent testing positive for at least one drug in theDUF survey ranged from 36% in Omaha to 75% in San Diego. Amongfemale arrestees, the percent testing positive for any drugranged from 45% in San Antonio to 79% in Cleveland The Facts The data of the Drug Use Forecasting program is interestingbut it does not underscore the crime-drugs link. The data aresimply measures of the number of people arrested who had drugs intheir system. There is no similar comparative data on people whowere not arrested, or did not commit crimes. It is also a long way from showing any causal relationshipbetween drugs and crime except, perhaps, for the fact that peoplewho are stupid enough to get severely drunk or stoned are proneto do stupid things. That would not make it a good idea to havedrug prohibition any more than the fact that we arrest people whoare drunk and disorderly makes it a good idea to have alcoholprohibition. DEA Statement  A May 1993 Bureau of Justice Statistics report states that"Drug use was common among inmates serving time forburglary, robbery or drug offenses. Among inmates serving asentence for burglary or robbery, about 6 in 10 inmates had useddrugs in the month before the arrest for the current offense, andabout 4 in 10 were under the influence at the time of theoffense." The Facts The number of inmates who used drugs in the month before thearrest is as irrelevant as the number who drank a beer during themonth before the arrest. It should be noted that being under the influence of drugs isa convenient excuse which seems to suit everybody involved in acriminal prosecution. The defendant can plead that he wasn'thimself because he was out of his mind on drugs and thereby playon the court's sympathies for leniency. The prosecutors can pointto another horrendous drug problem, which suits their interestsas well. DEA Statement The same study indicates that female inmates were more likelythan male inmates to have used drugs in the month before theoffense (54% versus 50%) and to have been under the influence atthe time of the offense (36% versus 31 %). The Facts How does this show that we ought to have a general program toimprison women who use drugs? DEA Statement Another finding of the study indicated that among 18-49 yearold males, those who had used alcohol, cannabis and cocaine atsome point during the past year were ten times more likely tocommit a violent act (26.1 percent versus 2.7 percent) than thosewho used none of the above. The Facts The DEA conveniently ignores the fact that alcohol has thehighest association with violence and that cannabis (hemp) hasnone. The DEA contends that, because someone had a beer up to a yearago, they are potentially violent today. There is no evidence of a causal relationship here at all.Even if there was, there is no evidence that prison would be thebest way to control drug use. DEA Statement  Mitchell S. Rosenthal, M.D., president of a major New YorkCity drug treatment center, Phoenix House, and chairman of theNew York State Advisory Council on Substance Abuse, notes thatone of the basic contentions of advocates of legalization is thatdrug users are essentially normal people. Actually, Dr. Rosenthalsaid in a speech in 1993, drugs undo the bounds that keep manyseemingly normal people on an even keel. "The treatmentcommunity does not contend that society is at risk from thebehavior of all drug abusers or even the great majority ofthem," he said. "The case for prohibition rests on thesubstantial number of abusers who cross the line from permissibleself-destruction to become 'driven' people, who are 'out ofcontrol' and put others in danger of their risk taking, violence,abuse or HIV infection." The Facts The DEA argues that drug users are not "essentiallynormal people", even while they state that at leasttwo-thirds of them are gainfully employed taxpayers. As for undoing "the bounds that keep many seeminglynormal people on an even keel" and all the other problemsmentioned, these problems are equally true of alcohol. Yet theydo not recommend that we bring back Prohibition of alcohol. Again, the DEA attempts to lump all drugs together, as if theyall had the same effects. General statements about"all" drugs are intentionally misleading. DEA Statement  The International Association of Chiefs of Police publisheda report in 1993 titled "Violent Crime in America." Itstates "Drug abuse and crime, both violent and nonviolent,are linked. National Crime Victimization surveys in 1989 and 1990revealed over 2,000,000 crimes committed by offenders under theinfluence of drugs or alcohol...this represented 36% and 34% oftotal violent crime recorded by the surveys." The Facts The important phrase here is "drugs or alcohol". Thetable below shows that alcohol's association with violent crimeis far greater than the association of all illegal drugscombined. The biggest problem is alcohol, and yet no one issuggesting that we have a war on booze. Again, the DEA attempts to lump all drugs together as if theywere all equally responsible for the problems. It isirresponsible and misleading to lump all drugs together,particularly in view of the large role that alcohol plays in thefigures. DEA Statement  Bureau of Justice Statistics surveys indicate that"25% of convicted inmates in jails, 33% of state prisoners,and 40% of youths in stateoperated facilities admit being underthe influence of an illegal drug at the time of theiroffense." (BJS, Drug and Crime Facts, 1992) The Facts One reason is that a large number of them are in jail forselling illegal drugs. Again, it is misleading to lump all drugs together as if theywere all equally responsible and to imply a causal relationship. The more complete figures, in the table below, show a somewhatdifferent picture. DEA Statement  Data from Bureau of Justice Statistics Surveys show that77.7 percent of jail inmates, 79.6 percent of State prisoners,and 82.7 percent of youth in longterm public juvenile facilitieshad used drugs the The Facts One reason is that a large number of them are in jail forillegal drug offenses. This what the DEA did not tell you. Convicted jail inmates under the influence of drugs or alcoholat the time of the current offense.                        Percent of convicted jail inmates under the    influence of:                   Most Serious             (All        Alcohol        Both        Total    Offense                Illegal)        Only                              Drugs Only                                         Violent Offenses          8.8          30.7         16.1         56.6        Homicide              5.5          49.5         13.7         68.7        Sexual Assault        3.5          21.1         21.1         45.7        Robbery              17.7          18.1         17.3         53.1        Assault               4.5          44.3          9.8         58.7        Other violent        10.0          21.8         27.3         59.2    Property Offenses        18.2          17.9         12.8         48.9    Drug Offenses            28.6          7.3          12.3         48.2    Public-Order              6.4          54.1          9.6         70.1    Offenses                                                                 From: Sourcebook on Criminal Justice Statistics, 1992, Table6.54, page 603. DEA Statement Some Effects of Illegal Drugs The Facts The DEA's table of the effects of illegal drugs is a notableexample of their failure to consider the whole picture. The tabledoes not include any information on the effects of either alcoholor tobacco for comparison, even though these drugs are clearlythe bigger problems in our society. Some of the information in the table the DEA presented is, ofcourse, patently wrong but, in the interest of brevity, we willforgo the detailed rebuttal of the information in this table. DEA Statement                     Short-Term Effects      Duration of  DEA View of Risk   Acute        of                 Drug Type      Desired        Other          Effects      Dependence         Heroin         euphoria       respiratory    3 to 6       physical - high                   pain           depression     hours        psychological -                   reduction      nausea                      high                                             drowsiness                                     Cocaine       excitement     increased      1 to 2       physical                          euphoria       blood          hours        possible                          increased      pressure                    psychological                     alertness,     increased                   high                              wakefulness    respiratory                                                                  rate                                                                         nausea                                                                       cold sweats                                                                  twitching                                                                    headache                                       Crack cocaine  same as        same as        about 5      same as cocaine                   cocaine        cocaine        minutes                                        more rapid                                                                   high than                                                                    cocaine                                                       Marijuana      euphoria       accelerated    2 to 4       physical  unknown                 relaxation     heartbeat      hours        psychological                                    impairment of               high                                             perception,                                                                  judgement,                                                                   fine motor                                                                   skills, and                                                                  memory                                         Amphetamines   euphoria       increased      2 to 4       physical                          excitement     blood          hours        possible                          increased      pressure                    psychological                     alertness,     increased                   high                              wakefulness    pulse rate                                                                   insomnia                                                                     loss of                                                                      appetite                                       LSD            illusions and  poor           8 to 12      physical  none                    hallucinations perception of  hours        psychological                                    time and                    unknown                           excitement     distance                                                      euphoria       acute                                                                        anxiety,                                                                     restlessness,                                                                sleeplessness                                                                sometimes                                                                    depression                                     The Drugs the DEA Did Not Include                                        Alcohol        euphoria       poor           2 to 4       physical - high                   excitement     perception of  hours        psychological -                   relaxation     time and                    high                                             distance                                                                     impairment of                                                                perception,                                                                  judgement,                                                                   fine motor                                                                   skills, and                                                                  memory                                                                       respiratory                                                                  depression                                                                   nausea                                                                       drowsiness                                                                   headache                                                                     death from                                                                   overdose                                       Tobacco        relaxation     nausea         1 to 2       physical - high                                  headache       hours        psychological -                                  lung cancer                 high                                             throat cancer                                                                Central                                                                      Nervous                                                                      System damage                                                                death from                                                                   overdose                                       AN1142 Sources NIDA, Heroin, NIDA capsules, August1986; DEA, Drugs of abuse, 1989, G R Gay, 'Clinicalmanagement and chronic cocaine poisoning Concepts, components andconfiguration, Annals of emergency medicine, 11(10); 562572 as cited in NIDA, Dale D Chitwood, Patterns andconsequences of cocaine use, in Coca, America: Epidemiologic and clinical perspectives, NicholasJ Kozel and Edgar H Adams, eds, NIDA research monograph 61, 1985; NIDA, James A Inciardi, Crackcocaine inMiami, in The epidemiology of cocaine u abuse, Susan Schober and Charles Schade, eds, NIDAresearch monograph 110, 1991; and NIDA; ManjL NIDA Capsules August 1986 Contents | Feedback | Search DRCNet Library | Schaffer Library | The Drug Legalization Debate WT02-B01-31IA031-000652-B039-223http://206.61.184.43:80/schaffer/activist/claim2.htm 206.61.184.43 19970122125938 text/html 13352HTTP/1.0 200 OKDate: Wednesday, 22-Jan-97 12:59:29 GMTServer: WebSitePro/1.1f (S/N wpo-0deb)Allow-ranges: bytesContent-type: text/htmlLast-modified: Saturday, 28-Dec-96 07:27:57 GMTContent-length: 13134 Claim II: We have made significant progess in reducingdrug use. Contents | Feedback | Search DRCNet Library | Schaffer Library | The Drug Legalization Debate DEA Statement CLAIM II: WE HAVE MADE SIGNIFICANT PROGRESS IN REDUCING DRUGUSE IN THIS COUNTRY. NOW IS NOT THE TIME TO ABANDON OUR EFFORTS. The Facts No one has suggested that we should "abandon" ourefforts to reduce the problems associated with drugs. What wehave suggested is that we should make those efforts morecost-effective. Prison is not cost effective. Even if we accepted this claim as true, there is no evidencethat the progress in reducing drug use was at all due to thenumber of people put in prison. In fact, the evidence clearlyshows that the number of people put in prison could not have hadenough of an impact on the average white, middle-class drug userto make any difference at all in drug use. If there was anyactual reduction in drug use (and not just in"reported" drug use) then it seems clear that it musthave been due to other factors. DEA Statement Legalization advocates claim that the fight against drugs hasnot been won, and is, in fact, unwinnable. They frequently statethat people still take drugs, drugs are widely available, andthat the changing that fact is a lost cause. Legalization is thealternative. The Facts It should be clear to anyone that the war on drugs has notbeen won. There is no credible evidence anywhere which wouldsuggest that the war could be won by the current methods, and theDEA has presented no such evidence here. The alternative is tolook for a better approach, whatever we might choose to call it. DEA Statement The conference participants disagreed with the notion that weshould wave the white flag of surrender because people still takedrugs. The experts contended that there have been many positivedevelopments over the past fifteen years in reducing drug use,and stated that the good news is often given short shrift. Ourdrug problem did not happen overnight, and it will take a numberof years to eliminate the problem. Legalization is not analternative to combating the drug problem. The Facts As happened with Vietnam, there comes a point when mustrecognize that we never should have taken this course in thefirst place. It is not surrender to end the war on drugs, it is arecognition of what we should have recognized years ago. DEA Statement The United States faces a number of problems today which, likeour drug problem, are not susceptible to easy solutions,including illegal immigration, declining education quality andpublic health problems. Should we just post signs on our bordersthat we've given up and invite a tide of immigrants in? Should wedeclare that our education system has been a failure and givechildren a permanent vacation from school? Should we throw up ourhands in frustration about AIDS and stop searching for a cure? Ofcourse not. Americans are a people committed to solving problems,not running from them. Why should our commitment to stoppingdrugs be any different from our approach to other nationalinterests? The Facts There is no doubt that there are many difficult problems. Ofall the problems mentioned, the DEA does not propose to solve anyof them by throwing people in prison. The final question here asks for a commitment to"stopping drugs" which, the DEA itself admits, isclearly impossible. DEA Statement Furthermore, ask proponents of legalization just what they areproposing be legalized. Just marijuana? Marijuana and heroin? Alldrugs? And for what age group? Will children be able to buy drugs? Will prescriptions be necessary? And what will they tolerate as the price of legalization? Apermanent underclass of drug users? Will a 10% increase in the number of traffic fatalities beaccepted? What about 50%? Would they be relieved to know that their child care providerhad been smoking legally-purchased marijuana? How manyborderbabies is too many? The Facts The question really is: for what drugs are we willing to throwpeople in prison? Can children buy drugs now? Obviously, they can because onlythe outlaws control distribution of drugs. The questions try toinsinuate that people in favor of reform want to distribute drugsto children. Nothing could be further from the truth. Thequestion also conveniently ignores the fact that the number onedrug killer, tobacco, is still freely available to childrenthrough vending machines. There are any number of possible policies, besides the currentone. The question of whether prescriptions would be necessaryshould not stop us from recognizing that prison is unnecessary. We already have a permanent underclass of drug users. There is no evidence that the number of traffic fatalitieswould change. About half of all traffic fatalities are now causedby alcohol, but the DEA does not propose that arresting all thepeople who drink beer or wine is a sensible solution. The laws and social rules for things such as caring forchildren would not change regardless of the legal status of anydrug. DEA Statement Some facts which help to confirm the observations of the forumparticipants may be used in debates:  The 1993 National Household Survey on Drug Abuse, releasedin July, 1994, demonstrates unequivocally that drug use declinedsignificantly between 1979 and 1993. The Facts The same figures show it is going back up again, particularlyamong children. Those figures show large increases in the lastyear alone -- and the laws have not changed. It must also be recognized that the data gathering methods ofthis survey are open to question. The survey is conducted bycalling people at random on the telephone and asking if anyone inthe household has committed a felony (used drugs) in the past fewweeks or months. Instead of an accurate measure of the amount ofdrug use, it may just be a measure of the number of people whoare stupid enough to answer such a question from a stranger onthe phone. DEA Statement  In 1993, an estimated 11.7 million Americans were currentillicit drug users, meaning they had used an illicit drug in themonth prior to the interview. This represents no change from 1992when the estimate was 11.4 million. The number of illicit drugusers had been declining since its peak in 1979 at 24 million. The Facts The DEA needs to take elementary math again. The figures shownrepresent a rise of 300,000 drug users. The figures show one thing above all else-- there is no way wecan throw that many people in prison, and our jails are fullalready. How many of these millions does the DEA propose that wethrow in prison? The DEA's own figures also clearly show that all of thesupposed decline in drug use has been among casual drug users.Their own figures show that this policy has had no effect on thenumber of hard core drug users, where the problem really lies. DEA Statement  The number of current cocaine users remained at 1.3 millionusers in 1993, the same as 1992. This is down from a peak of 5.3million in 1985. The Facts Does the DEA suggest that we throw all 1.3 million cocaineusers in prison? Since 1979, rates of current illicit drug use have dropped for12 17 year olds, 1825 year olds, and 2634 year olds, but not forthe age group 35 and older. The latest figures show that drug use among these groups hasrisen dramatically again, and yet the laws are just as harsh asthey always were. DEA Statement  Teenage drug consumption, despite recent upturns, is downin the long term. There is an obvious concern in the UnitedStates about the consumption of drugs by teenagers--the adults oftomorrow. Recent upturns demonstrate to us the clear need tocontinue doing what we've done for more than the past decade:combine law enforcement, education, and international efforts toaddress all aspects of the drug situation. The Monitoring theFuture Study, conducted annually by University of Michiganresearch scientists for the US Department of Health and HumanServices, has been tracking the drug consumption of American highschool seniors since the 1970s. In the past few years, the studyhas been broadened to embrace drug use by 10th grade and 8thgrade students as well. The Facts This is obviously wrong. See the latest figures cited above. DEA Statement When the first Monitoring the Future Study was published, 27.1% of the members of the Class of 1975 (eighth and 10th graderswere not surveyed then) reported having used marijuana or hashishin the previous month. The figure for the Class of 1980 was33.7%--which puts that 2.4% figure 13 years later intoperspective. The Facts If the study is looking at the drug use of eighth to tenthgraders then it would seem obvious enough that the campaign toput people in prison would not have had much real effect on thisgroup. This is evidence that any drop in use was not due totougher criminal enforcement. Source 1993 National Household Survey Contents | Feedback | Search DRCNet Library | Schaffer Library | The Drug Legalization Debate WT02-B01-32IA031-000652-B039-249http://206.61.184.43:80/schaffer/activist/claim3.htm 206.61.184.43 19970122125947 text/html 23062HTTP/1.0 200 OKDate: Wednesday, 22-Jan-97 12:59:37 GMTServer: WebSitePro/1.1f (S/N wpo-0deb)Allow-ranges: bytesContent-type: text/htmlLast-modified: Saturday, 28-Dec-96 07:27:51 GMTContent-length: 22844 Claim III: Legalization of drugs will lead to increaseduse and addiction Contents | Feedback | Search DRCNet Library | Schaffer Library | The Drug Legalization Debate CLAIM III: LEGALIZATION OF DRUGS WILL LEAD TO INCREASED USEAND INCREASED ADDICTION LEVELS DEA Statement A cornerstone of the legalization proponents' position is theclaim that making illegal drugs legal would not cause more ofthese substances to be consumed, nor would addiction increase.They claim that many people can use drugs in moderation and thatmany would choose not to use drugs, just as many forego alcoholand tobacco now. The Facts Every major study of drug policy agreed that there is noevidence that drug use would increase with more sensiblepolicies. In fact, they found that drug use would probablydecrease with more sensible policies. They also found that, even if drug use did increase,decriminalization would still be a better approach simply becauseof all the harm caused by the current policy. See the list of theBiggest Studies of Drug Policy, also on these web pages. DEA Statement Participants in the AntiLegalization Forum felt strongly thatwhen drugs are more widely available--as they certainly would beif they were legalized--rates of use and addiction wouldincrease. Legalizing drugs sends a message that drug use (like tobaccoand alcohol) is acceptable, and encourages drug use among peoplewho currently do not use drugs. When the social taboos about premarital sex were removed, thenation's illegitimate birthrate soared. And we are paying dearlyfor it. The Facts All of the arguments here depend upon what you mean by"legalized". No, it does not send any such message, and our society'scampaigns against tobacco are perhaps the best example. And ofcourse, the real question is: How many millions of people do wehave to put in prison to show the right amount of disapproval? This is a "TV-talk-show" argument, which blithelyignores the fact that the illegitimate birth rate is due toproblems much more complex than the taboo on premarital sex. Does this mean that, as a solution, the DEA is proposing thatwe throw people in prison for premarital sex? There are lots ofways to discourage something without throwing people in prison. DEA Statement Look to our history. For years, the United States legallyrefined morphine from opium, and hailed it as a miracle drug.Many soldiers on both sides of the Civil War who were givenmorphine for their wounds became addicted to it. Are we ready formore morphine addicts? Crack addicts? Heroin addicts? The Facts Morphine was first refined when many battle wounds weretreated with simple amputation without anesthesia and a doctorwas considered a good surgeon if he could do the amputationquickly to minimize the pain. In the medical context of that typeof "surgery" and the fact that there were noantibiotics to control infections, morphine was a real miracledrug because it relieved a great deal of suffering. The figures differ on the number of Civil War veterans whobecame addicts, partly because of the difficulty in defining whatan addict is. There was widespread use of these drugs simplybecause there were no regulations at all during this period andthey were included in many common patent medicines, includingremedies for baby colic. There is no evidence that the Civil Warveterans who became addicts were any more of a problem to societythan a modern tobacco addict. The 1905 Pure Food and Drug Act wasthe first law to require manufacturers to state the contents oftheir mixtures on the label. This was clearly a good law becauseit helped consumers make an informed decision. Drug use declinedsteadily between the time the law was passed and 1914, when theHarrison Narcotics Act was passed. See any of the major studieslisted elsewhere in this book for a more complete history of thesubject. DEA Statement Early in the 20th Century, drugs were plentiful, cheap, andlegal in the United States. Some could even be bought from theSears Catalogue. The Facts This is true. DEA Statement But Americans realized that these legalized drugs were harmfulto individuals and society, and drug laws were written. The Facts This is not true. The reasons were more complex than this andwere largely based on racism and ignorance. No evidence waspresented to Congress to show that prohibition was eithernecessary or desirable. No evidence was even presented to showthat these drugs were even medically harmful. In the case ofcocaine and the opiates, it is doubtful if Congress realized itwas passing what would be regarded as a general prohibition onthese drugs because it was phrased as a tax act. In the case ofmarijuana (hemp) it is clear that most members of Congress didnot realize that they were passing a law to prohibit the mostcommon crop in America. These laws were a hoax from the verybegining. DEA Statement CocaCola took the coca out of its popular soft drink andsubstituted caffeine. The Facts This is true. The original name of Coca-Cola was "FrenchWine of Coca -- Invigorating Tonic". It is also true thatthere was a campaign to outlaw caffeine for the same reasons thatcocaine was outlawed. That campaign died when it was realizedthat caffeine was contained in too many common foods, such ascoffee, tea, and chocolate. DEA Statement Legalization proponents would have them put it back, and makeopium as available as chewing gum. The Facts This is a flat-out lie and a cheap, deliberate attempt todistort the arguments. It shows that the DEA has set up"legalization" as a straw man, defined in their ownextreme terms. We do not agree with this extreme policy, or theDEA's extreme definition of "legalization". DEA Statement More recently Alaska decriminalized the personal use of smallamounts of marijuana in the home. The experiment did not turn outthe way legalization proponents had predicted. Although the legalage for using marijuana was 19, adolescents as young as 12 yearsold were using the drug. Alaskans eventually came to therealization that decriminalization did not work, and voted tooverturn the law. The Facts Twelve-year-olds using marijuana (hemp) is nothing new. Iobserved pre-teens using marijuana (hemp) more than twenty-fiveyears ago, and it appeared to me that it was fairly common amongchildren of that age. Decriminalization in any area has neverbeen shown to have any real effect on the use patterns ofmarijuana. The law was overturned because of a massive campaign headed bythen-Drug-Czar William Bennett as one of the cornerstones of hiscampaigns against the evils of drugs. Bennett, at the time, was atobacco addict. DEA Statement The experts believe that legalization of drugs would decreasethe perception of risk currently associated with drug use. The Facts Let's assume that the DEA experts are right. How many millionsof people do we have to put in prison to create the properperception of risk? DEA Statement The group strongly endorsed the notion that the Governmentshould help protect people from substances and activities thatare harmful to themselves the community and society at large. The Facts So why aren't we throwing people in prison for alcohol ortobacco? DEA Statement Some facts which help to confirm the observations of the forumparticipants may be used in debates:  Dr. Herbert Kleber, prominent psychiatrist from YaleUniversity, former Demand Reduction Deputy Director at the Officeof National Drug Control Policy and currently with the Center onAddiction and Substance Abuse at Columbia University, states in a1994 article in the New England Journal of Medicine that clinicaldata support the premise that drug use would increase withlegalization. The Facts Dr. Kleber does not define what he means by"legalization." There are any number of differentpolicies which could be defined as "legalization," eachof which could have widely varying effects. Therefore, all therest of his statements on the subject are essentiallymeaningless. Even if he did define what he means by"legalization", it is not the only option we have fordrug policy. DEA Statement He says: "There are over 50 million nicotine addicts, 18million alcoholics or problem drinkers, and fewer than 2 millioncocaine addicts in the United States. Cocaine is a much moreaddictive drug than alcohol. If cocaine were legally available,as alcohol and nicotine are now, the number of cocaine abuserswould probably rise to a point somewhere between the number ofusers of the other two agents, perhaps 20 to 25 million...thenumber of compulsive users might be nine times higher...than thecurrent number. When drugs have been widely available--as...cocaine was at the turn of the century--both use and addictionhave risen " The Facts See the table below for the latest ratings on the relativeaddictive qualities of drugs. Dr. Kleber does not suggest that the most productive approachto the 50 million nicotine addicts, or the 18 million alcoholics,is to put alcohol or tobacco users in prison. Why not? Drug use was widespread at the turn of the century. Thisstatement ignores the fact that drug use and addiction fellsteadily after manufacturers were required to list theingredients in their products. DEA Statement  England's experience with widely available heroin showsthat use and addiction increase. Great Britain allowed doctors toprescribe heroin to addicts. There was an explosion of heroin useand by the mid-1980s known addiction rates were increasing byabout 30% a year. According to the Lancet, the wellrespectedmedical journal (Lancet, January 9, 1982), 2,657 heroin addictswere registered in 1970 compared with 5,107 in 1980. The Facts By the mid-1980's Great Britain was fully into the Americanstyle drug war so it is apparent that, if there is any connectionbetween the drug war and addiction, the drug war must have madethe problem worse. It is also worthwhile to note that the figures show that thenumber of heroin addicts doubled in ten years, but the numberswere still trivial in comparison to the number of addicts in anycomparable segment of the United States. DEA Statement This was a program in which heroin users needed a doctor'sauthorization to get their drug. What would happen if anyonewanting to try heroin could simply buy it at the governmentstore? The Facts The vast majority of them would throw up after using it andfind they really didn't like the effects. DEA Statement  Alaska tried the legalization experiment and abandoned it.Legalization was given a lengthy try closer to home when theAlaska Supreme Court ruled in 1975 that the state could notinterfere with a person's possession of marijuana in his home forpersonal use. Enforcement was permitted only when the quantitypossessed exceeded four ounces--this in a state that, because ofthe long, sunny days of its brief growing season, produces extrapotent marijuana. The Facts Alaska's ruling applied to personal possession of hemp(marijuana) and use within the confines of one's own home. Thisis a far cry from the "legalization" the DEA talksabout elsewhere. The court decided that the right of privacyprotected the citizen's rights within their own home. All states are capable of producing extra potent marijuana.Alaska is nothing special in this regard. DEA Statement The court's ruling was interpreted by many Alaskans as asignal to light up, and so they did, especially the young ones,even though the ruling was limited to persons 19 and over.According to a 1988 University of Alaska study, the state's 12 to17yearolds used marijuana at more than twice the national averagefor their age group. The Facts It is ludicrous to state that an Alaskan Supreme Courtdecision would be interpreted by anyone as a "signal tolight up." It is highly doubtful if teenagers govern theirbehavior based on Supreme Court decisions. Anyone who wants touse a drug is going to do so regardless of what the Supreme Courtmay have said about it. DEA Statement "The frequency with which marijuana was used within thecurrent sample," the report on the study said,"suggests that it is not an experimental event for manystudents, but that it seems to have become well incorporated intothe lifestyle of many adolescents." The Facts And the DEA suggests that the best way to improve thesestudents lives is to hunt them down and put them in jail to curethem of their lifestyle. DEA Statement Although they historically cling to their personal liberties,Alaska residents voted in 1990 to recriminalize possession ofmarijuana, demonstrating their belief that increased use was toohigh a price to pay for increased personal liberties. The Facts A referendum was passed in 1990 by Alaska voters whichattempted to overturn the Alaska Supreme Court decision. Thereferendum was the result of an intensive, well-funded campaignby then-Drug Czar William Bennett and other drug wars to remove amajor embarrassment to their cause -- the fact that Alaska hadprotected private use of marijuana and Alaskan society had notfallen apart as a result. The courts later threw out the votebecause the issue had been decided on a matter of basicconstitutional protections of privacy, which cannot be voted awayunder Alaskan law. DEA Statement  Will the public support an aggressive marketing approach?While "government drugs" could conceivably be pricedlow enough, perhaps by having taxpayers subsidize them todiscourage a black market, the combination of low price and readyavailability would bring more consumption, more addiction. Wewould have won the battle and lost the war. If they see this asthe probable outcome, the American people can hardly be expectedto endorse a "sell at all costs" policy. The Facts Why should there be an aggressive marketing approach? DEA Statement  Robert L. DuPont, M.D., former director of the NationalInstitute on Drug Abuse, considered the impact legalization wouldhave on use and addiction rates in a paper published in 1994. "Would legalization increase the number of drug users andthe social harm produced by the use of drugs?" Dr. DuPontasked. "The answer to those two questions is simply, 'Yes,it would."' The Facts The answer to this question is simply: What"legalization" are you talking about? Until you definewhat you mean by "legalization" you can't define whatthe likely effect on the number of drug users and social harm. DEA Statement The current global experience with alcohol and tobacco revealsthe downside of legalization clearly, Dr. DuPont said. The Facts This is certainly true, keeping in mind the fact these drugsare only legal under certain conditions. Despite this, Dr. DuPontis not suggesting that we outlaw alcohol and tobacco as the mostappropriate response. Why not? DEA Statement "Legalization of any drugs leads to large increases inthe use of the legalized drugs," he said. "Because mostof the social costs of drugs are not the costs of prohibition butthe costs created by the drug use itself (a point proved beyonddispute by the dismal global experience with alcohol andtobacco), legalization raises the net social costs of drug use. The Facts Even if we assumed this to be true, every major study of drugpolicy has said that the cost of the current policy far outweighsthe other potential costs. DEA Statement "Legalization is an old, siren call which promises toreduce the high costs of drug use, but which abundant evidenceshows would inevitably raise the costs society pays for drug use,not reduce them. We do not need new experiments to make Contents | Feedback | Search DRCNet Library | Schaffer Library | The Drug Legalization Debate WT02-B01-33IA031-000652-B039-277http://206.61.184.43:80/schaffer/activist/claim4.htm 206.61.184.43 19970122130000 text/html 15827HTTP/1.0 200 OKDate: Wednesday, 22-Jan-97 12:59:49 GMTServer: WebSitePro/1.1f (S/N wpo-0deb)Allow-ranges: bytesContent-type: text/htmlLast-modified: Saturday, 28-Dec-96 07:27:44 GMTContent-length: 15609 Claim IV: Any revenues generated by taxing legalized drugswould quickly evaporate Contents | Feedback | Search DRCNet Library | Schaffer Library | The Drug Legalization Debate DEA Statement CLAIM IV: ANY REVENUES GENERATED BY TAXING LEGALIZED DRUGSWOULD QUICKLY EVAPORATE IN LIGHT OF THE INCREASED SOCIAL COSTSASSOCIATED WITH LEGALIZING DRUGS. DEA Statement A favorite argument in support of legalization is thateducation, health care, road building and a wide array of otherworthwhile causes would benefit from the taxes that could beraised by legalizing drugs and then taxing them. The Facts On the whole, it certainly seems better than sending all thatmoney to Colombia. DEA Statement The conference participants were extremely skeptical about theclaim of a large tax windfall, and challenged advocates to provethat the amounts of revenue potentially generated by legalizationwould counterbalance the increased social costs that would resultfrom making drugs legal. When asked for specifics, they have noanswers. Are they taking into account the erosion of the tax base asmore and more citizens are unable to work because of drugaddiction? Add to this loss the cost of health and welfarebenefits for the unemployed. The Facts There is no tax windfall, large or small, right now. The onlyrevenue generated is the revenue generated from money andproperty seizures, which is fraught with its own problems. The DEA has asked the American taxpayers to support anopen-ended program of building more prisons. When they are askedfor specifics, such as how many prisons they propose to build,they have no answers. Does the DEA take into account the erosion of the tax bases bythe fact that -- by their own estimates -- two-thirds of thepeople they propose to throw in prison are gainfully employedtaxpayers? Does the DEA take into account the fact that, oncethese people have a prison record, they may be permanentlyunemployed because no one wants to hire an ex-convict? Puttingpeople in prison doesn't do anything to reduce unemploymentproblems, except for prison guards. DEA Statement Health and societal costs of drug legalization would increase.The panel predicted that drug treatment costs, hospitalizationfor longterm drug related disease, and treatment of theconsequences of family violence would further burden our alreadystrapped health care system. The Facts Every major study of drug policy disagreed with this point.See the list elsewhere on these pages. DEA Statement There is also real reason to believe that liability suitswould be brought against manufacturers and distributors of drugsas damages to individuals increased, thereby increasing the costof products. The Facts As opposed to the current situation, where there is no one tobring a liability suit against. Liability suits have not yet put the alcohol and tobaccoindustries out of business, or made their products too expensive.If this was a real concern, alcohol and tobacco would still bethe major concerns. DEA Statement Ask legalization proponents if the alleged profits from druglegalization would be enough to pay for the increased fetaldefects, loss of workforce productivity, increased trafficfatalities and industrial accidents, increased domestic violenceand the myriad other problems that would not only be high incomeitems, but extremely expensive in terms of social decay. How muchare they willing to pay? The Facts The number of fetal defects caused by alcohol are far greaterthan the number for illegal drugs so this argument is a redherring. If the DEA was really concerned about fetal defects,they would concentrate on alcohol first. The DEA acts like these problems are not here already, andthat the best method of preventing them is to throw people inprison. In every case, these problems are already here, andthrowing people in prison is not the best approach to theproblem. DEA Statement Some facts which help to confirm the observations of the forumparticipants may be used in debates: Dr. William Olson, former Deputy Assistant Secretary of Statefor International Narcotics Matters, outlines the magnitude ofthe social costs borne now by U.S. taxpayers because of drugs. Inhis 1994 essay, "Drug Legalization: Getting to No," heprovides the following:  2560 percent of the homeless are addicts, whosehomelessness is in large part the result of addiction and theirinability to manage money or make rational, reasonable decisions.They are increasingly supported at public expense. The Facts This is the result of the current policy which is, in itself,a good argument against what we are doing. DEA Statement  7580 percent of the 1.2 1.5 million teenage runaways aresubstance abusers, and not because prohibition made them usedrugs or run away. The Facts No, and prohibition didn't keep them from using drugs either.Runaways are usually children who have severe problems at homewhich cause them to engage in all sorts of deviant behavior. Thedrug laws do not do anything to address the underlying problem.The law only makes the runaways' problems worse if they arecaught using drugs. DEA Statement  3050 percent of mental patients are chemical abusers, 5060percent of these crack and cocaine. They are largely on publicsupport. The Facts The only thing this would show is that people with severemental problems are likely to try to self-medicate themselves. Itdoes not show any causal connection between drug use andinsanity, except perhaps that insanity causes greater drug use.It says even less about what would a sensible public policy foraddressing the problem. DEA Statement  As many as 11 percent of young mothers use drugs duringpregnancy. The Facts This is what is happening under the current system. A moresensible approach might reduce the number. DEA Statement  2.5 percent of all live births, some 100,000 babies areborn addicted to cocaine. They have lifelong learningdisabilities and emotional problems. The Facts There is no support for this claim at all and the DEA knowsit. The DEA is lying. DEA Statement  $50 billion is devoted annually to dealing with the healthcare costs of drug addiction and its collateral costs. These willnot disappear with legalization. The Facts Those costs haven't disappeared with prohibition either. Infact, every major study of the subject says that prohibition onlymakes those costs greater. DEA Statement  There are approximately 500,000 heroin and 2 million othersubstance abusers. Their care is increasingly a demand onsociety. The Facts According to the DEA's own figures, shown above, the currentpolicies have had no effect on this problem at all. DEA Statement  There is no way to predict how much revenue would begenerated by the United States Government taxing legalized drugs.Such a scenario depends entirely upon the parameters oflegalization, and what the policy means vis a vis sources ofdrugs. If U.S. farmers were given subsidies to produce drugs (asthey are given subsidies for tobacco) the U.S. taxpayers would beresponsible for paying for these subsidies. If foreign sources ofdrugs (opium or coca) were allowed to supply the raw material forthese products, an elaborate system of tariffs and tradepreferences would need to be established. The Facts It is true that there is no way to predict tax revenues untilone makes some assumptions about "legalization". One ofthe reasons is that the DEA doesn't have a clue how big themarket for drugs really is. This should not stop us fromrecognizing that prison is a net revenue loser. These are curious arguments. They bring up the question ofwhether we should have subsidies for tobacco in the first place,especially in view of the fact that it kills 100 times as manypeople as all the illegal drugs combined. Why does our governmentgive subsidies to tobacco farmers while it throws marijuana(hemp) farmers in prison? Our drug laws plainly make no sense atall. Trade and tariffs would be handled as they would for any othercommodity and the fact that tariffs might be complicated is not agood argument for throwing American citizens in prison. We also have to ask, who controls the trade and tariffs now?And what are the trade and tariff rules now? DEA Statement  Taxes would likely push the cost of the product up. Taxingthe drugs would make them more expensive at the checkout counter.The drug cartels do not provide a share of their receipts totheir respective governments. They are all business. Anyone goinginto competition with them, including the U.S. Government, wouldhave to be all business too, prepared to cut prices, ifnecessary, to stay in the game. The Facts Prohibition pushes the cost of the product up. The maindifference would be that the revenues would not be used to fundother crime. The same arguments were equally true of alcohol during alcoholProhibition. DEA Statement  Legalized gambling has not put illegal gambling out ofbusiness. In fact, legalized gambling has produced a whole newgroup of people who cannot control their need to gamble. Manystates have gone into the gambling business to raise funds forpublic purposes, with some success, although as morejurisdictions get into it the profits decline. Meanwhile, bookiesply their trade as they always have. The reason is the payoffthey offer is better than the legal gambling schemes. For everymillion dollars wagered, that is, they return a higher percentageto the winners. Again, it' s a matter of overhead. The bookiesare not trying to build schools, so they don't have to earmark apercentage of the profits for such endeavors. So long as that isso, they will always have a market that is loyal to them. Thesame situation could logically occur if drugs were legal. The Facts And prohibition has not put the drug dealers out of business,it has only made them richer. In places where gambling is legal, illegal bookies do not havehigher payoffs than the legal gambling schemes, except in thecase of state lotteries which have notoriously poor payoffpercentages. No one contends that any scheme will entirely eliminate theblack market in drugs, and the current policy is the bestexample. However, a better policy could greatly reduce many ofthe problems associated with the black market, as happened withthe repeal of alcohol Prohibition. Contents | Feedback | Search DRCNet Library | Schaffer Library | The Drug Legalization Debate WT02-B01-34IA031-000652-B039-289http://206.61.184.43:80/schaffer/activist/claim5.htm 206.61.184.43 19970122130008 text/html 12457HTTP/1.0 200 OKDate: Wednesday, 22-Jan-97 13:00:00 GMTServer: WebSitePro/1.1f (S/N wpo-0deb)Allow-ranges: bytesContent-type: text/htmlLast-modified: Saturday, 28-Dec-96 07:27:39 GMTContent-length: 12239 Claim V: There are no compelling reasons to prescribemarijuana or heroin Contents | Feedback | Search DRCNet Library | Schaffer Library | The Drug Legalization Debate DEA Statement CLAIM V: THERE ARE NO COMPELLING MEDICAL REASONS TO PRESCRIBEMARIJUANA OR HEROIN TO SICK PEOPLE. The Facts It is quite easy to refute this argument for both drugs. Medically speaking, heroin is simply a stronger form ofmorphine. Therefore, if there is a legitimate medical use formorphine, then there is a legitimate medical use for heroin.Heroin was once used medically in a manner similar to morphineand was even used for pain relief during childbirth. Doctorsstate that heroin is a good drug for medical use because it issafe, powerful, and short acting. Recent research indicates thatpain-killers can be important healing agents after patientsundergo major surgery, because these drugs reduce the stress onthe central nervous system. In some cases, the amount of timerequired to heal can be cut in half. Some research shows that thebest doses of morphine are perhaps ten times what they wereconsidered to be just a decade ago. In the case of marijuana (hemp), there is already an approvedprescription drug, Marinol, which is derived from the primaryactive ingredient in marijuana and used for the conditions forwhich marijuana (hemp) is recommended. Marijuana (hemp) itselfwould not be approved as a prescription drug because of FDA ruleswhich state that a medicine must consist of only the activeingredients and a filler. Therefore, the rules themselvesprohibit the approval of any natural substances such as a plant,even though the active ingredients in the plant and theprescription drug are precisely the same. The question then becomes, why should a sick person pay sixtydollars a pill when they can grow the same medicine in their ownbackyard for free? Some patients report that the homegrown version of themedicine is far superior to the prescription version for a coupleof reasons. One reason is that marijuana (hemp) is often used totreat nausea and it is often hard to keep pills in their stomachwhen they have nausea. Some of them have complained that it isawfully depressing to vomit up a sixty dollar pill. Therefore, itis better if the medicine is smoked because it bypasses thestomach and gets the medicine into the body much more quickly.Another reason that some sick people prefer marijuana (hemp) overMarinol is that Marinol makes them "higher than akite", and they don't want to be high, they just want theirmedical symptoms relieved. By smoking marijuana (hemp), they canlimit the amount of "high" they get. Marijuana (hemp) has traditionally been used in medicines forthousands of years. Prior to 1937, it was the most commonagricultural crop in America and was used for literally thousandsof purposes, including rope, cloth, paper, fuel, and medicine. Itwas prescribed for a wide variety of ailments and was included inup to two-thirds of all over the counter preparations. Prior to1937, cannabis (hemp) was completely unregulated and it wouldhave been impossible to regulate cannabis (hemp) because it was amajor agricultural crop grown nearly everywhere. Cannabis (hemp)derivatives were included in a wide variety of items consumed bythe general public. Despite this widespread, unregulatedconsumption, there were no reported problems. The AmericanMedical Association was opposed to the marijuana (hemp) laws in1937 for these reasons. The promoters of these laws openly liedabout the AMA's attitude toward the law in order to get itpassed. DEA Statement It is often suggested that, even if currently controlledsubstances are not made available to the general public, some ofthem, particularly marijuana and heroin, could be used to relievesuffering. Participants in the AntiLegalization Forum acknowledged thatarguments urging the medical use of marijuana are often used asan entree into the legalization debate. Medical use arguments cangarner public support because they seem harmless enough to theuninformed audience. The experts agreed that these issues areperipheral to the real issue. The Facts The DEA has no business making decisions or statements aboutthe proper medical use of anything. The fact that they do is onlyone more example of what is wrong with our current drug policy. There should be no argument at all that it is up to themedical profession and its patients to define what is, or is not,a proper medical treatment. The police do not have the requiredprofessional knowledge to determine proper medical uses, they donot know what difficulties individual patients may face in theirtreatment or what benefits patients might receive, and they careeven less. It is absurd to pretend that complex medical decisionscan be made for every patient in the United States by anorganization such as the DEA. The problem goes beyond the illegal drugs such as marijuanaand heroin. The problem extends to pain killers of all types ingeneral. The severity of this problem was seen in the recent caseof Florida versus Martinez. Mr. Martinez was a lay AIDS counselor who ran a drug buyersclub for AIDS patients. A drug buyers club purchases medicaldrugs which are available in other countries but not in theUnited States and distributes them to sick people here. Mr.Martinez was charged with distributing morphine without medicaltraining or a license. Mr. Martinez did not deny the fact that he distributedmorphine to people and that he was in violation of the drug laws.His only defense was that his actions were a medical necessity,because of the barbaric policies of the DEA against people whowere in pain. The defense brought forth experts who testified howthe DEA had prosecuted and imprisoned doctors for prescribingTylenol 3 -- Tylenol with codeine -- a drug which is not even aprescription drug except in the United States and South Africa,and the US is the only control in the world which has ever sent adoctor to prison for prescribing it. They testified about AIDSpatients who suffer from a nerve degeneration all over their bodywhich makes them scream in pain every time they are even touched.For many of them, a simple bath can be painful beyond belief, andyet they cannot get pain medication because their doctors areoften afraid to prescribe it because they fear what the DEA coulddo to them. After the jury heard the evidence on the government's drugpolicy, they voted unanimously for acquittal. This trial wasshown on Court TV and has been repeated many times because it isone of the most interesting trials they have ever shown. DEA Statement The medical pros and cons of prescribing marijuana and herointo sick people are best debated by medical professionals. Itshould be kept in mind, however, that marijuana has been rejectedas medicine by the American Medical Society, the AmericanGlaucoma Society, the American Academy of Ophthalmology, theInternational Federation of Multiple Sclerosis Societies, and theAmerican Cancer Society. HHS report Not one American health association accepts marijuana asmedicine. Statements issued by these organizations expressconcern over the harmful effects of the drugs and over the lackof solid research demonstrating that they might do more good thanharm. The International Federation of Multiple Sclerosis Societies,for instance, said in a statement issued by its TherapeuticClaims Committee in 1992: "Further studies are required todetermine whether marijuana has a clinically useful effect onmultiple sclerosis. In view of the possible toxic effects oflongterm use, its use cannot be recommended. In the opinion ofthe committee, there appears to be no generally acceptedscientific basis for use of this therapy. It has never beentested in a properly controlled trial. Longterm use may beassociated with significant serious side effects." Some facts which help to confirm the observations of the forumparticipants may be used in debates:  Under the federal statute known as the ControlledSubstances Act, regulated drugs are divided into categories knownas schedules. In Schedule I, for instance, are drugs with a highpotential for abuse and no currently accepted medical use intreatment in the United States. At the other end of the spectrumis Schedule V, which is for drugs that have a low potential forabuse and have a currently accepted medical use in treatment inthe United States. The Act provides a mechanism for substances tobe controlled (added to a schedule), decontrolled (removed fromcontrol), or rescheduled (transferred from one schedule toanother). Heroin and marijuana are in Schedule I; cocaine, which issometimes used as a local anesthetic, is in Schedule II. Much ofthe debate about medical uses for currently illegal drugsconcerns substituting heroin for morphine and supplying marijuanato AIDS and glaucoma patients or using it to treat side effectsof chemotherapy.  A petition to put marijuana in a less restrictive scheduleof the CSA was rejected by then DEA Administrator John C. Lawn,after public hearings, on December 29, 1989. The United StatesCourt of Appeals ordered further proceedings, however, to clearup what it felt were some ambiguities in the record.Administrator Robert C. Bonner, who succeeded Lawn, complied andissued a new ruling on March 26, 1992. "By any modernscientific standard, marijuana is no medicine, " Bonnersaid. The three judge appeals court upheld the ruling unanimouslyon February 18, 1994. "Our review of the record convinces usthat the Administrator's findings are supported by substantialevidence," the court said, noting the "testimony ofnumerous experts that marijuana' s medicinal value has never beenproven in sound scientific studies." Contents | Feedback | Search DRCNet Library | Schaffer Library | The Drug Legalization Debate WT02-B01-35IA031-000652-B039-307http://206.61.184.43:80/schaffer/activist/claim6.htm 206.61.184.43 19970122130017 text/html 11738HTTP/1.0 200 OKDate: Wednesday, 22-Jan-97 13:00:07 GMTServer: WebSitePro/1.1f (S/N wpo-0deb)Allow-ranges: bytesContent-type: text/htmlLast-modified: Saturday, 28-Dec-96 07:27:34 GMTContent-length: 11520 Claim VI: Legalization and decriminalization of drugs havebeen a dismal failure Contents | Feedback | Search DRCNet Library | Schaffer Library | The Drug Legalization Debate CLAIM VI: LEGALIZATION AND DECRIMINALIZATION OF DRUGS HAVEBEEN A DISMAL FAILURE IN OTHER NATIONS. DEA Statement The Facts The experiences of a number of foreign countries includingGreat Britain, the Netherlands and Switzerland are often cited todemonstrate that other nations have successfully controlled druguse by offering access and areas where drug takers can obtain anduse drugs. Recently, an MTV documentary on the drug issuehighlighted coffeehouses in Amsterdam as a model for controlled,successful environment in which young Europeans can enjoymarijuana. There was also a 60 Minutes segment on the drug clinics inLiverpool, England, a special on the Arts & EntertainmentChannel, and a special on ABC which explored the situation inEurope. Legalization proponents cannot find encouragement in the factthat when drugs were once legal, cheap and available in theUnited States, the impact on society was such that laws wereenacted to make drugs illegal. They ignore our own history andpoint to Great Britain, the Netherlands and Switzerland as freeand open societies where drug use is allowed with no adverseeffects. The Quantico experts believed it is important to shedlight on the foreign experience with increased drug access andliberalized use policies, and explain that this experience hasbeen negative The statement of our own history is plainly false. Interestedreaders should any of the major studies of drug policy listed inthis book. England tried prescribing heroin but gave it up. Until themid1960s, British physicians were allowed to prescribe heroin tocertain classes of addicts. After this experiment, according toJames Q. Wilson in his 1990 article "Against theLegalization of Drugs", "a youthful drug cultureemerged with a demand for drugs far different from that of theolder addicts." The British system didn't work. Addiction levels rose,especially among teenagers, and many addicts chose to boycott theprogram and continued to get their heroin from pushers. In 1983, England began switching over to methadone and stoppeddispensing heroin from the clinics, and that caused even moreaddicts to depart in favor of the real thing. According to thelate John Kaplan of Stanford University, the number of addictsincreased fivefold. James Q. Wilson states that the BritishGovernment's experiment with controlled heroin distributionresulted in, at a minimum, a 30fold increase in the number ofaddicts in ten years. The Netherlands, despite its controlled program, is havingtroubles. Under the socalled "expediency principle"Dutch law protects individuals from prosecution for acts that aretechnically illegal, including the retaillevel sales and purchaseof marijuana and hashish. Dutch police are also instructed toignore streetlevel sales of all types of drugs. The Amsterdam Municipal Health Service showed a rise inhardcore addicts in 1992, attributable to a significant rise inthe local heroin supply which led to a price drop of as much as75%. Switzerland has become a magnet for drug users the world over.One thing small European nations have learned is a littletolerance about drugs brings a lot of unwelcome visitors. In1987, Zurich permitted drug use and sales in a part of the citycalled the "Platzspitz", dubbed "NeedlePark." Five years later the experiment was curtailed afteran influx of addicts and increased violence and deaths. In 1992,Zurich Municipal spokesman Andres Ohler told the New York Timesthat the number of regular drug users at the park had swelledfrom a few hundred in 1987 to 20,000 by 1992. After thePlatzspitz closed, the price of heroin reportedly doubled. RESOLUTION EUROPEAN CITIES AGAINST DRUGS DEA Statement The Facts A number of European cities have taken the initiative oforganizing a Conference for Cities Against the Legalization of Drugs. One of the aimsof the conference is to adopt a resolution to enable towns that have notparticipated in the conference to support its work. Imitation is the sincerest form of flattery. The tide of thedrug policy debate began to turn against the DEA with the adventof the Resolution for a Federal Commission on Drug Policy(sometimes referred to as the Hoover Resolution). A copy of thisResolution and a list of some of the major signers is included inthis book. The purpose of the conference is to increase cooperationbetween cities, to provide inspiration and hope for areas with particularly difficultdrug problems. The signatories to the resolution will affirmtheir decision to fight against the spread of drugs. The DEA apparently thought the Resolution for a FederalCommission on Drug Policy was so important that they figured theyhad to trump up something to counter it. The result is thisreally phony and poorly worded resolution against drugs. It isnotable that the DEA did not name any of the people who signedthis resolution on behalf of their entire city. STOCKHOLM  28TH APRIL 1994 Some facts which help to confirm the observations of the forumparticipants may be used in debates:  In April, 1994, a number of European cities signed aresolution titled "European Cities Against Drugs,"commonly known as the Stockholm resolution. It states: "Thedemands to legalize illicit drugs should be seen against thebackground of current problems, which have led to a feeling ofhelplessness. For many, the only way to cope is to try toadminister the current situation. But the answer does not lie inmaking harmful drugs more accessible, cheaper and sociallyacceptable. Attempts to do this have not proved successful. Webelieve that legalizing drugs will, in the long term, increaseour problems. By making them legal, society will signal that ithas resigned to the acceptance of drug abuse. The signatories tothis resolution therefore want to make their position clear byrejecting the proposals to legalize illicit drugs." It is interesting to note the differences between theResolution for a Federal Commission on Drug Policy and thisresolution. The biggest difference is that the Resolution for aFederal Commission on Drug Policy does not say anything about"legalization" but simply asks for an objective reviewof the evidence. The DEA's resolution does not call for anyobjective review of the evidence and, in fact, rejecting even theidea of a discussion of alternatives. Pointing to the appropriate international treaties whichrequire nations to "protect children from the illicit use ofnarcotic drugs," the signatories state that they"reject all demands for legalizing illicit drugs... Werequest that our Governments respect and with determination applythose conventions and agreements regarding drugs which they havesigned." Again, the DEA's resolution calls for a blind rejection of anyideas but there own, without consideration of any evidence. The cities signing this resolution include: Berlin, Stockholm,Budapest, Dublin, Gdansk (Poland), Gothenburg (Sweden), Helsinki,Paris, Lugano (Switzerland), Madrid, Malmo (Sweden), Moscow,Oslo, Prague, London, Reykjavik (Iceland), Riga (Latvia), St.Petersburg (Russia), Tallinn (Estonia), Valletta (Malta) andWarsaw. It is notable that the DEA does not mention who in thesecities signed on behalf of the entire city. It is also notablethat many of the cities are former Soviet Union cities withlittle experience in these areas.  A study by the Rotterdam Municipal Council shows that thenumber of cocaine users there has risen substantially. About 3.3%of all Rotterdam residents over 15 years of age or approximately12,000 people now use cocaine. Violent crime is also a major problem in the Netherlands. A1992 study of crime victims in twenty (mostly European) countriesranks the Netherlands as the number one country in Europe forassaults and threats. The Dutch Criminal Intelligence Service reported 104gunrelated deaths in the Netherlands in 1992, compared to 73 in1991. Almost all involved drug disputes. Robberies have alsoincreased in each of the four years since 1988. The Netherlands, smaller than West Virginia, has more than 50clinics supplying methadone to heroin addicts, and drug violatorsmake up a large percentage of prisoners in the Dutch prisonsystem.  Zurich authorities moved many addicts to a new site, anearby abandoned railway station, a few blocks north of NeedlePark. Here, addicts receive clean needles and are allowed toinject heroin and consume other drugs. Writing in Drug AbuseUpdate in 1994, Sue Rusche, executive director of NationalFamilies in Action, gave this description of what passersby cansee if they look down from the Kornhaus Bridge: "Most people think shots are bloodless events. A nurseinserts a needle, injects a medicine and you're on your way. Buthere, bright red blood streams down arms, necks, legs, feet andgroins as addicts inject themselves. Festering red and purplesores filled with pus, old blood and filthy scabs stretch fromwrist to elbow, ankle to knee." Contents | Feedback | Search DRCNet Library | Schaffer Library | The Drug Legalization Debate WT02-B01-36IA031-000652-B039-344http://206.61.184.43:80/schaffer/activist/claim8.htm 206.61.184.43 19970122130038 text/html 12517HTTP/1.0 200 OKDate: Wednesday, 22-Jan-97 13:00:26 GMTServer: WebSitePro/1.1f (S/N wpo-0deb)Allow-ranges: bytesContent-type: text/htmlLast-modified: Saturday, 28-Dec-96 07:27:29 GMTContent-length: 12299 Claim VIII: Drug control spending is a minor part of theUS budget Contents | Feedback | Search DRCNet Library | Schaffer Library | The Drug Legalization Debate CLAIM VIII: DRUG CONTROL SPENDING IS A MINOR PORTION OF THEU.S. BUDGET, AND COMPARED TO THE COSTS OF DRUG ABUSE, SPENDING ISMINUSCULE. DEA Statement Legalization advocates claim that this nation has spentbillions of dollars to control drug production, trafficking anduse with few, if any, positive results. They contend that themoney spent on drug control should be shifted to other, moreproductive endeavors. The Facts This whole claim is another curious argument. It seems thatthe DEA is saying, "We don't take very much money in thebigger scheme of things, so leave us alone." From my ownperspective, I still regard several billion dollars as a lot ofmoney. There is no doubt that a lot of money is spent on drugenforcement and there is no doubt that even the DEA has neverclaimed that it ever had any significant effect on reducing thesupply of drugs. If a program to spend several billion dollars isas useless as this one, it behooves us to look for a betterapproach. DEA Statement The truth is, we have made great progress in reducing drug useduring the past 15 years. If the relatively modest outlays ofFederal dollars had not been made, drug abuse and attendantsocial costs would have been far greater. The good news is thatdrug use has declined significantly between 1979 and 1993. The Facts Whether drug use has been significantly reduced is open toquestion, particularly in view of the survey methods used toarrive at such conclusions. Even if we assumed that this statement is true, it would stillleave open the question of whether any other approach might haveproduced better results. That is a question the DEA does not evenwant to consider. DEA Statement The experts participating in the Anti-Legalization forumdisputed the claim that money allegedly saved from giving up onthe drug problem could be better spent on education and socialproblems. When compared to the amount of funding that is spent onother national priorities, drug control spending is minimal.There has been progress in reducing drug use, and the money spenthas been effective and worthwhile. The Facts This argument is illogical. The participants state that themoney could not be better spent on education and social problemsbecause "drug control spending is minimal." Whether thespending is minimal (by their terms) has no bearing on whetherthe spending is wise. DEA Statement On the surface, legalization proponents present an appealing,simple argument that by legalizing drugs we can move vast sums ofmoney from drug law enforcement into solving society's ills. Theyleave unanswered questions about the cost of collecting revenuesassociated with drug sales, or the cost of regulating drugs. They ignore questions concerning the purity, potency andquality of legal drugs, the costs of insuring a safe product, andcosts associated with increased liability litigation. The Facts No revenue is collected from drug sales now, except by outlawdrug dealers. Any collection of tax revenues would be animprovement. There are no standards for purity, potency, or quality nowexcept those established by outlaw drug dealers, and there is noone to sue for an unsafe product. Any legal standards would be animprovement in this area. DEA Statement Ask proponents of legalization for specifics. Would the rawmaterial for these drugs be purchased from traditional sources,or would the United States produce its own marijuana, coca andopium? Would the government pay farmers subsidies to produce ornot produce these crops? Although all of these questions could beresolved, none comes without a price tag. The Facts The United States could easily produce all of its ownmarijuana, as the DEA should know from the fact that it wasAmerica's largest commercial crop before it was outlawed. The Federal Government should not be in the position of payingfarmers subsidies to produce any dangerous, addictive drug,including tobacco. The rules for subsidies should be consistentacross the board. However difficult these questions may be to agree on, it stilldoes not present any evidence that throwing people in prison fordrugs is a good idea. DEA Statement Proponents also conveniently fail to mention that unless drugsare made available to little children, law enforcement will stillbe needed to deal with the sale of drugs to minors. The Facts This is one of the phoniest arguments to come down the pike.No one except the DEA has suggested that drugs should be"made available to little children". We have laws now to prevent the sale of alcohol to minors andthe rules for other drugs should be no different. Law enforcementis needed to deal with the sale of alcohol to minors but it is byno means an overwhelming problem. If the DEA was really concerned about little children, theywould recommend stronger action against convenience store clerkswho sell tobacco to children. An American is about 100 times aslikely to die from tobacco as from any illegal drug, andchildhood is when most of them become addicted. DEA Statement But more importantly, in their simplistic arguments, they omitmention of the atrocious social costs that would be incurred witha larger class of drug users. The Facts No, we freely admit that drugs are going to impose atremendous social cost whatever we do. That is still not a goodreason to undertake actions which are counterproductive, such asprison. DEA Statement Legalization would also result in lost workforce productivityand a resultant increase in the cost of goods. A new class ofunemployables would be created who were unfit to hire because oftheir drug dependence. The Facts There is no evidence for this at all. The DEA proposes thatprison is the best way to keep drug users productive. DEA Statement Health and societal costs of drug legalization would alsoincrease, the panel predicted. Drug treatment costs,hospitalization for longterm drugrelated disease, and treatmentof family violence consequences would further burden our alreadystrapped healthcare system. The Facts The panel came together for the purpose of fighting"legalization" so it is no surprise that they wouldpredict it would be a disaster. It is important to note that theydid no research to back up their prediction and every major studyof drug policy in the last fifty years disagreed with them. DEA Statement There was also no guarantee, according to the group, thatcriminal justice costs would decline if drugs were legalized. Itis possible that law enforcement would be additionally burdenedwith addressing violations of traffic and family violence laws ifmore people had access to drugs. Law enforcement is alreadychallenged by significant alcoholrelated crimes. More users meanmore crimes committed, and incarceration costs would increase. Some facts which help to confirm the observations of the forumparticipants may be used in debates:  In 1995, over $13 billion is being spent by the federalgovernment on drug control, including treatment, education, lawenforcement and international activities.  Drug abuse costs the United States between $60 and $100billion in lost productivity each year. The Facts Most of this cost is caused by alcohol, which the DEA does notaddress at all. Even if all this cost was the result of illegaldrugs, there is still no evidence that throwing people in prisonis the best way to reduce those costs. Does the DEA honestlypropose that the best way to make sure that people are productiveis to throw them in prison? DEA Statement  The Federal Government spends billions of dollars each yearon other national priorities. In Fiscal Year 1995, the FederalGovernment is spending $ 243.4 billion on Defense $ 350 billion on Social Security $ 61.6 billion on Agriculture $ 22 billion on Welfare $ 13.5 billion on Foreign Assistance The Facts And? Not one word here is any kind of an argument in favor ofthrowing people in prison for drugs. Contents | Feedback | Search DRCNet Library | Schaffer Library | The Drug Legalization Debate WT02-B01-37IA031-000652-B040-2http://206.61.184.43:80/schaffer/activist/claim9.htm 206.61.184.43 19970122130117 text/html 7692HTTP/1.0 200 OKDate: Wednesday, 22-Jan-97 13:01:02 GMTServer: WebSitePro/1.1f (S/N wpo-0deb)Allow-ranges: bytesContent-type: text/htmlLast-modified: Saturday, 28-Dec-96 07:27:24 GMTContent-length: 7475 Claim IX: Drug prohibition is working Contents | Feedback | Search DRCNet Library | Schaffer Library | The Drug Legalization Debate CLAIM IX: DRUG PROHIBITION IS WORKING DEA Statement Legalization advocates claim that drug prohibition is akin toalcohol prohibition earlier this century. Their main premise isthat it is impossible to prohibit people from using substancesthat they want to use. The Facts It seems obvious that it is impossible, by the DEA's ownevidence. But there are other reasons as well. Even if it waspossible, we should not undertake actions which do more harm thangood. DEA Statement Participants in the AntiLegalization forum felt thatlegalization opponents should point to the successes ofProhibition and to continuously stress the positive progress thathas been made between 1979 and 1994 in reducing levels of drugabuse. The Facts Does the DEA feel that the "successes ofProhibition" were so great that we should bring backProhibition? Why not? DEA Statement When the Volstead Act was repealed, arrests for alcoholtraffickers disappeared, but arrests of alcohol related incidentsrose, indicating that the prohibition against alcohol had keptpeople from using it. The same will happen if drugs arelegalized. Once drug use is sanctioned by the government, morepeople will use drugs. It is also important to remember that after Prohibition wasrepealed, organized crime branched out into other areas, andthere is every expectation that current drug organizations wouldalso continue and diversify. The Facts After Prohibition was repealed, organized crime lost itssingle biggest source of funding. This is the same argument theDEA made before, that we must keep drug prohibition to keep thedrug dealers employed so they will not do something else. Again,we have to asked what would happen if the DEA really did succeedin stamping out drugs. Would we have to start selling them againto keep the criminals from doing something else? DEA Statement Some facts which help to confirm the observations of the forumparticipants may be used in debates:  Dr. Mark Moore, in a 1992 article titled "Actually,Prohibition Was a Success" points out that alcoholconsumption declined during the Prohibition years by as much as3050%. Mental hospital admissions from alcoholinduced psychosisdeclined 50%. The Facts The Wickersham Commission, which was formed to study andimprove Prohibition, found that alcohol use fell in the firstyear of Prohibition and rose every year thereafter. Assuming this was true, does that mean that the DEA isadvocating the return of alcohol Prohibition? Why not? DEA Statement  Robert Peterson, Director of the Michigan Office of DrugControl Policy, states that "Since the repeal ofProhibition, alcohol consumption has tripled." The Facts Does this mean that the DEA is advocating the return ofalcohol Prohibition? Why not? DEA Statement  Alcohol, unlike currently illegal drugs, has a long historyof social acceptance and has an important role in many cultures.Alcohol can also be selfadministered in small doses with littledamaging effects. The Facts The DEA is saying that some drugs can be sold in the localstore, while others merit a term in prison if you possess them.The difference, it seems, is based on their popularity. By thisargument, when these drugs reach a certain level of popularitythen it will be appropriate to sell them as we do alcohol andtobacco. Other drugs also have a long history of social acceptancewhich the DEA would like to deny. Marijuana (hemp), for example,was once this nation's largest crop and was even grown by ourfounding fathers such as George Washington and Thomas Jefferson. Most drugs can be self-administered in small doses with littledamaging effects and, in most examples of their use, they are. DEA Statement We are making progress in reducing the number of illicit drugusers. The Facts Even if one believes the DEA's figures on this score (andthere is good reason to doubt them), the DEA's own figures showthat there has been no effect on hard core drug use. Further,there is no evidence that the current policy is the best way toreduce the number of drug users of any type. Contents | Feedback | Search DRCNet Library | Schaffer Library | The Drug Legalization Debate WT02-B01-38IA031-000652-B040-16http://206.61.184.43:80/schaffer/activist/claim10.htm 206.61.184.43 19970122130126 text/html 6878HTTP/1.0 200 OKDate: Wednesday, 22-Jan-97 13:01:17 GMTServer: WebSitePro/1.1f (S/N wpo-0deb)Allow-ranges: bytesContent-type: text/htmlLast-modified: Saturday, 28-Dec-96 07:28:01 GMTContent-length: 6661 Claim X: Drug legalization would have an adverse effect onlow income communities Contents | Feedback | Search DRCNet Library | Schaffer Library | The Drug Legalization Debate CLAIM X: DRUG LEGALIZATION WOULD HAVE AN ADVERSE EFFECT ONLOWINCOME COMMUNITIES DEA Statement Some proponents of legalization claim that current strict drugcontrol policies have a disproportionately adverse effect on poorcommunities. The Facts This much is obvious from even the most cursory examination ofthe statistics. DEA Statement The drug laws of the United States, and efforts to stop drugtrafficking and abuse, are designed to protect all people fromthe harm and denigration that illegal drugs cause. If oneeconomic group or another is disproportionately affected by theimplementation of current laws, that problem should be dealt within its proper context--not by legalizing drugs. The Facts As a matter of fact, the laws were based largely on racism andthe fears of such things as Chinese men luring white women totheir ruin in opium dens, and the mythical "Negro CocaineFiend." Harry Anslinger specifically stated that the primaryreason to outlaw marijuana (hemp) was "its effect on thedegenerate races." DEA Statement The participants at the Forum, many of them city policechiefs, disagreed with the notion that legalization would improvethe lot of the poor. Legalization proponents argue that fewer people would bearrested for drug trafficking crime and the violence associatedwith turf protection would be reduced if drugs were legalized.That argument assumes that drugrelated violence is limited torival drug gangs disputing turf, when in fact, most drug violenceis committed by people under the influence of drugs. The incidence of dysfunctional families, unemployability,family violence, and ruined lives would increase in lowincomecommunities, just as they would in every other community. Allcommunities would see increased aberrant behavior because ofincreased drug use; increased occurrences of child neglect;increased family disintegration; increased fetal damage caused bymothers' drug use; increased social welfare costs; loss ofworkforce productivity; increased auto accidents because driversare driving under the influence of drugs; increased industrialaccidents caused by impaired workers; increased absenteeism; andincreases in emergency room visits and overdose deaths. In short,all Americans would see a moral decline of society. Drug use in the inner city is a manifestation of otherproblems in the inner city; these problems would not go away ifmore drugs were available. If proponents truly believe thatlegalization would have a positive affect on communities, wechallenge them to set up a trial program in their own community. The Facts This is an empty challenge. If anyone tried it, the DEA wouldhave them in jail before the first results could be evaluated.This kind of trial program is the last thing the DEA wants tosee, as they have already stated by their opposition to anobjective Federal Commission to examine the evidence. DEA Statement Some facts which help to confirm the observations of the forumparticipants may be used in debates:  In his 1994 article in the New England Journal of Medicine,Dr. Herbert Kleber addresses the drug situation: "Ourcurrent drug situation follows a pattern of earlier drugepidemics. As the use of drugs drops from epidemic to endemiclevels, disadvantaged groups are more likely than others tocontinue using drugs because of their greater availability andfewer alternative opportunities. That is why minority communitieswant not only treatment facilities but also fair laws, justlyapplied to reduce the horrendous toll of drug related crime intheir neighborhoods. The illegal, open air drug bazaars thatflourish in southeastern Washington DC and the South Bronx wouldnot be tolerated in Georgetown or Scarsdale." The Facts Try as I might, I can't find anything in that statement whichsays that throwing massive numbers of people in prison for drugoffenses is a good idea. Contents | Feedback | Search DRCNet Library | Schaffer Library | The Drug Legalization Debate WT02-B01-39IA086-000618-B047-59http://206.61.184.43:80/schaffer/Activist/claim3.htm 206.61.184.43 19970122030626 text/html 23062HTTP/1.0 200 OKDate: Wednesday, 22-Jan-97 03:06:13 GMTServer: WebSitePro/1.1f (S/N wpo-0deb)Allow-ranges: bytesContent-type: text/htmlLast-modified: Saturday, 28-Dec-96 07:27:51 GMTContent-length: 22844 Claim III: Legalization of drugs will lead to increaseduse and addiction Contents | Feedback | Search DRCNet Library | Schaffer Library | The Drug Legalization Debate CLAIM III: LEGALIZATION OF DRUGS WILL LEAD TO INCREASED USEAND INCREASED ADDICTION LEVELS DEA Statement A cornerstone of the legalization proponents' position is theclaim that making illegal drugs legal would not cause more ofthese substances to be consumed, nor would addiction increase.They claim that many people can use drugs in moderation and thatmany would choose not to use drugs, just as many forego alcoholand tobacco now. The Facts Every major study of drug policy agreed that there is noevidence that drug use would increase with more sensiblepolicies. In fact, they found that drug use would probablydecrease with more sensible policies. They also found that, even if drug use did increase,decriminalization would still be a better approach simply becauseof all the harm caused by the current policy. See the list of theBiggest Studies of Drug Policy, also on these web pages. DEA Statement Participants in the AntiLegalization Forum felt strongly thatwhen drugs are more widely available--as they certainly would beif they were legalized--rates of use and addiction wouldincrease. Legalizing drugs sends a message that drug use (like tobaccoand alcohol) is acceptable, and encourages drug use among peoplewho currently do not use drugs. When the social taboos about premarital sex were removed, thenation's illegitimate birthrate soared. And we are paying dearlyfor it. The Facts All of the arguments here depend upon what you mean by"legalized". No, it does not send any such message, and our society'scampaigns against tobacco are perhaps the best example. And ofcourse, the real question is: How many millions of people do wehave to put in prison to show the right amount of disapproval? This is a "TV-talk-show" argument, which blithelyignores the fact that the illegitimate birth rate is due toproblems much more complex than the taboo on premarital sex. Does this mean that, as a solution, the DEA is proposing thatwe throw people in prison for premarital sex? There are lots ofways to discourage something without throwing people in prison. DEA Statement Look to our history. For years, the United States legallyrefined morphine from opium, and hailed it as a miracle drug.Many soldiers on both sides of the Civil War who were givenmorphine for their wounds became addicted to it. Are we ready formore morphine addicts? Crack addicts? Heroin addicts? The Facts Morphine was first refined when many battle wounds weretreated with simple amputation without anesthesia and a doctorwas considered a good surgeon if he could do the amputationquickly to minimize the pain. In the medical context of that typeof "surgery" and the fact that there were noantibiotics to control infections, morphine was a real miracledrug because it relieved a great deal of suffering. The figures differ on the number of Civil War veterans whobecame addicts, partly because of the difficulty in defining whatan addict is. There was widespread use of these drugs simplybecause there were no regulations at all during this period andthey were included in many common patent medicines, includingremedies for baby colic. There is no evidence that the Civil Warveterans who became addicts were any more of a problem to societythan a modern tobacco addict. The 1905 Pure Food and Drug Act wasthe first law to require manufacturers to state the contents oftheir mixtures on the label. This was clearly a good law becauseit helped consumers make an informed decision. Drug use declinedsteadily between the time the law was passed and 1914, when theHarrison Narcotics Act was passed. See any of the major studieslisted elsewhere in this book for a more complete history of thesubject. DEA Statement Early in the 20th Century, drugs were plentiful, cheap, andlegal in the United States. Some could even be bought from theSears Catalogue. The Facts This is true. DEA Statement But Americans realized that these legalized drugs were harmfulto individuals and society, and drug laws were written. The Facts This is not true. The reasons were more complex than this andwere largely based on racism and ignorance. No evidence waspresented to Congress to show that prohibition was eithernecessary or desirable. No evidence was even presented to showthat these drugs were even medically harmful. In the case ofcocaine and the opiates, it is doubtful if Congress realized itwas passing what would be regarded as a general prohibition onthese drugs because it was phrased as a tax act. In the case ofmarijuana (hemp) it is clear that most members of Congress didnot realize that they were passing a law to prohibit the mostcommon crop in America. These laws were a hoax from the verybegining. DEA Statement CocaCola took the coca out of its popular soft drink andsubstituted caffeine. The Facts This is true. The original name of Coca-Cola was "FrenchWine of Coca -- Invigorating Tonic". It is also true thatthere was a campaign to outlaw caffeine for the same reasons thatcocaine was outlawed. That campaign died when it was realizedthat caffeine was contained in too many common foods, such ascoffee, tea, and chocolate. DEA Statement Legalization proponents would have them put it back, and makeopium as available as chewing gum. The Facts This is a flat-out lie and a cheap, deliberate attempt todistort the arguments. It shows that the DEA has set up"legalization" as a straw man, defined in their ownextreme terms. We do not agree with this extreme policy, or theDEA's extreme definition of "legalization". DEA Statement More recently Alaska decriminalized the personal use of smallamounts of marijuana in the home. The experiment did not turn outthe way legalization proponents had predicted. Although the legalage for using marijuana was 19, adolescents as young as 12 yearsold were using the drug. Alaskans eventually came to therealization that decriminalization did not work, and voted tooverturn the law. The Facts Twelve-year-olds using marijuana (hemp) is nothing new. Iobserved pre-teens using marijuana (hemp) more than twenty-fiveyears ago, and it appeared to me that it was fairly common amongchildren of that age. Decriminalization in any area has neverbeen shown to have any real effect on the use patterns ofmarijuana. The law was overturned because of a massive campaign headed bythen-Drug-Czar William Bennett as one of the cornerstones of hiscampaigns against the evils of drugs. Bennett, at the time, was atobacco addict. DEA Statement The experts believe that legalization of drugs would decreasethe perception of risk currently associated with drug use. The Facts Let's assume that the DEA experts are right. How many millionsof people do we have to put in prison to create the properperception of risk? DEA Statement The group strongly endorsed the notion that the Governmentshould help protect people from substances and activities thatare harmful to themselves the community and society at large. The Facts So why aren't we throwing people in prison for alcohol ortobacco? DEA Statement Some facts which help to confirm the observations of the forumparticipants may be used in debates:  Dr. Herbert Kleber, prominent psychiatrist from YaleUniversity, former Demand Reduction Deputy Director at the Officeof National Drug Control Policy and currently with the Center onAddiction and Substance Abuse at Columbia University, states in a1994 article in the New England Journal of Medicine that clinicaldata support the premise that drug use would increase withlegalization. The Facts Dr. Kleber does not define what he means by"legalization." There are any number of differentpolicies which could be defined as "legalization," eachof which could have widely varying effects. Therefore, all therest of his statements on the subject are essentiallymeaningless. Even if he did define what he means by"legalization", it is not the only option we have fordrug policy. DEA Statement He says: "There are over 50 million nicotine addicts, 18million alcoholics or problem drinkers, and fewer than 2 millioncocaine addicts in the United States. Cocaine is a much moreaddictive drug than alcohol. If cocaine were legally available,as alcohol and nicotine are now, the number of cocaine abuserswould probably rise to a point somewhere between the number ofusers of the other two agents, perhaps 20 to 25 million...thenumber of compulsive users might be nine times higher...than thecurrent number. When drugs have been widely available--as...cocaine was at the turn of the century--both use and addictionhave risen " The Facts See the table below for the latest ratings on the relativeaddictive qualities of drugs. Dr. Kleber does not suggest that the most productive approachto the 50 million nicotine addicts, or the 18 million alcoholics,is to put alcohol or tobacco users in prison. Why not? Drug use was widespread at the turn of the century. Thisstatement ignores the fact that drug use and addiction fellsteadily after manufacturers were required to list theingredients in their products. DEA Statement  England's experience with widely available heroin showsthat use and addiction increase. Great Britain allowed doctors toprescribe heroin to addicts. There was an explosion of heroin useand by the mid-1980s known addiction rates were increasing byabout 30% a year. According to the Lancet, the wellrespectedmedical journal (Lancet, January 9, 1982), 2,657 heroin addictswere registered in 1970 compared with 5,107 in 1980. The Facts By the mid-1980's Great Britain was fully into the Americanstyle drug war so it is apparent that, if there is any connectionbetween the drug war and addiction, the drug war must have madethe problem worse. It is also worthwhile to note that the figures show that thenumber of heroin addicts doubled in ten years, but the numberswere still trivial in comparison to the number of addicts in anycomparable segment of the United States. DEA Statement This was a program in which heroin users needed a doctor'sauthorization to get their drug. What would happen if anyonewanting to try heroin could simply buy it at the governmentstore? The Facts The vast majority of them would throw up after using it andfind they really didn't like the effects. DEA Statement  Alaska tried the legalization experiment and abandoned it.Legalization was given a lengthy try closer to home when theAlaska Supreme Court ruled in 1975 that the state could notinterfere with a person's possession of marijuana in his home forpersonal use. Enforcement was permitted only when the quantitypossessed exceeded four ounces--this in a state that, because ofthe long, sunny days of its brief growing season, produces extrapotent marijuana. The Facts Alaska's ruling applied to personal possession of hemp(marijuana) and use within the confines of one's own home. Thisis a far cry from the "legalization" the DEA talksabout elsewhere. The court decided that the right of privacyprotected the citizen's rights within their own home. All states are capable of producing extra potent marijuana.Alaska is nothing special in this regard. DEA Statement The court's ruling was interpreted by many Alaskans as asignal to light up, and so they did, especially the young ones,even though the ruling was limited to persons 19 and over.According to a 1988 University of Alaska study, the state's 12 to17yearolds used marijuana at more than twice the national averagefor their age group. The Facts It is ludicrous to state that an Alaskan Supreme Courtdecision would be interpreted by anyone as a "signal tolight up." It is highly doubtful if teenagers govern theirbehavior based on Supreme Court decisions. Anyone who wants touse a drug is going to do so regardless of what the Supreme Courtmay have said about it. DEA Statement "The frequency with which marijuana was used within thecurrent sample," the report on the study said,"suggests that it is not an experimental event for manystudents, but that it seems to have become well incorporated intothe lifestyle of many adolescents." The Facts And the DEA suggests that the best way to improve thesestudents lives is to hunt them down and put them in jail to curethem of their lifestyle. DEA Statement Although they historically cling to their personal liberties,Alaska residents voted in 1990 to recriminalize possession ofmarijuana, demonstrating their belief that increased use was toohigh a price to pay for increased personal liberties. The Facts A referendum was passed in 1990 by Alaska voters whichattempted to overturn the Alaska Supreme Court decision. Thereferendum was the result of an intensive, well-funded campaignby then-Drug Czar William Bennett and other drug wars to remove amajor embarrassment to their cause -- the fact that Alaska hadprotected private use of marijuana and Alaskan society had notfallen apart as a result. The courts later threw out the votebecause the issue had been decided on a matter of basicconstitutional protections of privacy, which cannot be voted awayunder Alaskan law. DEA Statement  Will the public support an aggressive marketing approach?While "government drugs" could conceivably be pricedlow enough, perhaps by having taxpayers subsidize them todiscourage a black market, the combination of low price and readyavailability would bring more consumption, more addiction. Wewould have won the battle and lost the war. If they see this asthe probable outcome, the American people can hardly be expectedto endorse a "sell at all costs" policy. The Facts Why should there be an aggressive marketing approach? DEA Statement  Robert L. DuPont, M.D., former director of the NationalInstitute on Drug Abuse, considered the impact legalization wouldhave on use and addiction rates in a paper published in 1994. "Would legalization increase the number of drug users andthe social harm produced by the use of drugs?" Dr. DuPontasked. "The answer to those two questions is simply, 'Yes,it would."' The Facts The answer to this question is simply: What"legalization" are you talking about? Until you definewhat you mean by "legalization" you can't define whatthe likely effect on the number of drug users and social harm. DEA Statement The current global experience with alcohol and tobacco revealsthe downside of legalization clearly, Dr. DuPont said. The Facts This is certainly true, keeping in mind the fact these drugsare only legal under certain conditions. Despite this, Dr. DuPontis not suggesting that we outlaw alcohol and tobacco as the mostappropriate response. Why not? DEA Statement "Legalization of any drugs leads to large increases inthe use of the legalized drugs," he said. "Because mostof the social costs of drugs are not the costs of prohibition butthe costs created by the drug use itself (a point proved beyonddispute by the dismal global experience with alcohol andtobacco), legalization raises the net social costs of drug use. The Facts Even if we assumed this to be true, every major study of drugpolicy has said that the cost of the current policy far outweighsthe other potential costs. DEA Statement "Legalization is an old, siren call which promises toreduce the high costs of drug use, but which abundant evidenceshows would inevitably raise the costs society pays for drug use,not reduce them. We do not need new experiments to make Contents | Feedback | Search DRCNet Library | Schaffer Library | The Drug Legalization Debate WT02-B01-40IA087-000632-B035-222http://206.61.184.43:80/schaffer/Activist/black1.htm 206.61.184.43 19970122070439 text/html 12504HTTP/1.0 200 OKDate: Wednesday, 22-Jan-97 07:04:23 GMTServer: WebSitePro/1.1f (S/N wpo-0deb)Allow-ranges: bytesContent-type: text/htmlLast-modified: Saturday, 28-Dec-96 07:26:03 GMTContent-length: 12286 How to Approach the Black Community How to Approach the Black Community by Clifford A. Schaffer Introduction There have been many people who have rightly criticized thefact that the drug policy reform movement has not made majorallies in the black community - despite the fact that the blackcommunity is clearly the most severely impacted by the drug war.Instead, the reaction in the black community is often one of evengreater calls for law enforcement presence and even greatersupport for the drug war. While this is largely true, it is simply a matter that mostblack people (like most white people) don't realize how we got towhere we are today with the drug problem. As soon as it isexplained in terms that are relevant and understandable to them,they readily understand and agree with the need for reform -specifically, not putting nearly so many people in prison. I have always found it relatively easy to get black people,particularly black leaders, to support drug policy reform. Theywill not support "legalization", but they will supportspecific steps of reform which both they and the"legalizers" agree are necessary. They already have aproblem with too many liquor stores in their communities, so theywill not support ideas which look like you are going to open up alegal chain of crack houses. They can be expected to argue forthe point that we simply need to stop and look at what we aredoing, and seriously question the whole program. They will alsosupport and argue for constructive, rather than destructiveapproaches to the problem. Ultimately, many black leaders will tell you privately thatthey support "legalization", if they are just given thefacts as a basis for their view. However, they will still have asignificant problem with the public presentation. One churchleader told us that his church had once issued a health kit whichincluded various first aid items, educational materials, phonenumbers to call, a lot of other things, and a condom. He saidthere was a storm of controversy about nothing but the condom andthey eventually had to take it out of the package because theywere spending all their time explaining it and defending it topeople, so they couldn't get anything else done. They ultimatelyfigured that it would be better to distribute the same packagewith everything but the condom. It is sad, but it is a functionalreality of the community they live in. It is one task to persuadethem of the need for reform. It is another task to help them findways that they can address the issue with their own community. How to Find Them, Approach Them, and Win Them Over Do your homework. Be up to date on the latest stats, issues, and arguments as they relate to the black community. Look in the phone book for any churches or other social organizations located in, or allied to, the black community. Call the head of the organization and arrange an appointment. Most of them, particularly churches, will give you one if you just ask. Be prepared with charts, graphs, statistics, historical information, and reference sources, so you have an interesting and persuasive presentation. Cover the racial origins of the laws, with appropriate citations and quotes. Cover the current situation with black men, including the lifetime risk of prison for black men - and how the probability of a drug conviction relates to that total risk. Don't expect them to trust white people. After the last 200 years, they are justified in being a little suspicious at times. Ask them to trust themselves and check everything you say. Then give them the reference sources to do it. Don't use the "L" word, the "D" word, or the "M" word. Use the "R" word - Reform - in terms that are specific to the concerns of the black community. Talk about constructive (treatment and education) rather than destructive (prison) approaches to the drug problem. They know that you (like most of those goody-good white people who come down to meddle in their community) are going to be gone tomorrow and not living with the consequences of whatever takes place in their community. Your arguments must, at all times, be expressed in terms which are meaningful and relevant to them. Understand their position. They CANNOT be seen as promoting or condoning drug use in any way at all. If you tell them you support the right of everyone to get loaded, you will find yourself in the parking lot in a matter of seconds. Remember that the Christian belief is very strong in the black community (though they do tend to have a somewhat more vigorous approach to their religion than those stuffy white people). The argument about what Jesus would do - build bigger prisons, or build hospitals and schools - will strike a resonant chord with many of them. Contrast love, compassion, and healing, with punishment, prison, and destruction. Help them to find a way to talk about it publicly. The issue of the disparity in the sentencing, and the sheer numbers of black men going to prison alone means that we should AT LEAST back up and take an honest look at what we are doing in the drug war. We must build, not destroy. And we must examine the entire drug war, not just the crack laws. Get them involved in our alliance. Get them connected to the Internet, if possible, (usually not possible), or get them on the mailing lists of the relevant organizations. Find someone from their group who will take the initiative in maintaining and responding to communications. Tell them about the online library and the fact that it has large amounts of information about the racial roots of the drug war, as well as other information. Questions I have listed below, a number of the common questions whichwill come up in such an interview, whether they are explicitlystated or not. What is their biggest concern? Their biggest single concern at this point is the ongoingmassive destruction of black men. Black men are being rendered"economically dead" by the massive imposition of prisonsentences. Their point of view may be somewhat skewed, in thatthey may view this as a result of the drugs, not the laws, and itmay not have occurred to them that, as bad as drugs are, criminalpunishment is not the way to address the problem. Why did this white boy come all the way over here to tellthis to me? Because I am concerned about the drug war for my own reasons,and I have the good sense to recognize that there are otherpeople who would also have concerns, for their own reasons. Wewill both achieve better results if we work together towardcommon goals. And, just as a matter of common sense and commondecency, I think it is pretty stupid to lock up half of all theblack men in America. There has to be a better way. Why should I trust you? Don't trust me. Trust yourself. I will simply give you apoint of view and the evidence which I think firmly supports it.I think the evidence will shock you, but I don't ask you tobelieve it. I will give you the reference sources where I got it,and I encourage you to do your own research and let me know ofany facts or issues that I have missed. My strongest allies havealways come from the people who went to the library and verifiedwhat I said. Why should black people support drug policy reform? Because the drug problem is tearing up the black community and we need to find a better approach - whatever it may be. Because the drug laws were based on racism from their inception, so there is no reason to expect them to be balanced and productive laws today. Because every major study of drug policy said that this policy only caused more harm than good, particularly for poor communities. Because it is what Jesus would do. Because we want to rebuild black men and make them productive citizens, not destroy them. Are you asking me to support legalization? Not at all. I am asking you to recognize the simpleproposition that prison has become a bigger threat to black menthan the drugs themselves. Black men can, and do, recover fromdrug problems and go on to live productive lives. They have amuch harder time recovering from a long stretch in prison. Weneed to discourage drug use but we do not need to destroy theirlives in order to save them. But some of these guys are dangerous and need to be lockedup! I fully admit that there are a good number of black men outthere who are dangerous and should be locked up for the good ofsociety. But we have now reached the point where about half ofall the young black men in America will have spent at least onestretch in prison before they are thirty. I find it hard tobelieve that we have to lock up half of all the young black menin America for the good of society. Whenever the numbers get thatlarge, we must stop and ask ourselves if this is really the bestcourse of action. Don't we need some jails? Certainly we do. But we learned long ago that, as bad asalcohol is, Prohibition only caused more problems than it solved.In the current situation, we can use our money to put one moreblack man in prison, or we can use the same amount of money toprovide education or treatment to more than one hundred blackmen. Suppose that someone gave us the decision on where we shouldspend the next million dollars of tax money on this problem -what should we do? Should we provide education and treatment forup to two hundred people, or should we put two more drug dealersin jail? How can I speak about this publicly? Talk about the terrible damage being done by not only the crack laws, but the drug laws in general. The crack laws are the worst example, but they are only one small part of a bigger system that is severely impacting black men. Talk about the need for education and treatment, not prison. Talk about the need for responses to the problem which build people rather than destroy them. Talk about the racial roots of the drug laws - how these laws were built on racism from their very inception, and how the image of the Negro Cocaine Fiend in 1914 is repeated in the image of the crack-fiend today. Talk about the need for an open and honest investigation of this entire drug problem - not just the mandatory minimums for crack. It is the entire drug policy which is wrong and it is the entire drug policy which must be fairly, openly, and honestly investigated. CliffSchaffer's Home Page WT02-B01-41IA087-000632-B035-83http://206.61.184.43:80/schaffer/Activist/flier2.htm 206.61.184.43 19970122070321 text/html 3882HTTP/1.0 200 OKDate: Wednesday, 22-Jan-97 07:03:14 GMTServer: WebSitePro/1.1f (S/N wpo-0deb)Allow-ranges: bytesContent-type: text/htmlLast-modified: Monday, 16-Dec-96 08:40:53 GMTContent-length: 3667 Worlds Largest Online Library of Drug Policy World's Largest OnlineLibrary of Drug Policy The Drug War obviously isn't working. It is time we took anotherlook at the evidence on drugs. Now you can do it through the Internet.The DRCNet Online Library contains thousands of documents coveringall aspects of drugs and drug policy, from ancient history tothe latest developments from Europe. You can find this libraryon the World Wide Web at the following location: http://www.druglibrary.org What These Libraries Contain: Major Studies of Drugs and Drug Policy overthe last 100 years, including summariesand full text of many studies. These studies include the NewYork City Bar Association Report (1994), the National Commissionon Marihuana and Drug Abuse (1972), the La Guardia CommitteeReport (1944), and many more. Historical Information,including the shocking origins of the drug laws. Included in thecollection are the actual transcripts of the hearings for theMarihuana Tax Act and many other historical works, includingtexts dating back to 550 BC. Why were these laws passed in thefirst place? You will find it hard to believe - it had nothingto do with what you have assumed. Latest News from Europe- including up-to-date information on drug policies in the Netherlandsas well as other developments, such as the heroin maintenanceclinics currently being run in Switzerland. DEA Judge Young's ruling on medical marijuana.In 1989, the DEA's Chief Administrative Law Judge finished hearingtwo years of evidence on medical marijuana and ruled that theDEA's actions in restricting the medical use of marijuana were"unconscionable." Our online library has the full textof Judge Young's decision. The Drug Legalization Debate -Extensive materials covering all of the arguments in the "druglegalization" debate from all perspectives, including thefull text of documents from all points of view. See all thearguments and all the evidence from both sides. Government Documents -We maintain an extensive collection of Federal and State Governmentdocuments related to drug policy including many reports whichhave never been formally published or are so rare that they arenot available in most libraries. Much, much more -literally thousands of documents on a huge range of topics! Our Guarantee We absolutely guarantee: That you will find the information in these libraries surprisingand fascinating - no matter what your current point of view. You have never seen or heard much of this information anywherebefore. We have some of the best information resources youwill find anywhere in the world on this topic. Brought to you by the Drug ReformCoordination Network (DRCNet) as a free public service.WT02-B01-42IA086-000618-B047-197http://206.61.184.43:80/schaffer/Activist/claim8.htm 206.61.184.43 19970122030819 text/html 12517HTTP/1.0 200 OKDate: Wednesday, 22-Jan-97 03:08:08 GMTServer: WebSitePro/1.1f (S/N wpo-0deb)Allow-ranges: bytesContent-type: text/htmlLast-modified: Saturday, 28-Dec-96 07:27:29 GMTContent-length: 12299 Claim VIII: Drug control spending is a minor part of theUS budget Contents | Feedback | Search DRCNet Library | Schaffer Library | The Drug Legalization Debate CLAIM VIII: DRUG CONTROL SPENDING IS A MINOR PORTION OF THEU.S. BUDGET, AND COMPARED TO THE COSTS OF DRUG ABUSE, SPENDING ISMINUSCULE. DEA Statement Legalization advocates claim that this nation has spentbillions of dollars to control drug production, trafficking anduse with few, if any, positive results. They contend that themoney spent on drug control should be shifted to other, moreproductive endeavors. The Facts This whole claim is another curious argument. It seems thatthe DEA is saying, "We don't take very much money in thebigger scheme of things, so leave us alone." From my ownperspective, I still regard several billion dollars as a lot ofmoney. There is no doubt that a lot of money is spent on drugenforcement and there is no doubt that even the DEA has neverclaimed that it ever had any significant effect on reducing thesupply of drugs. If a program to spend several billion dollars isas useless as this one, it behooves us to look for a betterapproach. DEA Statement The truth is, we have made great progress in reducing drug useduring the past 15 years. If the relatively modest outlays ofFederal dollars had not been made, drug abuse and attendantsocial costs would have been far greater. The good news is thatdrug use has declined significantly between 1979 and 1993. The Facts Whether drug use has been significantly reduced is open toquestion, particularly in view of the survey methods used toarrive at such conclusions. Even if we assumed that this statement is true, it would stillleave open the question of whether any other approach might haveproduced better results. That is a question the DEA does not evenwant to consider. DEA Statement The experts participating in the Anti-Legalization forumdisputed the claim that money allegedly saved from giving up onthe drug problem could be better spent on education and socialproblems. When compared to the amount of funding that is spent onother national priorities, drug control spending is minimal.There has been progress in reducing drug use, and the money spenthas been effective and worthwhile. The Facts This argument is illogical. The participants state that themoney could not be better spent on education and social problemsbecause "drug control spending is minimal." Whether thespending is minimal (by their terms) has no bearing on whetherthe spending is wise. DEA Statement On the surface, legalization proponents present an appealing,simple argument that by legalizing drugs we can move vast sums ofmoney from drug law enforcement into solving society's ills. Theyleave unanswered questions about the cost of collecting revenuesassociated with drug sales, or the cost of regulating drugs. They ignore questions concerning the purity, potency andquality of legal drugs, the costs of insuring a safe product, andcosts associated with increased liability litigation. The Facts No revenue is collected from drug sales now, except by outlawdrug dealers. Any collection of tax revenues would be animprovement. There are no standards for purity, potency, or quality nowexcept those established by outlaw drug dealers, and there is noone to sue for an unsafe product. Any legal standards would be animprovement in this area. DEA Statement Ask proponents of legalization for specifics. Would the rawmaterial for these drugs be purchased from traditional sources,or would the United States produce its own marijuana, coca andopium? Would the government pay farmers subsidies to produce ornot produce these crops? Although all of these questions could beresolved, none comes without a price tag. The Facts The United States could easily produce all of its ownmarijuana, as the DEA should know from the fact that it wasAmerica's largest commercial crop before it was outlawed. The Federal Government should not be in the position of payingfarmers subsidies to produce any dangerous, addictive drug,including tobacco. The rules for subsidies should be consistentacross the board. However difficult these questions may be to agree on, it stilldoes not present any evidence that throwing people in prison fordrugs is a good idea. DEA Statement Proponents also conveniently fail to mention that unless drugsare made available to little children, law enforcement will stillbe needed to deal with the sale of drugs to minors. The Facts This is one of the phoniest arguments to come down the pike.No one except the DEA has suggested that drugs should be"made available to little children". We have laws now to prevent the sale of alcohol to minors andthe rules for other drugs should be no different. Law enforcementis needed to deal with the sale of alcohol to minors but it is byno means an overwhelming problem. If the DEA was really concerned about little children, theywould recommend stronger action against convenience store clerkswho sell tobacco to children. An American is about 100 times aslikely to die from tobacco as from any illegal drug, andchildhood is when most of them become addicted. DEA Statement But more importantly, in their simplistic arguments, they omitmention of the atrocious social costs that would be incurred witha larger class of drug users. The Facts No, we freely admit that drugs are going to impose atremendous social cost whatever we do. That is still not a goodreason to undertake actions which are counterproductive, such asprison. DEA Statement Legalization would also result in lost workforce productivityand a resultant increase in the cost of goods. A new class ofunemployables would be created who were unfit to hire because oftheir drug dependence. The Facts There is no evidence for this at all. The DEA proposes thatprison is the best way to keep drug users productive. DEA Statement Health and societal costs of drug legalization would alsoincrease, the panel predicted. Drug treatment costs,hospitalization for longterm drugrelated disease, and treatmentof family violence consequences would further burden our alreadystrapped healthcare system. The Facts The panel came together for the purpose of fighting"legalization" so it is no surprise that they wouldpredict it would be a disaster. It is important to note that theydid no research to back up their prediction and every major studyof drug policy in the last fifty years disagreed with them. DEA Statement There was also no guarantee, according to the group, thatcriminal justice costs would decline if drugs were legalized. Itis possible that law enforcement would be additionally burdenedwith addressing violations of traffic and family violence laws ifmore people had access to drugs. Law enforcement is alreadychallenged by significant alcoholrelated crimes. More users meanmore crimes committed, and incarceration costs would increase. Some facts which help to confirm the observations of the forumparticipants may be used in debates:  In 1995, over $13 billion is being spent by the federalgovernment on drug control, including treatment, education, lawenforcement and international activities.  Drug abuse costs the United States between $60 and $100billion in lost productivity each year. The Facts Most of this cost is caused by alcohol, which the DEA does notaddress at all. Even if all this cost was the result of illegaldrugs, there is still no evidence that throwing people in prisonis the best way to reduce those costs. Does the DEA honestlypropose that the best way to make sure that people are productiveis to throw them in prison? DEA Statement  The Federal Government spends billions of dollars each yearon other national priorities. In Fiscal Year 1995, the FederalGovernment is spending $ 243.4 billion on Defense $ 350 billion on Social Security $ 61.6 billion on Agriculture $ 22 billion on Welfare $ 13.5 billion on Foreign Assistance The Facts And? Not one word here is any kind of an argument in favor ofthrowing people in prison for drugs. Contents | Feedback | Search DRCNet Library | Schaffer Library | The Drug Legalization Debate WT02-B01-43IA087-000632-B036-192http://206.61.184.43:80/schaffer/Activist/howlte.htm 206.61.184.43 19970122070715 text/html 7319HTTP/1.0 200 OKDate: Wednesday, 22-Jan-97 07:07:06 GMTServer: WebSitePro/1.1f (S/N wpo-0deb)Allow-ranges: bytesContent-type: text/htmlLast-modified: Saturday, 28-Dec-96 07:25:37 GMTContent-length: 7102 How to Write Letters to the Editor How to Write Letters to the Editor A personal note by Cliff Schaffer: Over the years, I have written a lot of letters to the editorand about three out of four of them get published. A lot ofpeople have asked me what are the good techniques for writingletters to the editor. The first thing I tell people is toremember that they fit about ten letters in a typical editorialsection (out of the hundreds they receive) so the ones theypublish either: 1) Are the best single expressions of what many people said. 2) Make some point exceedingly well. 3) Are signed by some prominent person. In all cases, the letters are usually short and to the point,and the editors have edited them even further to make themshorter. Most people who write letters to the editor wouldprobably like the satisfaction you get when you see your letterpublished. That way, at least you are certain that they read it.However, it is also apparent that the media can be influenced byletters they do not acknowledge. We have found many times that asimple letter to someone in the media wound up in major mediacoverage weeks or months later. I was going to write up a formal set of rules for how towrite letters to the editor, but I found someone who had done italready. He did quite a good job in saying the same essentialthings I would have said. =================================== How to Write Letters to the Editor by Richard Rider Short, concise letters are always more likely to be publishedthan long, meandering ones; try to keep them under 150 words. Thelonger letters are also more likely to be edited. It's betterthat you do your own editing. Ever notice how you read letters to the editor in the paper?Most people read the shorter letters first and then perhaps laterread the longer ones. Thus your shorter letter has a betterchance of being read. WHAT TO WRITE? Unlike single-issue or special-interestgroups, libertarians can select from an enormous range ofsubjects. Replying to editorials, agree or disagree, is veryeffective. Every day the news offers us all too many topics on which tocomment. Be timely; try to respond within two or three days of thearticle's publication. Pick an issue of particular importance toyou - don't be afraid to let some passion show through. Here are some stylistic considerations: 1. State the argument you're rebutting or responding to, asbriefly as possible, in the letter's introduction. Don't do alengthy rehash; it's a waste of valuable space and boring toboot. 2. Stick to a single subject. Deal with one issue per letter. 3. Don't be shrill or abusive. Editors tend to discardletters containing personal attacks. Even though you're dying tocall Jesse Jackson a preachy parasite, stifle the urge. 4. Your letter should be logically organized. First a briefrecitation of the argument you are opposing, followed by astatement of your own position. Then present your evidence. Closewith a short restatement of your position or a pithy comment ("Jimmy Breslin says possession of firearms should belimited to law enforcement officers. I say when only the policehave guns, the police state is just around the corner."). 5. Use facts, figures and expert testimony whenever possible.This raises your letters above the "sez you, sez me"category. For instance: "Anthony Lewis calls for taxing therich as a way to balance the budget. Is he aware of the fact thatif we confiscated the entire income of the top wage earners inthis country (those with income above $200,000), this would runthe federal government for exactly 8 days?" Readers respect the opinions of people with special knowledgeor expertise. Use expert testimony to bolster your case("George Will claims we need to draft to defend America. ButGeneral Edward C. Meyer, Army Chief of Staff, recently stated . .."). 6. Proofread your letter carefully for errors in spelling,punctuation and grammar. Newspapers will usually edit to correctthese mistakes, but your piece is more likely to be published ifit is "clean" to begin with. Read your letter to afriend, for objective input. One suggestion is that a letter shouldn't be mailed the sameday it is written. Write, proofread and edit the piece. Then putit aside until the next day. Rereading your letter in a freshlight often helps you to spot errors in reasoning, stiltedlanguage and the like. On the other hand, don't let the lettersit too long and lose it's timeliness. 7. Try to view the letter from the reader's perspective. Willthe arguments make sense to someone without a special backgroundon this issue. Did you use technical terms not familiar to theaverage reader? Should your letter be typed? In this day and age, generally yes. Double or triple space the letter if it is short. For faxing purposes, we appreciate it if the letter is all on one page, so single spacing might be the only option available. Direct your missives to "Letters to the Editor," or some similar sounding title. 10. Always include your name, address, day-time phone numberand signature. The papers will not publish this information, butthey may use it to verify that you wrote the letter. If we arefax broadcasting your letter, do not put a date on it. We mayhave to wait a day or two before broadcasting it out, dependingon how many letters are waiting for dissemination. 11. Most important - WRITE! Do not try to do a perfectletter. Just give it a good effort and send it off. Letterwriting is the one thing that any one of us can do on our ownwithout the need to work through a group. No committees arenecessary. Just do it! Don't be discouraged if your letter isn't published. Theeditor may have received more responses on that issue than hefeels he can handle. If we are faxing your letter, you will almost certainly bepublished somewhere. The only drawback is that we do not have agood feedback system, so you may not know which of the paperspublish your letter, particularly the smaller ones. -DRider@AOL.com CliffSchaffer's Home Page WT02-B01-44IA086-000618-B047-31http://206.61.184.43:80/schaffer/Activist/claim2.htm 206.61.184.43 19970122030600 text/html 13352HTTP/1.0 200 OKDate: Wednesday, 22-Jan-97 03:05:46 GMTServer: WebSitePro/1.1f (S/N wpo-0deb)Allow-ranges: bytesContent-type: text/htmlLast-modified: Saturday, 28-Dec-96 07:27:57 GMTContent-length: 13134 Claim II: We have made significant progess in reducingdrug use. Contents | Feedback | Search DRCNet Library | Schaffer Library | The Drug Legalization Debate DEA Statement CLAIM II: WE HAVE MADE SIGNIFICANT PROGRESS IN REDUCING DRUGUSE IN THIS COUNTRY. NOW IS NOT THE TIME TO ABANDON OUR EFFORTS. The Facts No one has suggested that we should "abandon" ourefforts to reduce the problems associated with drugs. What wehave suggested is that we should make those efforts morecost-effective. Prison is not cost effective. Even if we accepted this claim as true, there is no evidencethat the progress in reducing drug use was at all due to thenumber of people put in prison. In fact, the evidence clearlyshows that the number of people put in prison could not have hadenough of an impact on the average white, middle-class drug userto make any difference at all in drug use. If there was anyactual reduction in drug use (and not just in"reported" drug use) then it seems clear that it musthave been due to other factors. DEA Statement Legalization advocates claim that the fight against drugs hasnot been won, and is, in fact, unwinnable. They frequently statethat people still take drugs, drugs are widely available, andthat the changing that fact is a lost cause. Legalization is thealternative. The Facts It should be clear to anyone that the war on drugs has notbeen won. There is no credible evidence anywhere which wouldsuggest that the war could be won by the current methods, and theDEA has presented no such evidence here. The alternative is tolook for a better approach, whatever we might choose to call it. DEA Statement The conference participants disagreed with the notion that weshould wave the white flag of surrender because people still takedrugs. The experts contended that there have been many positivedevelopments over the past fifteen years in reducing drug use,and stated that the good news is often given short shrift. Ourdrug problem did not happen overnight, and it will take a numberof years to eliminate the problem. Legalization is not analternative to combating the drug problem. The Facts As happened with Vietnam, there comes a point when mustrecognize that we never should have taken this course in thefirst place. It is not surrender to end the war on drugs, it is arecognition of what we should have recognized years ago. DEA Statement The United States faces a number of problems today which, likeour drug problem, are not susceptible to easy solutions,including illegal immigration, declining education quality andpublic health problems. Should we just post signs on our bordersthat we've given up and invite a tide of immigrants in? Should wedeclare that our education system has been a failure and givechildren a permanent vacation from school? Should we throw up ourhands in frustration about AIDS and stop searching for a cure? Ofcourse not. Americans are a people committed to solving problems,not running from them. Why should our commitment to stoppingdrugs be any different from our approach to other nationalinterests? The Facts There is no doubt that there are many difficult problems. Ofall the problems mentioned, the DEA does not propose to solve anyof them by throwing people in prison. The final question here asks for a commitment to"stopping drugs" which, the DEA itself admits, isclearly impossible. DEA Statement Furthermore, ask proponents of legalization just what they areproposing be legalized. Just marijuana? Marijuana and heroin? Alldrugs? And for what age group? Will children be able to buy drugs? Will prescriptions be necessary? And what will they tolerate as the price of legalization? Apermanent underclass of drug users? Will a 10% increase in the number of traffic fatalities beaccepted? What about 50%? Would they be relieved to know that their child care providerhad been smoking legally-purchased marijuana? How manyborderbabies is too many? The Facts The question really is: for what drugs are we willing to throwpeople in prison? Can children buy drugs now? Obviously, they can because onlythe outlaws control distribution of drugs. The questions try toinsinuate that people in favor of reform want to distribute drugsto children. Nothing could be further from the truth. Thequestion also conveniently ignores the fact that the number onedrug killer, tobacco, is still freely available to childrenthrough vending machines. There are any number of possible policies, besides the currentone. The question of whether prescriptions would be necessaryshould not stop us from recognizing that prison is unnecessary. We already have a permanent underclass of drug users. There is no evidence that the number of traffic fatalitieswould change. About half of all traffic fatalities are now causedby alcohol, but the DEA does not propose that arresting all thepeople who drink beer or wine is a sensible solution. The laws and social rules for things such as caring forchildren would not change regardless of the legal status of anydrug. DEA Statement Some facts which help to confirm the observations of the forumparticipants may be used in debates:  The 1993 National Household Survey on Drug Abuse, releasedin July, 1994, demonstrates unequivocally that drug use declinedsignificantly between 1979 and 1993. The Facts The same figures show it is going back up again, particularlyamong children. Those figures show large increases in the lastyear alone -- and the laws have not changed. It must also be recognized that the data gathering methods ofthis survey are open to question. The survey is conducted bycalling people at random on the telephone and asking if anyone inthe household has committed a felony (used drugs) in the past fewweeks or months. Instead of an accurate measure of the amount ofdrug use, it may just be a measure of the number of people whoare stupid enough to answer such a question from a stranger onthe phone. DEA Statement  In 1993, an estimated 11.7 million Americans were currentillicit drug users, meaning they had used an illicit drug in themonth prior to the interview. This represents no change from 1992when the estimate was 11.4 million. The number of illicit drugusers had been declining since its peak in 1979 at 24 million. The Facts The DEA needs to take elementary math again. The figures shownrepresent a rise of 300,000 drug users. The figures show one thing above all else-- there is no way wecan throw that many people in prison, and our jails are fullalready. How many of these millions does the DEA propose that wethrow in prison? The DEA's own figures also clearly show that all of thesupposed decline in drug use has been among casual drug users.Their own figures show that this policy has had no effect on thenumber of hard core drug users, where the problem really lies. DEA Statement  The number of current cocaine users remained at 1.3 millionusers in 1993, the same as 1992. This is down from a peak of 5.3million in 1985. The Facts Does the DEA suggest that we throw all 1.3 million cocaineusers in prison? Since 1979, rates of current illicit drug use have dropped for12 17 year olds, 1825 year olds, and 2634 year olds, but not forthe age group 35 and older. The latest figures show that drug use among these groups hasrisen dramatically again, and yet the laws are just as harsh asthey always were. DEA Statement  Teenage drug consumption, despite recent upturns, is downin the long term. There is an obvious concern in the UnitedStates about the consumption of drugs by teenagers--the adults oftomorrow. Recent upturns demonstrate to us the clear need tocontinue doing what we've done for more than the past decade:combine law enforcement, education, and international efforts toaddress all aspects of the drug situation. The Monitoring theFuture Study, conducted annually by University of Michiganresearch scientists for the US Department of Health and HumanServices, has been tracking the drug consumption of American highschool seniors since the 1970s. In the past few years, the studyhas been broadened to embrace drug use by 10th grade and 8thgrade students as well. The Facts This is obviously wrong. See the latest figures cited above. DEA Statement When the first Monitoring the Future Study was published, 27.1% of the members of the Class of 1975 (eighth and 10th graderswere not surveyed then) reported having used marijuana or hashishin the previous month. The figure for the Class of 1980 was33.7%--which puts that 2.4% figure 13 years later intoperspective. The Facts If the study is looking at the drug use of eighth to tenthgraders then it would seem obvious enough that the campaign toput people in prison would not have had much real effect on thisgroup. This is evidence that any drop in use was not due totougher criminal enforcement. Source 1993 National Household Survey Contents | Feedback | Search DRCNet Library | Schaffer Library | The Drug Legalization Debate WT02-B01-45IA086-000618-B047-229http://206.61.184.43:80/schaffer/Activist/claim9.htm 206.61.184.43 19970122030837 text/html 7692HTTP/1.0 200 OKDate: Wednesday, 22-Jan-97 03:08:27 GMTServer: WebSitePro/1.1f (S/N wpo-0deb)Allow-ranges: bytesContent-type: text/htmlLast-modified: Saturday, 28-Dec-96 07:27:24 GMTContent-length: 7475 Claim IX: Drug prohibition is working Contents | Feedback | Search DRCNet Library | Schaffer Library | The Drug Legalization Debate CLAIM IX: DRUG PROHIBITION IS WORKING DEA Statement Legalization advocates claim that drug prohibition is akin toalcohol prohibition earlier this century. Their main premise isthat it is impossible to prohibit people from using substancesthat they want to use. The Facts It seems obvious that it is impossible, by the DEA's ownevidence. But there are other reasons as well. Even if it waspossible, we should not undertake actions which do more harm thangood. DEA Statement Participants in the AntiLegalization forum felt thatlegalization opponents should point to the successes ofProhibition and to continuously stress the positive progress thathas been made between 1979 and 1994 in reducing levels of drugabuse. The Facts Does the DEA feel that the "successes ofProhibition" were so great that we should bring backProhibition? Why not? DEA Statement When the Volstead Act was repealed, arrests for alcoholtraffickers disappeared, but arrests of alcohol related incidentsrose, indicating that the prohibition against alcohol had keptpeople from using it. The same will happen if drugs arelegalized. Once drug use is sanctioned by the government, morepeople will use drugs. It is also important to remember that after Prohibition wasrepealed, organized crime branched out into other areas, andthere is every expectation that current drug organizations wouldalso continue and diversify. The Facts After Prohibition was repealed, organized crime lost itssingle biggest source of funding. This is the same argument theDEA made before, that we must keep drug prohibition to keep thedrug dealers employed so they will not do something else. Again,we have to asked what would happen if the DEA really did succeedin stamping out drugs. Would we have to start selling them againto keep the criminals from doing something else? DEA Statement Some facts which help to confirm the observations of the forumparticipants may be used in debates:  Dr. Mark Moore, in a 1992 article titled "Actually,Prohibition Was a Success" points out that alcoholconsumption declined during the Prohibition years by as much as3050%. Mental hospital admissions from alcoholinduced psychosisdeclined 50%. The Facts The Wickersham Commission, which was formed to study andimprove Prohibition, found that alcohol use fell in the firstyear of Prohibition and rose every year thereafter. Assuming this was true, does that mean that the DEA isadvocating the return of alcohol Prohibition? Why not? DEA Statement  Robert Peterson, Director of the Michigan Office of DrugControl Policy, states that "Since the repeal ofProhibition, alcohol consumption has tripled." The Facts Does this mean that the DEA is advocating the return ofalcohol Prohibition? Why not? DEA Statement  Alcohol, unlike currently illegal drugs, has a long historyof social acceptance and has an important role in many cultures.Alcohol can also be selfadministered in small doses with littledamaging effects. The Facts The DEA is saying that some drugs can be sold in the localstore, while others merit a term in prison if you possess them.The difference, it seems, is based on their popularity. By thisargument, when these drugs reach a certain level of popularitythen it will be appropriate to sell them as we do alcohol andtobacco. Other drugs also have a long history of social acceptancewhich the DEA would like to deny. Marijuana (hemp), for example,was once this nation's largest crop and was even grown by ourfounding fathers such as George Washington and Thomas Jefferson. Most drugs can be self-administered in small doses with littledamaging effects and, in most examples of their use, they are. DEA Statement We are making progress in reducing the number of illicit drugusers. The Facts Even if one believes the DEA's figures on this score (andthere is good reason to doubt them), the DEA's own figures showthat there has been no effect on hard core drug use. Further,there is no evidence that the current policy is the best way toreduce the number of drug users of any type. Contents | Feedback | Search DRCNet Library | Schaffer Library | The Drug Legalization Debate WT02-B01-46IA087-000632-B036-132http://206.61.184.43:80/schaffer/Activist/whenab.htm 206.61.184.43 19970122070633 text/html 7466HTTP/1.0 200 OKDate: Wednesday, 22-Jan-97 07:06:21 GMTServer: WebSitePro/1.1f (S/N wpo-0deb)Allow-ranges: bytesContent-type: text/htmlLast-modified: Saturday, 28-Dec-96 07:24:39 GMTContent-length: 7249 The Washington Hemp Education Network The Washington Hemp Education Network Operating Abstract Abstract The following text defines the structure and mission of anon-profit educational organization known as the Washington HempEducation Network (W.H.E.N.). This organization consists ofvolunteer members. Mission Statement The mission of the Washington Hemp Education Network(W.H.E.N.) is to empower the people of Washington State, througheducational activities about the history, status, and uses (bothcurrent and potential) of the Hemp plant (cannabis sativa, alsoknown as marijuana), to make informed choices about the issuessurrounding re-legalization of Hemp in Washington State. Recognition of Benefit The Washington Hemp Education Network recognizes asbeneficial all responsible commercial, medicinal, and spiritualuses of the Hemp plant conducted for peaceful ends. Program and Goals To achieve the stated mission, the Washington Hemp EducationNetwork will plan and implement legal, nonviolent projects that: Raise public awareness of the history and beneficial uses of the Hemp plant; Educate the public to recognize and reject misinformation about Hemp; Facilitate changes in current laws to allow the people of Washington State to grow Hemp openly and engage in normal market activities with Hemp products; Through education and coalition, help to empower people who have been disempowered by misguided government policies concerning Hemp; Promote research and development of sustainable, environmentally responsible Hemp cultivation, and of beneficial products derived from Hemp. Project Criteria All projects planned and implemented by the Washington HempEducation Network will be consistent with the Mission,Recognition of Benefit, and Program and Goals statements definedherein. Endorsement and Support The Washington Hemp Education Network will endorse andsupport only those projects undertaken by individuals or otherentities that are consistent with the Mission, Recognition ofBenefit, and Program and Goals. Method of Operation This organization will meet regularly and will operate on theprinciple of consensus. As defined by the Center for ConflictResolution, Madison, WI, consensus is "a decision-makingprocess in which all parties involved explicitly agree to thefinal decision. Consensus decision making does not mean that all parties arecompletely satisfied with the final outcome, but that thedecision is acceptable to all because no one feels that his orher vital interests or values are violated by it." A board of directors will not be elected; rather, thefounding charter members will constitute the decision-makingbody, will serve as the projects and issues forum facilitationgroup, and will exercise no power other than that of presidingover meetings as defined by the Method of Operation, and ofapproving membership applications and filling vacancies in thecharter member group when a charter member leaves the group. Other future members may be added to the decision-making bodyof charter members if a consensus decision for such action ismade by the charter members. Members other than charter membersare encouraged to participate in discussions on issues that arebeing addressed during the decision-making process; participationin the final consensus decision is limited to charter members. Consensus Procedures o For each meeting, the charter members will appoint a rotating clerk, who will convene the meeting and govern the discussions during the meeting. The clerk is responsible for compiling and disseminating the agenda and supporting materials at least four days prior to the meeting. o If one or more members feel that a decision must be reached, the clerk must clearly state the issue to be decided and allow each member to speak uninterrupted about the issue. After each member speaks once about the issue, it can be debated if necessary by the group; however, members must not interrupt other speakers and must wait until granted the floor by the clerk before speaking. o Members must listen attentively and strive to understand each point of view, knowing that through the consensus process each decision must ultimately be a compromise of all points of view. o The clerk will develop a decision statement as the debate proceeds. The clerk will then document the evolution of the debate and will modify the position of the group by incorporating each point of view into the decision statement. o When all points of view have been made known, and the decision statement has reached a static state, the clerk will call for consensus on the statement. Three possible positions may be taken by the charter members: Consent, Object, or Stand Aside: o Consent indicates the member agrees to support the decision as the best compromise that can be achieved by the group. o Object indicates the member will not allow consensus to occur; if ONE member objects, the decision is discarded and no action is taken on the issue by the organization at that time. o Stand Aside indicates the member cannot agree with the decision but will not prevent the decision from being adopted by the group; the decision stands as long as no one indicates Object. These procedures should suffice for most issues facing thecharter members of W.H.E.N. If a situation should arise thatcannot be resolved by the above procedures, the clerk willreference the consensus handbook published by the Center forConflict Resolution. Charter members who are absent fromannounced meetings are by default relinquishing their consensusvote for the affected meetings only. Dave Hall, Olympia, WA: LEGALIZE IT, TAX IT, THEN LEAVE ME THE HELL ALONE!! CliffSchaffer's Home Page WT02-B01-47IA086-000618-B047-83http://206.61.184.43:80/schaffer/Activist/claim4.htm 206.61.184.43 19970122030637 text/html 15827HTTP/1.0 200 OKDate: Wednesday, 22-Jan-97 03:06:30 GMTServer: WebSitePro/1.1f (S/N wpo-0deb)Allow-ranges: bytesContent-type: text/htmlLast-modified: Saturday, 28-Dec-96 07:27:44 GMTContent-length: 15609 Claim IV: Any revenues generated by taxing legalized drugswould quickly evaporate Contents | Feedback | Search DRCNet Library | Schaffer Library | The Drug Legalization Debate DEA Statement CLAIM IV: ANY REVENUES GENERATED BY TAXING LEGALIZED DRUGSWOULD QUICKLY EVAPORATE IN LIGHT OF THE INCREASED SOCIAL COSTSASSOCIATED WITH LEGALIZING DRUGS. DEA Statement A favorite argument in support of legalization is thateducation, health care, road building and a wide array of otherworthwhile causes would benefit from the taxes that could beraised by legalizing drugs and then taxing them. The Facts On the whole, it certainly seems better than sending all thatmoney to Colombia. DEA Statement The conference participants were extremely skeptical about theclaim of a large tax windfall, and challenged advocates to provethat the amounts of revenue potentially generated by legalizationwould counterbalance the increased social costs that would resultfrom making drugs legal. When asked for specifics, they have noanswers. Are they taking into account the erosion of the tax base asmore and more citizens are unable to work because of drugaddiction? Add to this loss the cost of health and welfarebenefits for the unemployed. The Facts There is no tax windfall, large or small, right now. The onlyrevenue generated is the revenue generated from money andproperty seizures, which is fraught with its own problems. The DEA has asked the American taxpayers to support anopen-ended program of building more prisons. When they are askedfor specifics, such as how many prisons they propose to build,they have no answers. Does the DEA take into account the erosion of the tax bases bythe fact that -- by their own estimates -- two-thirds of thepeople they propose to throw in prison are gainfully employedtaxpayers? Does the DEA take into account the fact that, oncethese people have a prison record, they may be permanentlyunemployed because no one wants to hire an ex-convict? Puttingpeople in prison doesn't do anything to reduce unemploymentproblems, except for prison guards. DEA Statement Health and societal costs of drug legalization would increase.The panel predicted that drug treatment costs, hospitalizationfor longterm drug related disease, and treatment of theconsequences of family violence would further burden our alreadystrapped health care system. The Facts Every major study of drug policy disagreed with this point.See the list elsewhere on these pages. DEA Statement There is also real reason to believe that liability suitswould be brought against manufacturers and distributors of drugsas damages to individuals increased, thereby increasing the costof products. The Facts As opposed to the current situation, where there is no one tobring a liability suit against. Liability suits have not yet put the alcohol and tobaccoindustries out of business, or made their products too expensive.If this was a real concern, alcohol and tobacco would still bethe major concerns. DEA Statement Ask legalization proponents if the alleged profits from druglegalization would be enough to pay for the increased fetaldefects, loss of workforce productivity, increased trafficfatalities and industrial accidents, increased domestic violenceand the myriad other problems that would not only be high incomeitems, but extremely expensive in terms of social decay. How muchare they willing to pay? The Facts The number of fetal defects caused by alcohol are far greaterthan the number for illegal drugs so this argument is a redherring. If the DEA was really concerned about fetal defects,they would concentrate on alcohol first. The DEA acts like these problems are not here already, andthat the best method of preventing them is to throw people inprison. In every case, these problems are already here, andthrowing people in prison is not the best approach to theproblem. DEA Statement Some facts which help to confirm the observations of the forumparticipants may be used in debates: Dr. William Olson, former Deputy Assistant Secretary of Statefor International Narcotics Matters, outlines the magnitude ofthe social costs borne now by U.S. taxpayers because of drugs. Inhis 1994 essay, "Drug Legalization: Getting to No," heprovides the following:  2560 percent of the homeless are addicts, whosehomelessness is in large part the result of addiction and theirinability to manage money or make rational, reasonable decisions.They are increasingly supported at public expense. The Facts This is the result of the current policy which is, in itself,a good argument against what we are doing. DEA Statement  7580 percent of the 1.2 1.5 million teenage runaways aresubstance abusers, and not because prohibition made them usedrugs or run away. The Facts No, and prohibition didn't keep them from using drugs either.Runaways are usually children who have severe problems at homewhich cause them to engage in all sorts of deviant behavior. Thedrug laws do not do anything to address the underlying problem.The law only makes the runaways' problems worse if they arecaught using drugs. DEA Statement  3050 percent of mental patients are chemical abusers, 5060percent of these crack and cocaine. They are largely on publicsupport. The Facts The only thing this would show is that people with severemental problems are likely to try to self-medicate themselves. Itdoes not show any causal connection between drug use andinsanity, except perhaps that insanity causes greater drug use.It says even less about what would a sensible public policy foraddressing the problem. DEA Statement  As many as 11 percent of young mothers use drugs duringpregnancy. The Facts This is what is happening under the current system. A moresensible approach might reduce the number. DEA Statement  2.5 percent of all live births, some 100,000 babies areborn addicted to cocaine. They have lifelong learningdisabilities and emotional problems. The Facts There is no support for this claim at all and the DEA knowsit. The DEA is lying. DEA Statement  $50 billion is devoted annually to dealing with the healthcare costs of drug addiction and its collateral costs. These willnot disappear with legalization. The Facts Those costs haven't disappeared with prohibition either. Infact, every major study of the subject says that prohibition onlymakes those costs greater. DEA Statement  There are approximately 500,000 heroin and 2 million othersubstance abusers. Their care is increasingly a demand onsociety. The Facts According to the DEA's own figures, shown above, the currentpolicies have had no effect on this problem at all. DEA Statement  There is no way to predict how much revenue would begenerated by the United States Government taxing legalized drugs.Such a scenario depends entirely upon the parameters oflegalization, and what the policy means vis a vis sources ofdrugs. If U.S. farmers were given subsidies to produce drugs (asthey are given subsidies for tobacco) the U.S. taxpayers would beresponsible for paying for these subsidies. If foreign sources ofdrugs (opium or coca) were allowed to supply the raw material forthese products, an elaborate system of tariffs and tradepreferences would need to be established. The Facts It is true that there is no way to predict tax revenues untilone makes some assumptions about "legalization". One ofthe reasons is that the DEA doesn't have a clue how big themarket for drugs really is. This should not stop us fromrecognizing that prison is a net revenue loser. These are curious arguments. They bring up the question ofwhether we should have subsidies for tobacco in the first place,especially in view of the fact that it kills 100 times as manypeople as all the illegal drugs combined. Why does our governmentgive subsidies to tobacco farmers while it throws marijuana(hemp) farmers in prison? Our drug laws plainly make no sense atall. Trade and tariffs would be handled as they would for any othercommodity and the fact that tariffs might be complicated is not agood argument for throwing American citizens in prison. We also have to ask, who controls the trade and tariffs now?And what are the trade and tariff rules now? DEA Statement  Taxes would likely push the cost of the product up. Taxingthe drugs would make them more expensive at the checkout counter.The drug cartels do not provide a share of their receipts totheir respective governments. They are all business. Anyone goinginto competition with them, including the U.S. Government, wouldhave to be all business too, prepared to cut prices, ifnecessary, to stay in the game. The Facts Prohibition pushes the cost of the product up. The maindifference would be that the revenues would not be used to fundother crime. The same arguments were equally true of alcohol during alcoholProhibition. DEA Statement  Legalized gambling has not put illegal gambling out ofbusiness. In fact, legalized gambling has produced a whole newgroup of people who cannot control their need to gamble. Manystates have gone into the gambling business to raise funds forpublic purposes, with some success, although as morejurisdictions get into it the profits decline. Meanwhile, bookiesply their trade as they always have. The reason is the payoffthey offer is better than the legal gambling schemes. For everymillion dollars wagered, that is, they return a higher percentageto the winners. Again, it' s a matter of overhead. The bookiesare not trying to build schools, so they don't have to earmark apercentage of the profits for such endeavors. So long as that isso, they will always have a market that is loyal to them. Thesame situation could logically occur if drugs were legal. The Facts And prohibition has not put the drug dealers out of business,it has only made them richer. In places where gambling is legal, illegal bookies do not havehigher payoffs than the legal gambling schemes, except in thecase of state lotteries which have notoriously poor payoffpercentages. No one contends that any scheme will entirely eliminate theblack market in drugs, and the current policy is the bestexample. However, a better policy could greatly reduce many ofthe problems associated with the black market, as happened withthe repeal of alcohol Prohibition. Contents | Feedback | Search DRCNet Library | Schaffer Library | The Drug Legalization Debate WT02-B01-48IA086-000618-B047-168http://206.61.184.43:80/schaffer/Activist/claim7.htm 206.61.184.43 19970122030801 text/html 13680HTTP/1.0 200 OKDate: Wednesday, 22-Jan-97 03:07:53 GMTServer: WebSitePro/1.1f (S/N wpo-0deb)Allow-ranges: bytesContent-type: text/htmlLast-modified: Saturday, 28-Dec-96 07:28:25 GMTContent-length: 13462 Claim VII: Alcohol has caused significant health, social,and criminal problems Contents | Feedback | Search DRCNet Library | Schaffer Library | The Drug Legalization Debate CLAIM VII: ALCOHOL HAS CAUSED SIGNIFICANT HEALTH, SOCIAL ANDCRIME PROBLEMS IN THIS COUNTRY, AND LEGALIZED DRUGS WOULD ONLYMAKE THE SITUATION WORSE DEA Statement Many legalization advocates are fond of comparing the use ofalcohol with the use of drugs, yet draw faulty conclusions fromthe comparison. People often consume small amounts of wine orbeer as a beverage and do not necessarily drink to the point ofmental impairment. This is not true of drug use, where the wholepoint of use is intoxication. A more accurate analogy would be tocompare drug use to drunkenness. Yet even that analogy is weak,because drugs are far more addictive than alcohol, and have nocultural or social value. Dr. Mitchell Rosenthal points out, forexample, that only 10 percent of drinkers become alcoholics,while up to 75 percent of regular illicit drug users becomeaddicted. The Facts The point of use of alcohol is intoxication, just as it is forthe illegal drugs. Even small amounts of alcohol will relax aperson or change their mood. This is intoxication, it is just amild intoxication. If you don't want the intoxication, there isvery little reason to drink alcoholic wine or beer instead oftheir non-alcoholic versions. The alcoholic versions are themajor sellers so it is a fair assumption that most alcoholdrinkers want the mild intoxication which comes from a couple ofbeers. Most users of most drugs want a relatively mild intoxicationfrom their drug of choice. That is one of the main reasons thatwine and beer outsell the harder beverages, and why most illegaldrug use is the use of marijuana. This argument is a distortion in itself because it lumps allillicit drugs together, as if they had the same capacity toaddict. Clearly, there are major differences between drugs suchas heroin, cocaine, and marijuana, and Dr. Rosenthal isirresponsible not to point them out. Dr. Rosenthal's figures could not possibly be true, based onthe DEA's own evidence shown above in their chart showing thesupposed drop in drug use. The DEA's own figures shows the numberof regular drug users is far higher than the number of addictsand always has been. By the DEA's own figures at least 85 percentare not addicted, and at least 70 percent are gainfully employed. DEA Statement Proponents of legalization note--correctly--that alcohol killsmany more Americans than do illegal drugs and currently exactsocial and financial costs that are higher as well. Advocatesclaim that many people do not use alcohol, and that manyAmericans may also choose to forego drugs. Like treatmentprograms available for alcohol addicted people, treatment fordrug addicts should be more widely available. The Facts The DEA admits that alcohol causes far more damage than theillegal drugs but they don't seem to propose that we bring backalcohol Prohibition. What the DEA does not say is the degree to which alcohol andtobacco cause more damage than illegal drugs. DEA Statement The experts assembled at the AntiLegalization Forum pointed toalready overburdened health care and social systems that areunable to address all the problems associated with alcohol use.Instead of compounding these problems, and acknowledging thecrime problems made worse by alcohol use, the group stated thatlegalizing drugs would create undue burdens on the criminal,health and social service systems. The Facts The group points out that the "already overburdenedhealth care and social systems . . . are unable to address allthe problems associated with alcohol use", yet no oneproposes that we bring back alcohol Prohibition as the bestapproach to the problem. DEA Statement Alcohol use in this country has taken a tremendous physicaltoll on Americans, not to mention the social problems that haveresulted from its use. Legalization proponents would have uscompound our problems by creating a new class of drug addictedAmericans. Again, how much are we willing to tolerate? To payfor? The Facts Should we bring back alcohol Prohibition as a means of dealingwith alcohol problems? Clearly not. The message of Prohibition isclear: Alcohol is bad, but Prohibition is worse. DEA Statement Look at the problems that alcohol abuse has wrought. In the1920s those advocating the repeal of Prohibition argued thatcrime and other social ills would be alleviated if alcohol werelegal. Has that happened? We now have approximately 11 millionalcoholics or problem drinkers in this country whose behavior hascontributed to lost productivity in the workplace, fetal defects,traffic fatalities, domestic violence and other crime. If drugswere made legal, the numbers and the problems would swell. The Facts Is the DEA arguing that the best approach to the alcoholproblems is to bring back Prohibition? Why not? DEA Statement The simple fact is that if drugs are made legal, more peoplewill use drugs. There will be higher health and social costs;there will be more crime. Some facts which help to confirm theobservations of the forum participants may be used in debates: The Facts The Wickersham Commission, which was originally formed toimprove alcohol Prohibition, found that alcohol use fell in thefirst year of Prohibition but rose every year thereafter. DEA Statement  In a May, 1993 report titled "Survey of State PrisonInmates," the Bureau of Justice Statistics states that 32%of inmates committed their offense under the influence ofalcohol. Slightly more than twofifths of inmates convicted ofhomicide or assault committed their current offense under theinfluence of alcohol or of alcohol with drugs. The Facts This is another curious argument. It is clear that the biggestproblem here is alcohol, as the DEA itself states. If the DEA wasreally consistent in their position, they would advocate thereturn of alcohol prohibition. DEA Statement  According to the 1993 National Household Survey on DrugAbuse, about 11 million Americans were heavy drinkers in 1993(drinking five or more drinks per occasion on five or more daysin the past 30 days). Heavy alcohol use has changed little since1985, when there were 12 million heavy drinkers. The Facts Assuming the figures are accurate, it would obviously not be asensible approach to the problem to attempt throw all thesepeople in prison. DEA Statement The same report indicates that "of the 11 million heavydrinkers in 1993, 26 percent (3 million) were also currentillicit drug users." The report goes on to say that"Current smokers are more likely to be heavy drinkers andillicit drug users. Among smokers in 1993, 11 percent were heavydrinkers and 12 percent were illicit drug users." The Facts The DEA seems to be trying to make the discredited argumentabout "gateway drugs". That is, they used to contendthat some drugs, by some as-yet-unexplained process, naturallycreated a craving for totally unrelated drugs in people who hadnever used drugs before. This was a holdover from their earlier,plainer and even more easily discredited argument that marijuanaleads to heroin. (Which, by the way, was in direct contradictionto Harry Anslinger's testimony before Congress when marijuana wasoutlawed.) People who engage in one form of risky behavior often engagein other risky behaviors. That is the only thing that these kindsof statistics could show. DEA Statement  In a 1993 report by Brandeis University, it was estimatedthat the United States spent $10.5 billion on health care relatedto alcohol use. The Facts Then why shouldn't we bring back Prohibition as the best wayto deal with the problem? DEA Statement  Alcohol is blamed for between $140 and $210 billion peryear in lost productivity. The Facts Then why shouldn't we bring back Prohibition as the best wayto deal with the problem? DEA Statement  17,461 people were killed in alcohol related trafficincidents in 1993. The Facts That is almost as many people as the American MedicalAssociation estimates were killed by all illegal drugs from allcauses combined. Clearly, if the DEA wanted to do something aboutthe real drug problem, it would be of more benefit to concentratetheir enforcement efforts on alcohol. DEA Statement  Michigan's Director of the Office of Drug Control Policy,Robert Peterson, states that "It is estimated that alcoholabuse costs the nation $100 billion per year and over 300 livesper day, an amount that the $18 billion in state and federalexcise tax revenue does not begin to cover." The Facts And yet no one contends that throwing wine and beer drinkersin prison is a sensible approach to this problem. Contents | Feedback | Search DRCNet Library | Schaffer Library | The Drug Legalization Debate WT02-B01-49IA086-000618-B047-115http://206.61.184.43:80/schaffer/Activist/claim5.htm 206.61.184.43 19970122030650 text/html 12457HTTP/1.0 200 OKDate: Wednesday, 22-Jan-97 03:06:40 GMTServer: WebSitePro/1.1f (S/N wpo-0deb)Allow-ranges: bytesContent-type: text/htmlLast-modified: Saturday, 28-Dec-96 07:27:39 GMTContent-length: 12239 Claim V: There are no compelling reasons to prescribemarijuana or heroin Contents | Feedback | Search DRCNet Library | Schaffer Library | The Drug Legalization Debate DEA Statement CLAIM V: THERE ARE NO COMPELLING MEDICAL REASONS TO PRESCRIBEMARIJUANA OR HEROIN TO SICK PEOPLE. The Facts It is quite easy to refute this argument for both drugs. Medically speaking, heroin is simply a stronger form ofmorphine. Therefore, if there is a legitimate medical use formorphine, then there is a legitimate medical use for heroin.Heroin was once used medically in a manner similar to morphineand was even used for pain relief during childbirth. Doctorsstate that heroin is a good drug for medical use because it issafe, powerful, and short acting. Recent research indicates thatpain-killers can be important healing agents after patientsundergo major surgery, because these drugs reduce the stress onthe central nervous system. In some cases, the amount of timerequired to heal can be cut in half. Some research shows that thebest doses of morphine are perhaps ten times what they wereconsidered to be just a decade ago. In the case of marijuana (hemp), there is already an approvedprescription drug, Marinol, which is derived from the primaryactive ingredient in marijuana and used for the conditions forwhich marijuana (hemp) is recommended. Marijuana (hemp) itselfwould not be approved as a prescription drug because of FDA ruleswhich state that a medicine must consist of only the activeingredients and a filler. Therefore, the rules themselvesprohibit the approval of any natural substances such as a plant,even though the active ingredients in the plant and theprescription drug are precisely the same. The question then becomes, why should a sick person pay sixtydollars a pill when they can grow the same medicine in their ownbackyard for free? Some patients report that the homegrown version of themedicine is far superior to the prescription version for a coupleof reasons. One reason is that marijuana (hemp) is often used totreat nausea and it is often hard to keep pills in their stomachwhen they have nausea. Some of them have complained that it isawfully depressing to vomit up a sixty dollar pill. Therefore, itis better if the medicine is smoked because it bypasses thestomach and gets the medicine into the body much more quickly.Another reason that some sick people prefer marijuana (hemp) overMarinol is that Marinol makes them "higher than akite", and they don't want to be high, they just want theirmedical symptoms relieved. By smoking marijuana (hemp), they canlimit the amount of "high" they get. Marijuana (hemp) has traditionally been used in medicines forthousands of years. Prior to 1937, it was the most commonagricultural crop in America and was used for literally thousandsof purposes, including rope, cloth, paper, fuel, and medicine. Itwas prescribed for a wide variety of ailments and was included inup to two-thirds of all over the counter preparations. Prior to1937, cannabis (hemp) was completely unregulated and it wouldhave been impossible to regulate cannabis (hemp) because it was amajor agricultural crop grown nearly everywhere. Cannabis (hemp)derivatives were included in a wide variety of items consumed bythe general public. Despite this widespread, unregulatedconsumption, there were no reported problems. The AmericanMedical Association was opposed to the marijuana (hemp) laws in1937 for these reasons. The promoters of these laws openly liedabout the AMA's attitude toward the law in order to get itpassed. DEA Statement It is often suggested that, even if currently controlledsubstances are not made available to the general public, some ofthem, particularly marijuana and heroin, could be used to relievesuffering. Participants in the AntiLegalization Forum acknowledged thatarguments urging the medical use of marijuana are often used asan entree into the legalization debate. Medical use arguments cangarner public support because they seem harmless enough to theuninformed audience. The experts agreed that these issues areperipheral to the real issue. The Facts The DEA has no business making decisions or statements aboutthe proper medical use of anything. The fact that they do is onlyone more example of what is wrong with our current drug policy. There should be no argument at all that it is up to themedical profession and its patients to define what is, or is not,a proper medical treatment. The police do not have the requiredprofessional knowledge to determine proper medical uses, they donot know what difficulties individual patients may face in theirtreatment or what benefits patients might receive, and they careeven less. It is absurd to pretend that complex medical decisionscan be made for every patient in the United States by anorganization such as the DEA. The problem goes beyond the illegal drugs such as marijuanaand heroin. The problem extends to pain killers of all types ingeneral. The severity of this problem was seen in the recent caseof Florida versus Martinez. Mr. Martinez was a lay AIDS counselor who ran a drug buyersclub for AIDS patients. A drug buyers club purchases medicaldrugs which are available in other countries but not in theUnited States and distributes them to sick people here. Mr.Martinez was charged with distributing morphine without medicaltraining or a license. Mr. Martinez did not deny the fact that he distributedmorphine to people and that he was in violation of the drug laws.His only defense was that his actions were a medical necessity,because of the barbaric policies of the DEA against people whowere in pain. The defense brought forth experts who testified howthe DEA had prosecuted and imprisoned doctors for prescribingTylenol 3 -- Tylenol with codeine -- a drug which is not even aprescription drug except in the United States and South Africa,and the US is the only control in the world which has ever sent adoctor to prison for prescribing it. They testified about AIDSpatients who suffer from a nerve degeneration all over their bodywhich makes them scream in pain every time they are even touched.For many of them, a simple bath can be painful beyond belief, andyet they cannot get pain medication because their doctors areoften afraid to prescribe it because they fear what the DEA coulddo to them. After the jury heard the evidence on the government's drugpolicy, they voted unanimously for acquittal. This trial wasshown on Court TV and has been repeated many times because it isone of the most interesting trials they have ever shown. DEA Statement The medical pros and cons of prescribing marijuana and herointo sick people are best debated by medical professionals. Itshould be kept in mind, however, that marijuana has been rejectedas medicine by the American Medical Society, the AmericanGlaucoma Society, the American Academy of Ophthalmology, theInternational Federation of Multiple Sclerosis Societies, and theAmerican Cancer Society. HHS report Not one American health association accepts marijuana asmedicine. Statements issued by these organizations expressconcern over the harmful effects of the drugs and over the lackof solid research demonstrating that they might do more good thanharm. The International Federation of Multiple Sclerosis Societies,for instance, said in a statement issued by its TherapeuticClaims Committee in 1992: "Further studies are required todetermine whether marijuana has a clinically useful effect onmultiple sclerosis. In view of the possible toxic effects oflongterm use, its use cannot be recommended. In the opinion ofthe committee, there appears to be no generally acceptedscientific basis for use of this therapy. It has never beentested in a properly controlled trial. Longterm use may beassociated with significant serious side effects." Some facts which help to confirm the observations of the forumparticipants may be used in debates:  Under the federal statute known as the ControlledSubstances Act, regulated drugs are divided into categories knownas schedules. In Schedule I, for instance, are drugs with a highpotential for abuse and no currently accepted medical use intreatment in the United States. At the other end of the spectrumis Schedule V, which is for drugs that have a low potential forabuse and have a currently accepted medical use in treatment inthe United States. The Act provides a mechanism for substances tobe controlled (added to a schedule), decontrolled (removed fromcontrol), or rescheduled (transferred from one schedule toanother). Heroin and marijuana are in Schedule I; cocaine, which issometimes used as a local anesthetic, is in Schedule II. Much ofthe debate about medical uses for currently illegal drugsconcerns substituting heroin for morphine and supplying marijuanato AIDS and glaucoma patients or using it to treat side effectsof chemotherapy.  A petition to put marijuana in a less restrictive scheduleof the CSA was rejected by then DEA Administrator John C. Lawn,after public hearings, on December 29, 1989. The United StatesCourt of Appeals ordered further proceedings, however, to clearup what it felt were some ambiguities in the record.Administrator Robert C. Bonner, who succeeded Lawn, complied andissued a new ruling on March 26, 1992. "By any modernscientific standard, marijuana is no medicine, " Bonnersaid. The three judge appeals court upheld the ruling unanimouslyon February 18, 1994. "Our review of the record convinces usthat the Administrator's findings are supported by substantialevidence," the court said, noting the "testimony ofnumerous experts that marijuana' s medicinal value has never beenproven in sound scientific studies." Contents | Feedback | Search DRCNet Library | Schaffer Library | The Drug Legalization Debate WT02-B01-50IA086-000615-B002-191http://206.61.184.43:80/schaffer/Library/savings.htm 206.61.184.43 19970122024817 text/html 3608HTTP/1.0 200 OKDate: Wednesday, 22-Jan-97 02:48:08 GMTServer: WebSitePro/1.1f (S/N wpo-0deb)Allow-ranges: bytesContent-type: text/htmlLast-modified: Saturday, 28-Dec-96 06:41:20 GMTContent-length: 3391 Federal Financial Analysis of the Legalization of Drugs Contents | Feedback | Search DRCNet Library | Schaffer Library Federal Financial Analysis of Legalization of Drugs This Federal financial analysis of legalization comes fromTheodore R. Vallance, Former chief of the Planning Branch of theNational Institutes of Mental Health. His main professionaleffort for many years was directed at just this sort of analysis.The analysis was published in the 7-10-95 issue of NationalReview. Reductions (in millions of $)     From      To        Saving  DirectLaw Enforcement                   13,203    3,300      9,903*Interdiction costs                2,200        0      2,200*International anti-drug             768      384        384*OCDETF (Organized Crime & Drug      399       40        359          Enforcement Task Force)            ONDCP (the "drug czar")               69       17         52IndirectVictims of Crime                     842      210        632Incarceration                      4,434      887      3,547Crime careers                     13,976    2,679     11,297                                                    ________Subtotal                                              28,374Less increase in prevention research and service      (3,572)Less increase in treatment research and service       (2,802)                                                    ________Subtotal                                              22,000Plus net income from drug taxes                       15,000                                                    ________Total                                                 37,000*1993 Figures. Contents | Feedback | Search DRCNet Library | Schaffer Library WT02-B01-51IA086-000618-B047-13http://206.61.184.43:80/schaffer/Activist/claim1.htm 206.61.184.43 19970122030540 text/html 34107HTTP/1.0 200 OKDate: Wednesday, 22-Jan-97 03:05:32 GMTServer: WebSitePro/1.1f (S/N wpo-0deb)Allow-ranges: bytesContent-type: text/htmlLast-modified: Saturday, 28-Dec-96 07:28:34 GMTContent-length: 33889 Claim I - Crime, Violence and Drug Use Go Hand in Hand Contents | Feedback | Search DRCNet Library | Schaffer Library | The Drug Legalization Debate How to Hold Your Own In a Drug Legalization Debate THE TEN CLAIMS DEA Statement The three groups discussing legalization at Quantico touchedon a number of significant issues. It was evident to theparticipants that the prolegalization arguments have remainedfairly consistent over the years and that there are ten majorclaims that can be made in opposition of legalization. The Facts The participants have missed the point again. The argumentshave changed over the last few years in particular, which is whatbrought them to Quantico in the first place. DEA Statement We have attempted to provide the ten simple, compelling claimsto help you frame your arguments against legalization. The claimsare backed up by facts, quotes and statistics. Periodically,these will need to be updated to ensure that the most currentinformation is being used to craft arguments againstlegalization. The Facts In this booklet, the DEA puts its arguments on the line. Whenthese ten claims are gone, it will have no more argument forcontinuing this drug war. DEA Statement CLAIM I: CRIME, VIOLENCE AND DRUG USE GO HAND IN HAND The Facts In this claim, the DEA does the first of its major distortions- the lumping together of all drugs into the same group.Different drugs have different effects and, for some drugs, thereis clearly very little association with violence. Marijuana andtobacco are two examples of drugs with little reason to believethat they are connected to violence. The DEA does not mentionhemp (marijuana) in this Claim so we must assume that they agreethat this argument would not apply to hemp (marijuana) in anycase. Even if we accepted the DEA's arguments that drugs, and notprohibition, causes violence, the best way to reduce the crimeand violence would be to reduce the drug use. There is noevidence that throwing people in prison is the most effective wayto reduce drug use. All the evidence shows that treatment andeducation are more cost-effective. DEA Statement Proponents of legalization contend that if drugs werelegalized, crime and violence would decrease. They believe thatit is the illegal nature of drug production, trafficking and usethat fuels crime and violence. They state that turf wars, gangactivity and drugrelated crimes are the result of the illegalnature of the drug trade. Proponents state that users commitcrimes to pay for drugs now because they cannot easily obtainthem. If drugs were legal, they say, the enormous profitsassociated with drugs because of their illegal status wouldevaporate and, once gone, the black market and criminal activityassociated with drugs would also be eliminated. The Facts If this was really the number one concern of the DEA then theyshould be advocating tough prison sentences against alcohol. Of all psychoactive substances, alcohol is the only one whose consumption has been shown to commonly increase aggression. . . . Alcohol drinking and violence are linked through pharmacological effects on behavior, through expectations that heavy drinking and violence go together in certain settings, and through patterns of binge drinking and fighting that sometimes develop in adolescence. . . . Illegal drugs and violence are linked primarily through drug marketing: disputes among rival distributors, arguments and robberies involving buyers and sellers, property crimes committed to raise drug money and, more speculatively, social and economic interactions between the illegal markets and the surrounding communities. . . . Psychoactive Substances andViolence, published by the Department of Justice, Series:Research in Brief, February 1994 The image of the insanely violent drug user has been a commonargument for drug prohibition since the earliest days of the lawswhen the New York Times published front page articles about"Negro Cocaine Fiends, New Southern Menace", and quoteda sheriff saying, "Those cocaine niggers sure are hard tokill." (NY Times, February 17, 1914) It is an image whichhas been used to justify the cruelest kinds of responses tosocial problems, as shown by the sheriff's own words. It neverdid have any basis in fact. The Department of Justice's own research clearly shows thatthe only real connection between illegal drugs and violence isthe violence created by the fact that it is illegal. This is thesame kind of violence that we saw with respect to alcoholProhibition with the wars between rival alcohol distributors. Itwas during this period that the Thompson submachine gun became asymbol of gangs and Prohibition. All of that ended whenProhibition ended. Violent crime dropped 65 percent in the yearProhibition was repealed and it continued to drop every yearthereafter until World War II. (Need citation from Ethan N. onthis one.) We could expect similar results from the repeal ofdrug Prohibition. DEA Statement Participants in the AntiLegalization Forum, who are experts incrime and violence, disagreed strongly with the notion that crimeand violence would be reduced if drugs were legalized. It iswidely claimed by those advancing the case for legalization thatcrime is largely committed by drug traffickers protecting theirturf. Sadly, it is the experience of many local police officersthat crime is committed not only because people want to buydrugs, but more often because people use drugs. There is nodenying the fact that drug use changes behavior and exacerbatescriminal activity. The Facts The Department of Justice's own studies of the issue disagree.See the information presented above. DEA Statement The experts also believe that legalization will lead toincreased availability of drugs, which will, in turn, lead toincreased use. The use of drugs, especially cocaine, crack,methamphetamine, and PCP is often associated with violentcriminal behavior. There is ample evidence which demonstrates thelinks between drugs, violence and crime, and the links between acurrently legal substance--alcohol--and crime is well documented.Police can attest to the fact that alcohol plays a significantrole in domestic violence cases. Drug use would only swell thestatistics regarding crime, even if the drugs were legallypurchased. The Facts The Department of Justice's own studies of the issue disagree. DEA Statement Legalization proponents ignore the fact that the peoplecommitting violent crimes are career criminals who will not stoptheir illegal activities once drugs are legalized; they willinstead seek new sources of illicit revenue. Criminal activitywould not be reduced as a result of drug legalization any morethan gangster activity disappeared after the Repeal ofProhibition. The Facts This is the argument that if we "legalized" drugsthen the criminals would just find another line of work. There isnothing else which offers the opportunity to get rich so easily.By comparison, all the other crimes are hard work. The DEA says that criminal activity would not be"reduced" because gangster activity did not"disappear" after the repeal of Prohibition. Of course,anyone who has seen "The Untouchables" should know thatgangster activity was significantly "reduced" after therepeal of Prohibition, even if it did not "disappear".Therefore, we could expect similar results again. This is an interesting argument. We must keep drugs illegalbecause it gives work to criminals who might be doing somethingmore dangerous if we did not. That is, having these people selldrugs is a good thing because it keeps them out of biggertrouble. Relatively speaking then, selling drugs is not so bad asother potential crimes so we should make sure they keep doing it. Of course, then the question becomes: What would happen if weactually did stop the flow of drugs? Would we have to startmanufacturing drugs and distributing them through these samecriminals just to keep them from doing something worse insociety? According to this argument, we are better off if the drug warnever does succeed. DEA Statement The group discussed the fallacy that legalizing drugs wouldeliminate the black market environment which seems to fuel thedrug trade and its attendant violence. The existence of a blackmarket is heavily dependent on the parameters set by thelegalizers: which drugs would be legal, the potency level ofdrugs and the age at which legal drugs could be purchased. Ifdrugs were legal for persons over 18, for example, drugtraffickers would still target those 17 and younger; if onlymarijuana were legalized, drug traffickers would continue totraffic in heroin and cocaine. The Facts Who do the drug traffickers target now? What drugs do theytraffic in now? No sensible person pretends that any drug policy is going tosolve all the problems related to drugs. That is clearlyunrealistic. At the same time, there is no reason to undertakepolicies, such as we have now, which only make the situationworse. Let's face it. The DEA never has had any effective controlover the drug markets and they never will. By taking thisapproach the DEA has insured that only the outlaws will havecontrol of drug sales and distribution. DEA Statement Some facts which help to confirm the observations of the forumparticipants may be used in debates:  A report in the Journal of the American Medical Association(7/6/94) reports that cocaine use is linked to high rates ofhomicide in New York City and that "homicide victims mayhave provoked violence through irritability, paranoid thinking orverbal and physical aggression which are known to bepharmacologic effects of cocaine." The Facts The DOJ's own studies, mentioned above, tell a differentstory. What the DEA is alluding to here in the last part of thisparagraph is the fact that people are more likely to be victimsor homicide than to be perpetrators of homicide while under theinfluence of cocaine. The same statistic is true of alcohol. Whatit means is that people who get stoned on anything sometimes dostupid things, such as getting themselves killed. This is evenmore true of alcohol, but does not make a good reason to throwpeople in prison for drinking wine or beer. DEA Statement  An April, 1994 report titled "Violent Drug RelatedCrime" compiled by Drug and Crime Data Center andClearinghouse indicates that drugs are used by many offenderscommitting crimes. In 1991, the following percentages of Stateprison inmates involved in violent offenses reported that theyhad used drugs at the time the offense was committed. Violent Offenses: 28% Homicide: 28% Sexual Assault: 20% Robbery: 38% Assault 23% The Facts The Drug and Crime Data Center and Clearinghouse reports thatthey have no publication with this title. The Sourcebook ofCriminal Justice Statistics of 1992 lists the breakdown of druguse during commission of violent offenses. The figures showsthat, with the exception of robbery, about 75 to 90 percent ofall the reported drug use was use of alcohol, not illegal drugs.For robbery, the figures are roughly equal. People who commit violent crimes are likely to have a lot ofproblems in their lives, including use of illegal drugs as wellas higher rates of use of alcohol and tobacco. That doesn'tnecessarily mean that one problem is causally related to another. Even if we assumed, as the DEA implies, that all of this wasdue to illegal drugs, they don't mention comparison data for thenumber of people who took whatever drug and did not commit aviolent crime. Even if we assumed the DEA is right, there is no evidence thatthe best way to control the problem is to put people in prison. DEA Statement  Data from the National Institute of Justice (US Departmentof Justice) Drug Use Forecasting (DUF) program underscore thecrimedrugs link. Of a sample of males arrested in 24 US cities in1991, the percent testing positive for at least one drug in theDUF survey ranged from 36% in Omaha to 75% in San Diego. Amongfemale arrestees, the percent testing positive for any drugranged from 45% in San Antonio to 79% in Cleveland The Facts The data of the Drug Use Forecasting program is interestingbut it does not underscore the crime-drugs link. The data aresimply measures of the number of people arrested who had drugs intheir system. There is no similar comparative data on people whowere not arrested, or did not commit crimes. It is also a long way from showing any causal relationshipbetween drugs and crime except, perhaps, for the fact that peoplewho are stupid enough to get severely drunk or stoned are proneto do stupid things. That would not make it a good idea to havedrug prohibition any more than the fact that we arrest people whoare drunk and disorderly makes it a good idea to have alcoholprohibition. DEA Statement  A May 1993 Bureau of Justice Statistics report states that"Drug use was common among inmates serving time forburglary, robbery or drug offenses. Among inmates serving asentence for burglary or robbery, about 6 in 10 inmates had useddrugs in the month before the arrest for the current offense, andabout 4 in 10 were under the influence at the time of theoffense." The Facts The number of inmates who used drugs in the month before thearrest is as irrelevant as the number who drank a beer during themonth before the arrest. It should be noted that being under the influence of drugs isa convenient excuse which seems to suit everybody involved in acriminal prosecution. The defendant can plead that he wasn'thimself because he was out of his mind on drugs and thereby playon the court's sympathies for leniency. The prosecutors can pointto another horrendous drug problem, which suits their interestsas well. DEA Statement The same study indicates that female inmates were more likelythan male inmates to have used drugs in the month before theoffense (54% versus 50%) and to have been under the influence atthe time of the offense (36% versus 31 %). The Facts How does this show that we ought to have a general program toimprison women who use drugs? DEA Statement Another finding of the study indicated that among 18-49 yearold males, those who had used alcohol, cannabis and cocaine atsome point during the past year were ten times more likely tocommit a violent act (26.1 percent versus 2.7 percent) than thosewho used none of the above. The Facts The DEA conveniently ignores the fact that alcohol has thehighest association with violence and that cannabis (hemp) hasnone. The DEA contends that, because someone had a beer up to a yearago, they are potentially violent today. There is no evidence of a causal relationship here at all.Even if there was, there is no evidence that prison would be thebest way to control drug use. DEA Statement  Mitchell S. Rosenthal, M.D., president of a major New YorkCity drug treatment center, Phoenix House, and chairman of theNew York State Advisory Council on Substance Abuse, notes thatone of the basic contentions of advocates of legalization is thatdrug users are essentially normal people. Actually, Dr. Rosenthalsaid in a speech in 1993, drugs undo the bounds that keep manyseemingly normal people on an even keel. "The treatmentcommunity does not contend that society is at risk from thebehavior of all drug abusers or even the great majority ofthem," he said. "The case for prohibition rests on thesubstantial number of abusers who cross the line from permissibleself-destruction to become 'driven' people, who are 'out ofcontrol' and put others in danger of their risk taking, violence,abuse or HIV infection." The Facts The DEA argues that drug users are not "essentiallynormal people", even while they state that at leasttwo-thirds of them are gainfully employed taxpayers. As for undoing "the bounds that keep many seeminglynormal people on an even keel" and all the other problemsmentioned, these problems are equally true of alcohol. Yet theydo not recommend that we bring back Prohibition of alcohol. Again, the DEA attempts to lump all drugs together, as if theyall had the same effects. General statements about"all" drugs are intentionally misleading. DEA Statement  The International Association of Chiefs of Police publisheda report in 1993 titled "Violent Crime in America." Itstates "Drug abuse and crime, both violent and nonviolent,are linked. National Crime Victimization surveys in 1989 and 1990revealed over 2,000,000 crimes committed by offenders under theinfluence of drugs or alcohol...this represented 36% and 34% oftotal violent crime recorded by the surveys." The Facts The important phrase here is "drugs or alcohol". Thetable below shows that alcohol's association with violent crimeis far greater than the association of all illegal drugscombined. The biggest problem is alcohol, and yet no one issuggesting that we have a war on booze. Again, the DEA attempts to lump all drugs together as if theywere all equally responsible for the problems. It isirresponsible and misleading to lump all drugs together,particularly in view of the large role that alcohol plays in thefigures. DEA Statement  Bureau of Justice Statistics surveys indicate that"25% of convicted inmates in jails, 33% of state prisoners,and 40% of youths in stateoperated facilities admit being underthe influence of an illegal drug at the time of theiroffense." (BJS, Drug and Crime Facts, 1992) The Facts One reason is that a large number of them are in jail forselling illegal drugs. Again, it is misleading to lump all drugs together as if theywere all equally responsible and to imply a causal relationship. The more complete figures, in the table below, show a somewhatdifferent picture. DEA Statement  Data from Bureau of Justice Statistics Surveys show that77.7 percent of jail inmates, 79.6 percent of State prisoners,and 82.7 percent of youth in longterm public juvenile facilitieshad used drugs the The Facts One reason is that a large number of them are in jail forillegal drug offenses. This what the DEA did not tell you. Convicted jail inmates under the influence of drugs or alcoholat the time of the current offense.                        Percent of convicted jail inmates under the    influence of:                   Most Serious             (All        Alcohol        Both        Total    Offense                Illegal)        Only                              Drugs Only                                         Violent Offenses          8.8          30.7         16.1         56.6        Homicide              5.5          49.5         13.7         68.7        Sexual Assault        3.5          21.1         21.1         45.7        Robbery              17.7          18.1         17.3         53.1        Assault               4.5          44.3          9.8         58.7        Other violent        10.0          21.8         27.3         59.2    Property Offenses        18.2          17.9         12.8         48.9    Drug Offenses            28.6          7.3          12.3         48.2    Public-Order              6.4          54.1          9.6         70.1    Offenses                                                                 From: Sourcebook on Criminal Justice Statistics, 1992, Table6.54, page 603. DEA Statement Some Effects of Illegal Drugs The Facts The DEA's table of the effects of illegal drugs is a notableexample of their failure to consider the whole picture. The tabledoes not include any information on the effects of either alcoholor tobacco for comparison, even though these drugs are clearlythe bigger problems in our society. Some of the information in the table the DEA presented is, ofcourse, patently wrong but, in the interest of brevity, we willforgo the detailed rebuttal of the information in this table. DEA Statement                     Short-Term Effects      Duration of  DEA View of Risk   Acute        of                 Drug Type      Desired        Other          Effects      Dependence         Heroin         euphoria       respiratory    3 to 6       physical - high                   pain           depression     hours        psychological -                   reduction      nausea                      high                                             drowsiness                                     Cocaine       excitement     increased      1 to 2       physical                          euphoria       blood          hours        possible                          increased      pressure                    psychological                     alertness,     increased                   high                              wakefulness    respiratory                                                                  rate                                                                         nausea                                                                       cold sweats                                                                  twitching                                                                    headache                                       Crack cocaine  same as        same as        about 5      same as cocaine                   cocaine        cocaine        minutes                                        more rapid                                                                   high than                                                                    cocaine                                                       Marijuana      euphoria       accelerated    2 to 4       physical  unknown                 relaxation     heartbeat      hours        psychological                                    impairment of               high                                             perception,                                                                  judgement,                                                                   fine motor                                                                   skills, and                                                                  memory                                         Amphetamines   euphoria       increased      2 to 4       physical                          excitement     blood          hours        possible                          increased      pressure                    psychological                     alertness,     increased                   high                              wakefulness    pulse rate                                                                   insomnia                                                                     loss of                                                                      appetite                                       LSD            illusions and  poor           8 to 12      physical  none                    hallucinations perception of  hours        psychological                                    time and                    unknown                           excitement     distance                                                      euphoria       acute                                                                        anxiety,                                                                     restlessness,                                                                sleeplessness                                                                sometimes                                                                    depression                                     The Drugs the DEA Did Not Include                                        Alcohol        euphoria       poor           2 to 4       physical - high                   excitement     perception of  hours        psychological -                   relaxation     time and                    high                                             distance                                                                     impairment of                                                                perception,                                                                  judgement,                                                                   fine motor                                                                   skills, and                                                                  memory                                                                       respiratory                                                                  depression                                                                   nausea                                                                       drowsiness                                                                   headache                                                                     death from                                                                   overdose                                       Tobacco        relaxation     nausea         1 to 2       physical - high                                  headache       hours        psychological -                                  lung cancer                 high                                             throat cancer                                                                Central                                                                      Nervous                                                                      System damage                                                                death from                                                                   overdose                                       AN1142 Sources NIDA, Heroin, NIDA capsules, August1986; DEA, Drugs of abuse, 1989, G R Gay, 'Clinicalmanagement and chronic cocaine poisoning Concepts, components andconfiguration, Annals of emergency medicine, 11(10); 562572 as cited in NIDA, Dale D Chitwood, Patterns andconsequences of cocaine use, in Coca, America: Epidemiologic and clinical perspectives, NicholasJ Kozel and Edgar H Adams, eds, NIDA research monograph 61, 1985; NIDA, James A Inciardi, Crackcocaine inMiami, in The epidemiology of cocaine u abuse, Susan Schober and Charles Schade, eds, NIDAresearch monograph 110, 1991; and NIDA; ManjL NIDA Capsules August 1986 Contents | Feedback | Search DRCNet Library | Schaffer Library | The Drug Legalization Debate WT02-B01-52IA086-000618-B046-267http://206.61.184.43:80/schaffer/Activist/dearep1.htm 206.61.184.43 19970122030423 text/html 8549HTTP/1.0 200 OKDate: Wednesday, 22-Jan-97 03:04:18 GMTServer: WebSitePro/1.1f (S/N wpo-0deb)Allow-ranges: bytesContent-type: text/htmlLast-modified: Saturday, 28-Dec-96 07:27:19 GMTContent-length: 8332 Speaking Out Against Drug Legalization Contents | Feedback | Search DRCNet Library | Schaffer Library | The Drug Legalization Debate Speaking Out Against Drug Legalization or How to Hold Your Own in a Drug Legalization Debate Introduction by Clifford A. Schaffer What follows in these pages is the Drug EnforcementAdministrations's booklet "How to Hold Your Own In a DrugLegalization Debate" which outlines the top ten reasons whythey think "legalization" is such a bad idea. I willexamine their statements, sentence by sentence, and presentcomments. Readers should note that, while the DEA has written abook on how to survive when defending the War on (Some) Drugs,the DEA has no interest in coming forward to actually engage insuch a debate. An open and honest public debate is the last thething the DEA wants. The DEA's Statement ACKNOWLEDGEMENTS Though compiled from many sources, this guide evolved from asingle event: the AntiLegalization Forum held at the FBI/DEATraining Academy in August 1994. Five major city police officialsprovided invaluable assistance to the project: Superintendent Matt L. Rodriguez, Chicago Police Department; Chief Ruben Ortega, Salt Lake City Police Department; Chief William K. Finney, St. Paul Police Department; Chief Joe Samuels, Oakland Police Department; and Chief Dennis E. Nowicki, Charlotte Police Department. Other participants, whose contributions to the discussions areacknowledged with gratitude, were from: Office of National Drug Control Policy National Institute on Drug Abuse National Families in Action California Office of Criminal Justice Planning Office of Drug Control Policy, State of Michigan Office of the District Attorney, Multnomah County, Oregon Kennedy School of Government, Harvard University BOTEC Analysis Corporation, Cambridge, Massachusetts DEA Headquarters DEA Seattle, Miami, and Chicago Field Divisions Facilitators: Kenneth F. Hickey, Esq., Washington, DC Kunz and Company, Arlington, Virginia The Walsh Group, Bethesda, Maryland LETTER OF INTRODUCTION Dear Reader: You and I are frequently faced with the need to address manyof the positions which are advocated by those calling for thelegalization of drugs. More and more, the debate on legalizationis being given public airing in the media. Average citizens, fedup with crime and drugs, are being told that legalization is areasonable alternative to the crime problem that so manycommunities are struggling against. You and I know that legalization is not an alternative, butrather a surrender which will further reduce our quality oflife. Ninety percent of the American people agree thatlegalization of drugs would complicate an already devastatingsituation. Health and social costs associated with the increasedavailability of drugs would break our economy. Crime would notdecrease. The moral fiber of our country would be torn apart. Those who advocate legalization have many motives. But theyfrequently do not have answers to a lot of the questions we areasking. Legalization is an abstract to many of them. But I cantell you firsthand, from my thirtyfour years' experience as alawenforcement officer at the state level, the damage caused bydrugs is real and lasting. It's not drug laws, or the enforcementof the drugs laws of our nation that are causing harm--it's thedrugs themselves. Because we're often called on to speak to the issues, I askeda number of professionals from the law enforcement, health, andacademic communities to come together for two days to discuss howwe can best address the arguments against legalization. I am wellaware that local law enforcement officials are on the front linein the battle against drug abuse. For that reason I asked severalpolice chiefs to participate in the Quantico Conference to givetheir expertise and guidance as we formulated our response tothese issues. This guide represents most of the issues andarguments raised during that time. This booklet is intended as aresource for you as you are faced with the questions and issuesassociated with the debate on the legalization of drugs. Whilemany professionals participated in the session, the viewsrepresented in this document are the position of the DrugEnforcement Administration. They represent the consensus of theassembled group and without necessarily attributing each andevery position to the personal views of each participant. Please feel free to use the guide in whatever way you feel itis appropriate. The debate on the legalization of drugs cannot bewon if we remain silent. Sincerely, Thomas A. Constantine Administrator Drug Enforcement Administration The Reply to the DEA's Statement REPLY TO THE LETTER OF INTRODUCTION The DEA really has no business spending taxpayer dollars topromote their own political agenda. The DEA acts as lobbyist andpublic relations firm for themselves and other special interestgroups which benefit from the drug war and it should be stopped. In the course of this public advocacy the DEA distorts thetruth on many occasions, lies shamefully at times and drawsinvalid conclusions from what is true. The purpose of thisbooklet was to try to stop the damage being done when the drugwarriors were caught in public spouting the old mythology of thedrug war, but we will demonstrate clear examples of the lies anddistortions here in their book. We agree that the debate on the legalization of drugs cannotbe won by anyone who remains silent. That is why we challenge theDEA to bring forth their best against our best in an open publicenvironment where these issues can be discussed at length. Wehave asked for an open debate on this issue since February 23,1993 when the Resolution for a Federal Commission on Drug Policywas first signed. It is only the DEA who is afraid to debate thisissue in public. We challenge the DEA to show the strength and truth of theirarguments by supporting our call for an objective FederalCommission where all of the issues and evidence can be fullyexamined. If they are right, the evidence will show it. Sincerely, Clifford A. Schaffer Contents | Feedback | Search DRCNet Library | Schaffer Library | The Drug Legalization DebateWT02-B01-53IA087-000632-B036-106http://206.61.184.43:80/schaffer/Activist/groups1.htm 206.61.184.43 19970122070613 text/html 5781HTTP/1.0 200 OKDate: Wednesday, 22-Jan-97 07:06:04 GMTServer: WebSitePro/1.1f (S/N wpo-0deb)Allow-ranges: bytesContent-type: text/htmlLast-modified: Saturday, 28-Dec-96 07:25:41 GMTContent-length: 5564 Presentations to Social Clubs about drug legalization Presentations to Social Clubs How to make presentations to social groups such aschurches, Lions Clubs, Rotary, and other similar groups. By Clifford A. Schaffer How to find them. Many of them will be listed in your local phone directories.If no chapters of a particular group are listed in your area, itdoesn't necessarily mean they don't exist. You can also look inthe Encyclopedia of Associations, at your local library, tocontact their national headquarters and ask for any chapters inyour area. What kind of groups typically have meetings where people canmake presentations? Here are just a few examples: Lions, Rotary, Elks, Moose, churches, synagogues, Chambers ofCommerce, Business groups, other social clubs, political parties,etc. Any place where more than a few people gather for nearly anypurpose may be an opportunity to make a presentation. How to get a date to speak to their group. First, put together a coherent, sensible presentation ofmaterial pertinent to your area of interest. It is best topresent factual, interesting material, rather than politicaldiatribe. Visual displays and graphics are always good to helpkeep the audience's interest. Second, call them. You will be surprised at the number ofsocial groups which are looking for, or receptive to, speakers.Calling them is the toughest part for many people, but it isreally easy. The worst that can happen is that they will say no,and you have heard that before. What is interesting to these groups? Many of these groups want speakers for their regularluncheons.all the time for their lunch and, therefore they covera wide variety of topics over the year. You will often find asituation where there is someone who is designated to find goodspeakers for the meetings who invariably has a hard time findingenough interesting speakers to fill the bill. Therefore, in manycases, there is a wide degree of latitude in what these groupswould like to hear. The facts about hemp are usually interestingto these groups, but there are any number of other subjects whichwould also get a good reception with a good presentation. Dress and act conservatively. The people in these groups are business people for the mostpart, and will expect and appreciate a business like demeanor andapproach. Whether you like it or not, they are most likely torespond favorably to conservatively dressed and"normal" looking and acting people, as opposed to the"hippy" look. Use Visual Aids Charts, graphs, pictures, and other visual aids can be veryhelpful in getting your point across. There are a number ofcharts and graphs on these pages as samples of things you mightuse. Read the Persuasive Strategies and Debate Materials These social groups tend to be politically and sociallyconservative so wild-eyed arguments about how it is everyone'sright to get loaded will not get a good reception. The bestapproach is a soft, factual approach which presents some part ofthe vast amount of information which most people don't know aboutdrugs. Don't promote or even defend the use of drugs, drugdealers, or anything else that your audience will find hard toaccept. You will often have a long way to go to convince them, sodon't try to bring them too far, too fast. But I am afraid to make presentations to groups. What are you afraid of? That you will look like a fool? (Asif that hasn't happened before.) Seriously, speaking in front ofa group is one of the items which produces the highest levels offear in many people. They realize everyone is looking at them andthey get nervous and freeze up. The more nervous they get, themore they worry about it, and the more nervous they get. Forget it. If you are afraid of embarrassing yourself andlooking like a fool, don't worry. In the first place, most peopledon't have to stand up in front of a group to look like fools, solooking like a fool is nothing new. Get over it. Everyone lookslike a fool now and then. The truth is that most members of mostaudiences are so awestruck by anyone who can get up in front ofan audience and speak (because they know they couldn't do itthemselves) that they will never notice that you are nervous - atleast not to the degree that you feel nervous. Experience will get you over it. The first presentation isthe roughest, and from that point it gets progressively easier.By this time I have done so many, and encountered all thequestions that come up so many times, that I could do thesethings in my sleep. There are a lot of other people who are alsoquite adept at presentations and they started out as shywallflowers just like you. Give it a try. You will find it is alot of fun. CliffSchaffer's Home Page WT02-B01-54IA086-000618-B046-284http://206.61.184.43:80/schaffer/Activist/dearep2.htm 206.61.184.43 19970122030455 text/html 19871HTTP/1.0 200 OKDate: Wednesday, 22-Jan-97 03:04:25 GMTServer: WebSitePro/1.1f (S/N wpo-0deb)Allow-ranges: bytesContent-type: text/htmlLast-modified: Saturday, 28-Dec-96 07:27:15 GMTContent-length: 19653 Why this drug legalization debate guide is necessary Contents | Feedback | Search DRCNet Library | Schaffer Library | The Drug Legalization Debate WHY the GUIDE IS NECESSARY            DEA Statement                         The Facts               This Guide was developed by the     The reason they developed this       Drug Enforcement Administration in  guide was very simple.  They are     response to requests by law         getting beat -- badly -- every time  enforcement executives, community   they show up for a debate.  The      leaders, substance abuse            evidence is simply  overwhelming     prevention counselors, parent and   that our drug policy needs serious   family advocates, and others for    reform, and it is starting to show.  DEA's help in responding to                                              legalization issues and questions.                                       We well understand that responding                                       to these issues and answering the                                        questions can be a challenge.                                            Questions about legalization often                                       touch on many issues: crime,                                             violence, criminal justice and                                           economic costs; health, behavior                                         and development; the quality of                                          family, community and social life;                                       and employment and productivity.                                         Few are prepared to answer such                                          diverse questions thoroughly, let                                        alone stay current on the research                                       and spot the flaws and distortions                                       in others' arguments. Yet,                                               questions are asked and they must                                        be answered. This Guide offers you                                       a strategy and resource for doing                                        so.                                                                      Discussions about legalization are  This is simply not true.  The drug   usually abstract and theoretical,   warriors are losing the public       which suits proponents of           debate on this issue because of the  legalization fine. A dialogue       most concrete, pragmatic reasons.    without boundaries or benchmarks    The drug war is a failure as an      works to their advantage. For       approach to the drug problem and     those engaged in the daytoday work  there is no way to redeem it.  We    of the real solution to America' s  could not afford to pursue this      drug problem--reducing the supply   policy to a successful conclusion,   and the demand for illegal drugs,   even if it was a good idea -- and    as well as addressing the criminal  it is not a good idea.  It isn't a   activity caused by drug             matter of what we want to do         trafficking and use--taking time    anymore, it is a matter of what we   out to discuss legalization         can do.                              questions can be a frustrating                                           undertaking. This Guide offers you                                       the resource information to                                              discuss this issue in a reasonable                                       and informed manner.                                                     THE DEA POSITION            DEA Statement                         The Facts               DEA is unequivocally opposed to     As the DEA itself points out later   the legalization of illicit drugs.  in their book, there is no clear                                         definition of "legalization" but,                                        whatever it is, they are against                                         it.                                                                                                                                               Actually, "legalization" is not the                                      issue, because we really don't know                                      if we will ever do it.  The issue                                        is really whether we need serious                                        reform of the current policy, no                                         matter what that reform may be                                           called.  It would be more accurate                                       to state that the DEA is                                                 unequivocally opposed to any reform                                      at all.                              Legalization in any form would      Whether a drug is perceived as       likely:                             having risks and costs is not a                                          product of the law, but of public    (1) reduce the perception of the    education.  Even if the law was a    risks and costs of use;             major  factor in those perceptions,                                      this still would not be a good                                           justification to throw individual                                        drug users in prison.                (2) increase availability of and    It should first be pointed out that  access to harmful drugs;            the DEA itself admits that it has    (3) increase demand, use, abuse     never had a major impact on          and addiction; and                  availability of drugs in the United                                      States and there is no hope that it                                      ever will.  In point of fact, this                                       policy often makes the illegal                                           drugs more available to                                                  schoolchildren than alcohol is.                                          The availability of alcohol to                                           children was one of the major                                            reasons that alcohol Prohibition                                         was repealed.                                                                                                                                     Whether availability, demand, use,                                       abuse and addiction would increase                                       depends upon what you mean by                                            "legalization".  If you mean that                                        there would be cocaine vending                                           machines alongside the tobacco                                           vending machines, and convenience                                        store clerks would wink as they                                          sold heroin to children in the same                                      way that they wink when they sell                                        tobacco, then drug use might                                             increase.   If the drug laws are                                         somewhat more sensible, there is                                         good evidence to believe that drug                                       use would drop.                      (4) remove the social sanction      There are many ways to have social   against drug abuse that is          sanctions reinforced in legislation  reinforced in legislation.          and everyone would agree that some                                       laws are necessary to achieve best                                       results with the drug problem.  The                                      question is whether it does any                                          good to enforce those social                                             sanctions with prison.  All the                                          evidence says that prison does more                                      harm than good.                      The present social problems in the  The Drug War benefits only two       United States, including crime,     groups of people -- The drug         health problems and poverty, are    barons, and the drug enforcement     substantial and can only worsen if  barons.  For the drug barons, the    drugs become legal. The arguments   drug war guarantees high profits     for legalization are a sad and      with comparatively low risk.  For    bitter offering to the most         the drug enforcement barons it is    vulnerable segment of our           their very livelihood.  It is the    population. Legalization would      reason they can spend billions of    increase risks and costs to         dollars on fancy drug-detecting      individuals, families and           technology, aircraft, and radar      communities--indeed, to every part  balloons, even while the figures     of the nation--without              clearly show that none of these      compensating benefits.              tactics provides any real benefit                                        to the situation.                    Any proposal with the potential to  The DEA has set up a straw man of    do these things is unacceptable.    what they deem "legalization" to     As public policy, it is             be.  In doing so, they have shown    fundamentally flawed.               that they really don't even                                              understand the arguments.  In the                                        fanatical protection of their own                                        interests, they have missed the                                          points entirely.                     WHO/WHEN/WHERE TO USE            DEA Statement                         The Facts               When DEA asked law enforcement      Basically, what the DEA is trying    executives, community leaders and   to say here is that the drug         prevention advocates exactly what   warriors were getting their butts    they want and need to address       kicked pretty thoroughly every time  legalization questions, the         they came out for a public debate    answers were clear. They said, "It  on this issue.  It was a major       is essential that the facts         embarrassment for them to have drug  regarding the true implications of  warriors being struck speechless     the legalization issue be made      and unable to respond every time     known. Help us to explain this      they got into a discussion in front  complex issue to our families,      of a public group. Whenever the      friends and fellow citizens. Put    drug warriors appeared, they would   it in words everyone can            be confronted by people who knew     understand. And give us the         the facts on the issue and made it   support we need to continue to      apparent that the drug warriors did  make the case until it doesn't      not know the facts.                  have to be made anymore."                                                                                    The drug warriors would also be      This Guide is the first step in     confronted by simple undeniable      helping to deliver the credible,    logic:  Even if you assumed the      consistent message about the risks  facts to be as the drug warriors     and costs of the legalization of    have stated them, our drug policy    drugs to people in terms that make  still does not make sense.           sense to them. The                                                       antilegalization message is                                              effective when communicated by                                           representatives of the Federal                                           Government, but takes on even more                                       credibility when it comes from                                           those in the community who can put                                       the legalization debate in local                                         perspective.                                                                                                                                      DEA will undertake the ongoing                                           work of responding to your                                               inquiries, updating and expanding                                        the guide as necessary and                                               evaluating its usefulness and                                            impact. We invite you to provide                                         your views on this publication.                                                                                                                   We hope the Guide will be used in                                        several ways. For local law                                              enforcement executives, community                                        leaders, prevention advocates and                                        others, the Guide should serve,                                          first, as an open invitation to                                          join in making the affirmative                                           case against legalization. Second,                                       it provides background and                                               practical answers to the most                                            commonly asked questions about the                                       legalization of drugs.                                                   REMEMBER            DEA Statement                         The Facts               There are a few things to remember  This is no surprise.  There has      when discussing the legalization    been a concerted media campaign to   issue.                              instil this belief in the American                                       public over the last several         First, according to reliable        decades by the DEA, its              public opinion polls, the majority  predecessors, and its allies.        of the American people and          Everyone should read the references  lawmakers agree that drugs should   listed at the back of the this       not be legalized.                   section just to see what a                                               long-term concerted and malicious                                        propaganda campaign can achieve.                                                                              Second, when discussing             Strangely enough, information is     legalization, it is important that  the one thing that all drug          all available information and       warriors seem to be short on in      experiences are brought out into    debates.  There are very few who     the open. This can be accomplished  can provide even the most basic      by asking the "tough" questions.    facts about the drug problem, such   Some of these questions are listed  as the number of people killed by    on page 8. Insist that any          drugs, the number of people in       discussion be based on a specific   prison, why drugs were made illegal  definition of how legalization      in the first place, etc.  The        should be implemented, not an       problem, in a nutshell, is the       abstract theory.                    ignorance of the drug warriors.      Third, don't lose faith. This is a  This was copied from my Persuasive   long and difficult effort we are    Strategies.  When I first wrote      undertaking to get our issues on    Persuasive Strategies a few years    the table and be heard. Eventually  ago I realized that, at the time,    the climate will change and         it was often hard to get people to   prolegalization arguments will      listen to rational arguments on      again be out of fashion. While the  drug policy.  I wanted to give       debate appears to be cyclical,      reform activists some encouragement  having more resonance in certain    to stay in the game until the        circumstances, we must continue to  debate turned their way, as I knew   impress upon audiences, and         it would.  As it turns out, I        ultimately the American people,     underestimated the whole situation.  that legalization would be a         Reform activists are beating the    devastating defeat to the           snot out of the drug warriors in     commitment that so many have made   every debate and don't really need   to living free, healthy and         a lot of encouragement and "faith."  unfettered in our nation.            I would agree that the drug                                             warriors probably need it.           Contents | Feedback | Search DRCNet Library | Schaffer Library | The Drug Legalization Debate WT02-B01-55IA086-000618-B046-313http://206.61.184.43:80/schaffer/Activist/dearep3.htm 206.61.184.43 19970122030526 text/html 29400HTTP/1.0 200 OKDate: Wednesday, 22-Jan-97 03:05:14 GMTServer: WebSitePro/1.1f (S/N wpo-0deb)Allow-ranges: bytesContent-type: text/htmlLast-modified: Saturday, 28-Dec-96 07:27:08 GMTContent-length: 29182 Anti Drug Legalization Forum Contents | Feedback | Search DRCNet Library | Schaffer Library | The Drug Legalization Debate ANTI-LEGALIZATION FORUM            DEA Statement                         The Facts               In August 1994, in an effort to                                          identify compelling arguments                                            against legalization, DEA                                                sponsored a twoday                                                       AntiLegalization Forum at                                                Quantico, Virginia, for experts in                                       the field. Several police chiefs,                                        representatives from Government                                          agencies and private sector                                              authorities gave their time to                                           this important task. The                                                 participants were asked to refine                                        the arguments that can be made                                           against legalization and evaluate                                        ways to address the legalization                                         issue in an effective and                                                meaningful way.                                                          Three groups were formed to                                              discuss various aspects of the                                           legalization debate: Social/                                             Economic issues, Health Effects,                                         and Crime and Violence. All of the                                       arguments espoused by legalization                                       proponents impact on these three                                         areas, and many of the claims                                            outlined in this publication                                             crosscut the topics discussed by                                         the three groups. At the end of                                          the twoday session, group leaders                                        presented the recommendations of                                         each group.                                                              While individual groups arrived at                                       specific conclusions, there were a                                       number of general concerns and                                           ideas raised by all participants:                                         Those speaking against            At one time, drug warriors were      legalization needed to be positive  confident when they spoke about the  and confident about that position.  drug war.  They relied on            Legalization opponents must         inflammatory rhetoric and horror     constantly ask just how many drug   stories to get everyone to believe   addicts will be created under       drugs were bad and, therefore, the   legalization, how the government    best approach to the problem would   will support addicts' habits, and   be to put massive numbers of people  who will pay for the social,        in prison.  Then, about 1989, the    criminal and other costs of         tide began to turn.                  legalization.                                                             Legalization opponents often      This is an extraordinary statement   have a hard time being heard.       considering the fact that they       Although only a small minority of   parade every major drug bust before  academics, social scientists and    the media.  The DEA has always had   other public figures advocate       almost a media monopoly when         legalization, the conference        compared to the voices of reform.    participants felt that the                                               legalization advocates made better                                       use of the media in making their                                         opinions known than the far larger                                       group of legalization opponents. A                                       current climate of frustration                                           with crime, violence and drug                                            abuse is fueling the legalization                                        debate, and accomplishments in                                           controlling drugs do not get much                                        attention. The costs of the fight                                        against drugs are generally not                                          put in perspective, and the costs                                        of inaction are never discussed.                                         Nevertheless, conference                                                 participants agreed that a                                               positive, proactive campaign                                             against legalization can be very                                         effective.                                                                Legalization proponents are       Thank you.                           formidable opponents. The group                                          acknowledged that proponents of     The bit about public relations       legalization are generally          firms is a flat out lie.  Nobody in  wellprepared and credible people    the drug reform movement has the     whose arguments, though             money to afford it.  The movement    compelling, are faulty. Proponents  is made up almost entirely of        effectively use lawyers and public  volunteers.                          relations firms to espouse                                               liberalization of drug policies.                                          Misperceptions drive the debate.  The costs of solving the drug        The legalization debate is being    problem are not too high.  The       driven by the perception that the   costs of solving the drug problem    costs of solving the drug problem   are too high this way.  Everyone     in America are far too high. The    agrees that we should devote         group cited public mistrust of      significant resources to address     government and a perception that    the problem.  We do not believe      federal agencies attacking the      that the single most expensive and   problem are fragmented and have no  least cost-effective approach --     consensus about direction as        prison -- is the best approach.      reasons that the legalization                                            debate rings true with many         The DEA, as it has on many other     people. There are also numerous     occasions, is distorting the truth   misperceptions about the foreign    and outright lying about many        experience relating to drug         aspects of the drug issue in order   legalization and the system of      to advance its own interests.  The   prescription for heroin. Forum      Dutch Government has already filed   participants stressed the need to   an official protest against the      get the real story on the British,  misstatements of the DEA in this     Dutch and Swiss experiments out     booklet.                             into the open.                                                            Americans are frustrated by the   Judge James P. Gray likes to ask     drug problem. While an              audiences how many people believe    overwhelming majority of the        the current drug war is working.     American people are not convinced   On average, he says, about one or    that legalization is a good         two percent will raise their hands.  option, there is a sense of          It is pretty clear to most people   frustration that we have spent so   that this drug war causes more       much money on controlling drug      problems than it solves.             trafficking and use, yet violence                                        and crime continue. The group                                            noted that most Americans                                                erroneously think that                                                   legalization advocates are only                                          suggesting that marijuana be                                             legalized, and are generally                                             unaware of the dramatic impact                                           that legalizing cocaine and heroin                                       will have.                                                                The debate must not take place    This is a curious statement.  The    in the abstract. The debate on      DEA is saying that more than         legalization must be brought down   two-thirds of the people they want   from an abstract concept to a       to prosecute are gainfully           common sense scenario. Audiences    employed, tax-paying adults.  One    need to understand that 70 percent  would have to ask why the            of drug users are employed, and     government would have any interest   that the school bus driver who      in pursuing otherwise law-abiding    drives your children to school      taxpayers.                           could smoke marijuana; that the                                          surgeon who operates on you may     As for people driving your bus, or   have cocaine in his system; and     doing your surgery, there are laws   that the driver in back of you may  and other sanctions in place         be on speed. The debate needs to    against doing anything harmful to    demonstrate graphically how the     others while intoxicated on          common man will be impacted by      anything.  These laws would not      drug legalization.                  change under any scenario.                                                                                                                        Attempting to arrest everyone who                                        ever has a glass of wine is not an                                       effective approach to preventing                                         doctors from performing surgery                                          while drunk.  This is also true of                                       other drugs.                         WHAT MOTIVATES LEGALIZATION PROPONENTS?            DEA Statement                         The Facts               Some of the media, certain          The more interesting study of        quarters in academia and some       motives comes from analyzing the     frustrated Americans see            motives of those who have supported  legalization as an option which     these laws throughout history.  It   should be discussed. The panel      is apparent from the history of      discussed some of the factors       these laws that they were based on   possibly motivating advocates of    racism, ignorance, and the           legalization in order to            promotion of special interests.      appreciate the complexity of the    Everyone should read the history of  debate. The group noted that many   these laws to understand how we      who advocate legalization are       came to be where we are today.       attempting to "normalize" the                                            behavior of drugtaking and that                                          many are people who have tried                                           drugs without significant adverse                                        consequences.                                                            Others see potential profit in      And still others believe that        legalizing drugs and still others   government should abandon policies   simply believe that individual      which were based on ignorance,       rights to take drugs should be      fraud, and racism from the very      protected. The group also           beginning.  It also appeals to       acknowledged that the legalization  people who think that government     concept appeals to people who are   should not undertake to do anything  looking for simple solutions to     that is patently impossible.         the devastating problem of drug                                          abuse.                                                                   QUESTIONS TO ASK            DEA Statement                         The Facts               There was consensus among the                                            participants at the                                                      AntiLegalization Forum, too, on                                          the need to ask a number of                                              questions of those proposing                                             legalization. Too often, the                                             specifics of how to implement a                                          system for distribution and sale                                         of legalized drugs are never                                             discussed. Instead simplistic                                            rhetoric is used to deflect                                              serious consideration of the many                                        questions that must be thought                                           through before one can evaluate                                          the ramifications of their                                               proposals. This is the great                                             weakness of the prolegalization                                          position. Participants in the                                            Forum suggested that the following                                       questions be asked consistently in                                       order to illustrate the                                                  shallowness of the legalization                                          concept.                                                                 Should all drugs be legalized ?     The question is not whether any                                          drugs should be "legalized" because                                      the DEA itself states further down                                       in this book that there is no real                                       definition of "legalization."  Is                                        alcohol legal?  In some senses it                                        is, and in others it is not.  The                                        same is true of many other drugs.                                        If the DEA is right, we will never                                       "legalize" any of these drugs, so                                        they miss the point to focus on                                          "legalization."                                                                                                                                   The real question is prison.  Right                                      now we are embarked on a course                                          which will incarcerate millions of                                       people who, in the view of many of                                       the prison wardens in this country,                                      don't need to be in prison.  We are                                      turning loose violent felons so we                                       can incarcerate more drug users.                                         With these laws, we have the                                             opportunity to imprison literally                                        millions of people.  We must decide                                      how many millions of people we are                                       going to put in prison to make this                                      policy work.                                                                                                                                      As a personal matter, I don't much                                       like cigars.  I think they are                                           addictive, dangerous, smelly, and                                        disgusting. I cannot understand why                                      anyone would want to walk around                                         with one of those things stuck in                                        their face,  and I make my feelings                                      known to anyone who lights one up                                        in my presence.  At the same time,                                       I don't want to put George Burns in                                      prison.                                                                                                                                           No matter what policy we may                                             devise, or what name we may call                                         it, it is an undeniable truth that                                       putting people in prison does no                                         good at all.                         Who will determine which segments   Who determines the access to drugs   of the population will have access  now?                                 to legalized drugs?                 Under "legalization" it would be                                         the same people who do it for                                            alcohol and tobacco.                 Will they be limited only to        Are they limited to people over      people over eighteen ?              eighteen now?                                                                                                                                     Every major proposal for reform                                          assumes that minors should not have                                      access to drugs.  This is one of                                         the major reasons that many people                                       would like to see reform, because a                                      more sensible policy would do a                                          better job of keeping drugs away                                         from children.                       Will cocaine, heroin, LSD and PCP   Are they available now?  As the DEA  be made available if people         itself admits, their efforts have    request them?                       never had any major effect on                                            availability of drugs and it is                                          unlikely that they ever will affect                                      the drug market.                     Who will sell drugs? The            Who sells them now?                  Government? Private companies ?     You can't think of anyone who could                                      do a better job than the current                                         sellers?                             And who is liable for damages       The rules for liability should be    caused by drug use and the          consistent for all drugs.  If you    activities of those taking drugs?   get hit by a drunk or stoned                                             driver, it doesn't matter to you                                         which chemical caused the problem.                                       The damage is done in either case,                                       and should be addressed the same                                         under law.                           Who will collect the revenues       Who collects them now?               generated by the drug sales?        We have funded the richest criminal                                      organizations in the history of the                                      world with this policy. It is time                                       to take the money out of their                                           hands with a more sensible policy.   How will a black market for         The same way it is controlled for    cheaper drugs be controlled ?       alcohol and tobacco.                 Who will bear the costs to society  Under the current system the         of increased drug use?              taxpayers bear the entire cost, and                                      this system uses the single most                                         expensive, least cost-effective                                          approach to the problem -- prison.                                       For the same money it takes to                                           catch, try, and convict one drug                                         offender and to hold them in prison                                      for five years, we can provide                                           treatment or education for more                                          than one hundred people.  Which do                                       you think is the better deal?        How will absenteeism and loss of    It should be addressed the same way  productivity be  addressed by       it is for alcohol, tobacco, or any   business?                           similar problem.                     Will the local drug situation in a  Who dictates where drugs are sold    community dictate which drugs are   now?                                 sold where?                         The community itself should dictate                                      these matters, as they do with                                           liquor and tobacco outlets.          How will society care for and pay   First, there is no real evidence     for the attendant social costs of   that drug use would increase under   increased drug use, including       a more sensible policy.              family disintegration and child     Society is paying these costs        neglect?                            already.  Reform would seek to                                           reduce those costs by using                                              approaches which are more                                                cost-effective than prison.  Prison                                      does not do anything to address                                          these problems.                      Will people still need              This is a separate issue and,        prescriptions for currently         whichever way it goes, will not      controlled medications, such as     make much difference to the          antibiotics, if drugs are           fundamental problems of our current  legalized ?                         drug policy.  Antibiotics are an                                         entirely different class of drug                                         with an entirely different set of                                        uses and associated problems.                                            Therefore, it would be appropriate                                       to have a different policy for                                           them.                                Will legal drugs require            That depends on what you mean by     prescriptions?                      "legal".  For example, both alcohol                                      and penicillin are "legal" but have                                      different requirements for                                               purchasing them.                     Can anyone, regardless of physical  Who can purchase them now?           or medical conditions purchase                                           drugs?                              Can anyone, regardless of physical                                       or medical conditions purchase                                           alcohol or tobacco?  Alcohol and                                         tobacco are the big killers by a                                         wide margin. If we can manage to                                         find a workable policy for alcohol                                       and tobacco, then the other drugs                                        will be easy.                        How can we deal with the influx of  We won't have to.  The rest of the   people to the United States who     western world is going toward        are seeking legal drugs?            "legalization" faster than we are.   Can we begin a legalization pilot   Yes.  As the New York City Bar       program in your neighborhood for    Association recommended, we should   one year?                           allow states and communities to                                          determine their own approach to the                                      problem, as they do for alcohol, so                                      that we might have a number of                                           different programs from which to                                         draw ideas and information.  The                                         one thing we should not do is to                                         stay locked in to a single national                                      policy which -- by definition --                                         cannot work.                         Should the distribution outlets be  Where are the distribution outlets   located in the already              located now?                         overburdened inner city?                                                                                     Matters affecting the inner city                                         should be decided by the people in                                       the inner city.                      Contents | Feedback | Search DRCNet Library | Schaffer Library | The Drug Legalization Debate WT02-B01-56IA086-000615-B002-46http://206.61.184.43:80/schaffer/Library/cureport.htm 206.61.184.43 19970122024509 text/html 1801HTTP/1.0 200 OKDate: Wednesday, 22-Jan-97 02:44:59 GMTServer: WebSitePro/1.1f (S/N wpo-0deb)Allow-ranges: bytesContent-type: text/htmlLast-modified: Saturday, 28-Dec-96 06:40:50 GMTContent-length: 1584 The Consumers Union Report on Licit and Illicit Drugs The Consumers Union Report on Licit and Illicit Drugs by Edward M. Brecher and the Editors of Consumer ReportsMagazine, 1972 The Consumers Union Report on Licit and Illicit Drugs isperhaps the best book ever written on the subject of drug policy.The authors did five years of research in preparation to writingit and the facts they found are absolutely fascinating,regardless of what you may believe about drugs or drug policy. If you have not read the full text, you should go to thelibrary immediately and read it. It is a fascinating book and iscertain to change many of your opinions. This book is a copyrighted work and we have not yet obtainedpermission to put it on the net. However, we will include achapter-by-chapter synopsis of the major points. We will alsopost information where you can buy a copy of the full text. Readthis book! Orderthe Consumers Union Report CliffSchaffer's Home Page WT02-B01-57IA087-000632-B036-6http://206.61.184.43:80/schaffer/Activist/speech1.htm 206.61.184.43 19970122070511 text/html 21315HTTP/1.0 200 OKDate: Wednesday, 22-Jan-97 07:05:02 GMTServer: WebSitePro/1.1f (S/N wpo-0deb)Allow-ranges: bytesContent-type: text/htmlLast-modified: Saturday, 28-Dec-96 07:24:52 GMTContent-length: 21097 Speech on Drug Legalization Fullerton Community College Speech by Clifford A. Schaffer This is one of my typical speeches First, I would like to inform everyone that the real subjecthere today is not drug decriminalization, or legalization, orre-legalization, or anything like that, because we still don'tknow if we will ever do any of those things. What is certain isthat, at the current rates of incarceration, we will build thelargest prisons in the world. The issue is prison. It is not upto us to justify decriminalization. It is up to those who supportthe current policy to justify putting millions of people inprison behind a drug policy which everyone admits cannot work. One of the reasons that I am here is because of my mother. Ihave heard many people say that the crusade against drugs is amoral issue. William Bennett, our first national Drug Czar, saidthat it is important to stamp out drugs because it is the moralthing to do. I will show you that there is nothing moral aboutit. On April 20, 1992, my mother told me she wanted to die. Shecalled me that evening and asked me if I would understand if shecommitted suicide. My mother is sixty-five years old and shelooks and acts at least ten years younger than her age. She stillworks because she enjoys her job. Why then does she want to die? A few years ago she had a minor operation on her ribs and,during the operation, some nerves were damaged. It wasn'tanyone's fault, it is just one of the ordinary risks of surgery.It could happen to anyone. Now the nerves fire constantly, atnear-maximum intensity. She says it feels as if someone isholding a blowtorch to her ribs -- twenty-four hours a day. Shecan no longer wear clothes which touch her skin. She can nolonger walk in a warm spring rain because the pain of a singleraindrop is too much to bear. Something as simple as a hug fromher smallest granddaughter will make her fall to the floor intears. She has spent the last few years traveling across the UnitedStates to find a cure. The doctors have tried a long list oftreatments including surgery, drugs, ointments, electricity, andmany other things. None of them worked very well and many of themwere dangerous. The best of them was a nerve block. The nerveblock required my mother to lay on her stomach while the doctorsinjected anesthetic directly into the nerve causing the problem.The needle had to be placed precisely on the nerve so it usuallyhad to be moved around for a few minutes to get just the rightspot. It reached the limits of human pain. The pain was so greatthat her body rigidly locked up, with her senses overloaded. Shecould not scream, breathe, or even see. On two occasions they punctured her lung with this procedure,and once they actually stopped her heart. To revive her, theygave her CPR, which means they had to pound on her ribs. When sheawoke she screamed at them to kill her. She said that she wasbitter for months because they had not let her die when they hadthe chance. She has since left written instructions that, if herheart ever stops again, she is not to be revived. Still, she saidthe nerve block is worth it, because it gives her relief foralmost three days and, besides, there is always the chance thatshe will luck out and they will kill her again. Only one treatment has ever worked to ease the pain. Thattreatment is morphine. Morphine does not make her into a drugaddict. It does not make her into some kind of mindless zombie.It does not even make her high. It just allows her to live arelatively normal life, free from the pain in her side. Whencompared with the other available treatments, morphine is thecheapest, safest, and most effective treatment for her condition. He doctors will not give her morphine, for two reasons. Thefirst reason is that they are afraid she will become addicted. Astudy conducted at Johns Hopkins Medical School showed that theaddiction rate for the medical use of morphine was less thanone-half of one percent. Even when patients do become addicted,morphine addiction can be easily managed in a proper medicalenvironment, so addiction is not a legitimate medical concern. The second reason they will not prescribe morphine is thatthey are afraid of the drug police. They know that the DrugEnforcement Administration and the local police can seize theirproperty and destroy their careers over a single questionedprescription, and the police do not even have to file criminalcharges to do it. It not only can happen, it does happen. Lastyear, the Drug Enforcement Administration sent two doctors toprison for prescribing Tylenol 3. That is Tylenol with codeine.Tylenol 3 is a prescription drug in only two countries in theworld, the United States and South Africa, and the United Statesis the only country which has ever sent a doctor to prison forprescribing this common medicine. There are many other caseswhere doctors have had their lives and careers ruined overequally trivial matters. My mother has mixed emotions when I speak out about herproblem. She says that she really does not want anyone's sympathybecause, since she has had this problem, she has discovered thatthere are so many more people who are in worse condition than sheis. Some people with AIDS get this same kind of condition allover their bodies. Every day of their lives is worse than anyhorror movie that you have ever seen. They can't get morphineeither. Seven thousand five hundred people go blind from glaucomaevery year because the best medicine - marijuana - is illegal.And the list goes on. There are literally millions of people with chronic pain,cancer, AIDS, glaucoma, and other conditions for which the safestand most effective medicine is a drug which is now illegal.Hundreds of thousands of them violate the drug laws every daybecause they need these medicines to live. On behalf of all of the families affected by AIDS, andcancer, and glaucoma, and a dozen other diseases, I am here totell you that this drug policy is indecent and it must bestopped. There is nothing moral about a drug policy which makessick people choose between prison and death. Drug policy is a complicated issue and we will not have timetoday to resolve all of the points under discussion. In the pastfifty years, however, there have been several occasions whenmajor commissions have been formed specifically to study theevidence and the options for drug policy and to makerecommendations. There have been both public and privatecommissions, domestic and foreign, performed by people of allpolitical persuasions from liberals to conservative law-and-orderRepublicans, and people who aren't even on our political map.They all recommended decriminalization. I would like to read to you some of the studies which havereached this conclusion: The LaGuardia Committee Report, commissioned by MayorFiorello LaGuardia, written by the New York Academy of Medicine,and published by the City of New York in 1944. The Baroness Wootton Report, published by thegovernment of the United Kingdom in 1967. The Report of the Canadian Government Commission ofInquiry into the Non-Medical Use of Drugs, published by theCanadian Government in 1969. Dealing With Drug Abuse: A Report to the Ford Foundation,published by the Drug Abuse Survey Project in 1972. The Consumers Union Report on Licit and Illicit Drugs,published by the Editors of Consumer Reports Magazine in 1972.This is a landmark study, a "must-read", used as abasic textbook at major universities. The Report of the National Commission on Marihuana andDrug Abuse, commissioned by President Nixon, and published bythe U.S. Federal Government in 1973. The Facts About Drug Abuse, published by the UnitedStates Drug Abuse Council in 1980. An Analysis of Marijuana Policy, published by theNational Research Council of the National Academy of Sciences in1982. The Report of the California State Research Advisory Panel,commissioned by the State of California, and published in 1990. The recommendations in these reports were endorsed by (amongothers) the American Medical Association, the American BarAssociation, The American Association for Public Health, theNational Education Association, and the National Council ofChurches. I might also add that the last two reports of the NationalCommission on AIDS have also recommended that we adoptnon-criminal approaches to drug abuse. We may debate the details of the many issues of drug policyall day, but one basic fact is undeniable. When all of the issuesand all of the evidence is considered, the overwhelming weight ofthe scholarly evidence on drug policy supports decriminalization. The first question that we need to ask ourselves is: How didwe get into this mess? Any study of the history of the drug lawsshows that they were based on two primary factors; racism andignorance. You may have wondered why marijuana, heroin, and cocaine areillegal while other equally dangerous drugs such as tobacco andalcohol are legal, and even promoted by the Federal Government.The primary reason is that alcohol and tobacco were associatedwith white people while the other drugs were associated --wrongly -- with people of color. Opiates were first outlawed because of the fear that Chinesemen were luring white women to their ruin in opium dens. Ruin wasdefined not as opium addiction, but as associating with Chinesemen. In the early years of this century, many of the majornewspapers printed lurid articles about superhuman Negro CocaineFiends who would take large amounts of cocaine which would causethem to go on a violent sexual rampage and rape white women.Police departments across the nation switched from .32 caliberpistols to .38 caliber pistols because as one Police Chiefstated, "Those cocaine niggers sure are hard to kill."Newspaper stories of the day told lurid tales of Jewish peddlersselling cocaine to poor southern blacks. There was also amovement to ban caffeine for the same reasons. There was noevidence to back up the myth of the Negro Cocaine Fiend simplybecause most black people did not have the money to buy cocaine.Any black man who did rape a white woman would have had to besuicidal because in 1905 there were 105 recorded lynchings ofblack men for unspecified offenses. Marijuana was later outlawed largely as a repressive toolagainst Mexican laborers who were competing with American workersfor jobs during the Depression. Racism was one of the primary themes of the campaign againstdrugs until the campaigns for civil rights in the 1950's and1960's made it unacceptable. At that point, the drug warriorsturned to other myths to defend their cause. You have heard someof those myths today. It is important to remember that many ofthe myths you heard today were made up in the 1950's and 1960'swhen it began to be apparent that the old myths just wouldn't cutit any more. These laws never did have anything to do with publichealth and safety. GRAPH We next need to understand the facts on the issue. My firstgraph shows the number of deaths caused by drugs, both legal andillegal, in the United States in a typical year. Tobacco kills about 390,000 people. Alcohol kills about 80,000. Sidestream smoke from tobacco kills about 50,000 people whodon't even smoke. Prescription drugs kill at least 10,000. Cocaine kills about 2,500. Heroin kills about 2,000. Aspirin kills about 2,000 Marijuana kills 0. Even the DEA itself says that there hasnot been a recorded death due to marijuana in the history of theUnited States. All of the illegal drugs combined killed about 4,500, orabout one percent of the number killed by tobacco. Tobacco killsmore people every year than all of the people killed by all ofthe illegal drugs in the Twentieth Century. More Colombians diefrom the effects of American tobacco than the number of Americanswho die from Colombian cocaine. As you may know, tobacco isheavily subsidized and promoted by the United States Government.The US Government demands that other countries buy more Americantobacco even while we threaten them with war for sending us theirmarijuana and cocaine. Right now we have about 1.3 million people in prison. Morethan 600,000 of them are there for non-violent drug offenses. Forevery person who died from illegal drugs last year, one hundredand fifty people went to prison. Most of them were black men. You may hear a good deal of take about the dangers of illegaldrugs. First let me state that the medical evidence is very clearthat, by any standard of measurement, alcohol and tobacco aresubstantially more dangerous to both the individual and tosociety than any of the illegal drugs. We have known this for atleast twenty-five years. This is not to say that use of any drugis entirely safe. We could safely assume that almost anything weput into our bodies is going to have some health risk, to agreater or lesser degree. That is not the issue. Just because something is hazardous does not automaticallymean that the best approach to those hazards is to throw millionsof people in prison. In fact, every major study of drug policyhas concluded that prison only makes those hazards worse andincreases the damage done to society. As one commission stated,the more we learn about the dangers of drugs, the more it willbecome apparent that massive prisons are a medical and socialdisaster. It is precisely because of those health hazards that wemust not send people to prison for drug offenses. We might win the war on drugs if we could be successful inone of three areas. First, we could try to stop the production of drugs inforeign countries. There is no credible evidence anywhere whichwould suggest that we could stop, or even greatly reduce, theproduction of drugs in foreign countries. The Federalgovernment's own evidence shows that this is impossible and it isa waste of money to try. Second, we could try to stop drugs at the border. There is nocredible evidence anywhere which would suggest that we couldstop, or even greatly reduce, the flow of drugs across ourborder. The Federal government's own evidence shows that this isimpossible and it is a waste of money to try. Third, we could try to stop the sale of drugs within theUnited States, even while we know that it is impossible to stoptheir production, or to keep them outof the United States. Thereis no credible evidence anywhere which would suggest that wecould stop, or even greatly reduce, the sale of drugs within theUnited States. Again, the evidence shows that this is impossibleand, not only is it a waste of money to try but, in fact, the waragainst drugs actually causes far more harm than good. The largest part of that harm falls upon the African-Americancommunity. GRAPH I have here a few graphs which were taken directly from USFederal Government statistics. The first graph shows the numberof people in prison over the last fifty years. The number ofpeople in prison was relatively stable for about fifty years,until the 1970's when President Nixon started the first majorcampaign against drugs. Then the number of inmates began to risesharply. It was also during the 1970's that a major recession hitthe country and African Americans, being at the bottom of theeconomic totem pole, were the first to lose their jobs and thelast to be rehired when the economy changed. As a result of thestresses on unemployed fathers, African-American families beganto fall apart and we saw the first great rise of black familiesheaded by single mothers. This became especially significantbecause of what happened in the 1980s. In the 1980s the rate of incarceration went through the roof.Since 1980 we have tripled the number of people in prison and wenow have the largest prisons in the world. We will almost tripletheir size again before the year 2000. GRAPH The next graph shows the racial breakdown of our prisons, andprojects those figures into the future, based on current trends.By the year 2000, our prisons will be larger than the Naziconcentration camps of World War II. About two-thirds of all ofthe people in our prisons will be black men, most of themarrested for non-violent drug offenses. For every black man whogoes to college, at least three will go to prison. Two-thirds ofall of today's black male teenagers will be dead, disabled, or inprison before their thirtieth birthday. The largest single groupof them will go to prison for non-violent drug offenses. Even as we speak, one-fourth of all of the young black men inAmerica are in prison, on probation, or on parole. In some innercities such as Washington, D.C. and Baltimore, which were testcases for the war on drugs, more than half of all the young blackmen in the city are under the supervision of the criminal justicesystem. It is estimated that more than ninety percent of theblack men in these cities have already been incarcerated at leastonce. When an African-American man goes to prison he becomeseffectively permanently unemployable because nobody will hire ablack man with a prison record. Most of the young black men inour nation's capitol are already economically dead as a directresult of the war on drugs. They become social pariahs, unwanted by employers and even bythe women in their own communities. They are unable to restorethemselves and the families that we will need to rebuild ourinner cities. The economic destruction of African-American mencaused by the war on drugs is perhaps the singlest biggest reasonthat African-American families continued to disintegrate in the1980's even in the midst of an economic boom. Even conservative black leaders are now beginning to say thatthe war on drugs is genocide and the new form of slavery and theyare right. Because of our misguided and ignorant drug policies,we have already destroyed the better part of an entire generationof African-American men. In 1973 President Nixon's National Commission on Marihuanaand Drug Abuse said that the real drug problem is not heroin, orcocaine, or marijuana. The real drug problem, they said, is theignorance of our public officials who have never bothered to readthe evidence. Today, we can prove that this is still true. I would like my opponent to answer one simple question. Ihave here a list of every major study of drug policy in the lastfifty years including the largest studies ever conducted by theUS Federal Government and the State of California. They allrecommended decriminalization. Do you agree that the overwhelming weight of the scholarlyevidence on drug policy supports decriminalization? Before you answer, remember that there are only threepossible answers to this question. The first possible answer is yes, you agree that theoverwhelming weight of the scholarly evidence supportsdecriminalization. The second possible answer is no, you do not agree and,therefore, you can provide a list of scholarly studies equal inquality and quantity to the list I have provided. The third possible answer is that you don't have a clue whatthe scholarly evidence says because you have never read the mostbasic research on the subject. What is your answer? Do you agree that the overwhelmingweight of the scholarly evidence on drug policy supportsdecriminalization? CliffSchaffer's Home Page WT02-B01-58IA087-000632-B035-129http://206.61.184.43:80/schaffer/Activist/wherego.htm 206.61.184.43 19970122070345 text/html 6355HTTP/1.0 200 OKDate: Wednesday, 22-Jan-97 07:03:34 GMTServer: WebSitePro/1.1f (S/N wpo-0deb)Allow-ranges: bytesContent-type: text/htmlLast-modified: Saturday, 28-Dec-96 07:24:35 GMTContent-length: 6138 Where do we go from here? Where do wego from here? by Clifford A. Schaffer The tide has turned in the war against the War on Drugs. Itis a tough fight, but those who support drug policy reform havebegun to carry the day. There have been three major televisionspecials on the issue in less than a year and the DEA openlyadmitted their arguments were in trouble when they called aspecial conference last August to try to find ways to argueagainst reform. They have been getting pretty well shellacked inevery single debate over the last few years and the media hasbegun to seriously question the wisdom of the drug war. The drugwarriors are in retreat and they know it. The big question for those who support reform is: Where do wego from here? Activists from around the world have beendiscussing this on the Internet, and here are some of theanswers. The Internet Rapid communication is critical to this movement. Activistsfrom around the world have joined together on the Internet todiscuss ideas and provide support for each other in a widevariety of ways. There are plans for a bigger and better presenceon the Internet where news, research, and ideas will be availableto anyone with a computer, and where people from around the worldcan work together. We need more people on the Internet. We alsoneed someone in every city who is plugged in to the network andcan distribute the news on a timely basis to those who are notyet on the Internet. Unity The Internet has also brought unity. The biggest singlethrust of the DEA in their public relations campaign is that welack unity. The DEA tells the public that those who supportreform don't even agree among themselves on what they want and,therefore, they could never build a credible public policy. Formany years it was true. We have a number of organizations andgroups around the country who have always agreed on theiropposition to the drug war but have usually worked alone topursue their goals. As a result, we looked like a mob, ratherthan a team. Through the internet, we have held lengthy on-line"meetings" where many of the leading activists andorganizations have discussed where we agreed and disagreed, andhow we could work together toward the goals we all shared. As theresult of those meetings, we have formulated a basic statement ofour objective and the principles which should be the basis for abetter drug policy. They are: Our Objective Our objective is to bring drugs within the law. Principles for a Solution. We believe that a better drug policy should be based on threebasic principles: 1) Decisions on the medical use of drugs should be the soleprovince of the medical profession in consultation with itspatients. 2) Punishment should not be used to control private drug use. 3) We must have a consistent policy for all drugs ofpotential abuse. We ask all interested people and groups around the nation tojoin us in a recognition of our common goals and present a unitedfront to the world. We all agree that we need reform now. Thefirst step toward reform is to press for open and honestdiscussion of the issue. Better Public Relations When it comes to funding for media, we are clearly outgunnedby the drug warriors. But, over the last few years we have justas clearly beaten them with a better, more sensible message. Weneed a grass roots effort to educate the media at all levels.Keep track of your local newspaper, television, and radiostations and make sure that the old hysterical lies andhalf-truths of the drug war do not go unchallenged. We haveproven that the media will come our way if they know the facts. Recruitment We all know people who are not members of the DPF but shouldbe. Many of them are not members simply because no one has askedthem to join, or they don't know the DPF is there. No one hastold them that their support is important. We should all make acommitment to recruit at least one new member in the comingmonth. It's easy. All you need to do is ask them. When you leavethe house tomorrow morning, carry a membership application and astamped envelope addressed to the DPF. I will bet you find a newally before noon. The Next Step We have already demonstrated that when the evidence isexamined the drug warriors don't have a leg to stand on. Theyhave lost every debate in the last few years because of theevidence, so the last thing they want now is a public discussionof the evidence. Their "anti-legalization" resolutioneven says so, in so many words. Even the mere discussion ofpossible alternatives, they say, will cause a massive increase indrug addiction. We want to talk about alternatives. We want to review theevidence. We want openness, honesty, and objectivity in a publicreview of all we know about drug policy. We want to lay the cardson the table and let the chips fall where they may. The drugwarriors do not. Therein lies the difference between us. Our mission is to draw the drug warriors into a publicdebate. We must ask the media to ask them: "What's wrongwith the truth? Why don't you want to read the evidence? Whywon't you discuss it? If you are right, the evidence will surelyshow it." We have nothing to fear from the truth. CliffSchaffer's Home Page WT02-B01-59IA087-000625-B011-117http://206.61.184.43:80/schaffer/library/daremenu.htm 206.61.184.43 19970122041134 text/html 5042HTTP/1.0 200 OKDate: Wednesday, 22-Jan-97 04:11:29 GMTServer: WebSitePro/1.1f (S/N wpo-0deb)Allow-ranges: bytesContent-type: text/htmlLast-modified: Saturday, 28-Dec-96 06:39:11 GMTContent-length: 4825 An Analysis of DARE An Analysis of DARE A series of articles about the Drug Abuse Resistance Educationprogram in schools Links to Other DARE Pages The following two links are highly recommended for additionalinformation on DARE. DRCNetDARE Page The Other Sideof DARE Does DARE work? No. All the major research on the effectiveness of DAREshows that it has no impact on the rate of drug use by childrenwho go through DARE training. These reports include: 1991 Kentucky study - National Institute on Drug Abuse - "No statistically significant differences" 1990 Canadian Government study "DARE had no significant effect on the use of...marijuana, acid, heroin, crack, glue and PCP" 1993 Research Triangle Institute - National Institute of Justice - Statistical analysis of all DARE research, which says DARE has "a limited to essentially non-existent effect" on drug use. The final edition of the largest evaluation of the DARE program has concluded that the Anti-Drug program does not reduce drug use, and in at least category of pot, the DARE graduates smoked more frequently than the control. The report concluded: "The DARE program's limited effect on adolescent drug use contrasts with the program's popularity and prevalence. An important implication is that DARE could be taking the place of other, more beneficial drug education programs that kids could be receiving"How Effective is DARE, American Journal of Public Health Sept 1994 p1399 Among the notable quotations from researchers: * "Itswell established that DARE doesn't work" Gilbert Botvin -Cornell Medical Center * "Research shows that, no, DAREhasn't been effective in reducing drug use" WilliamModzeleski, Top Drug education official at the Department ofEducation * "I think the program should be entirely scrapped andredeveloped anew." Dr. William Hansen, who helped design theoriginal DARE And the DARE defenders - Glenn Levant, executive director of DARE, called studies flawed, and suggested that we need to study the problem for the next seven years. He then said "We're like apple pie". "..surveys across the nation show kids who take the DARE course are much less likely to use drugs". Mike Muiller, police officer and DARE instructor, who may have unwittingly shown why DARE is failing. Michael Milken, famous junk bond king found guilty of securities fraud, was among the "noted" volunteers who show young kids how to live. Past and FutureDirections of the D.A.R.E. Program: An Evaluation Review, (380K- big file) Draft Final Report by Research Triangle InstituteSeptember 1994 This is the study done by the Research Triangle Institute toevaluate the effectiveness of the DARE drug-education program inthe schools. The basic conclusion was that DARE was highlypopular with both police and the school officials, but had noreal effect on long-term drug use. A Personal Experience with DARE - DARE Scare: Turning Children IntoInformants? US Rejects unfavorable DARE study STUDIES FIND DRUG PROGRAM NOT EFFECTIVE Yethigh-level supporters argue "it's better to have it than nothave it" CliffSchaffer's Home Page WT02-B01-60IA087-000632-B035-244http://206.61.184.43:80/schaffer/Activist/dangers.htm 206.61.184.43 19970122070453 text/html 10582HTTP/1.0 200 OKDate: Wednesday, 22-Jan-97 07:04:45 GMTServer: WebSitePro/1.1f (S/N wpo-0deb)Allow-ranges: bytesContent-type: text/htmlLast-modified: Saturday, 28-Dec-96 07:25:55 GMTContent-length: 10364 Pot (Drugs) are Dangerous - How to Deal with the Argument Pot (Drugs) are Dangerous - How to Deal with the Argument by Clifford A. Schaffer You have heard the argument before: Pot is dangerous. It causes cancer, auto accidents,grows hair on your palms, and makes you go blind. This is a guide on how to deal with this argument in allsorts of easy ways. Some of these arguments were developed duringdebates with doctors, so some of them assume that the opponent isa doctor. GeneralDiscussion First, it is generally pointless to get tied up in debatingthe details of health issues or, in general, any supposed dangerof drugs. The reason is that you get so wound up in tradingscientific references that you never get to the real bottom line-- prison. Dr. So-and-So (who the audience doesn't know anyway)says X, Dr. Whositt, says Y -- so what? Net result -- you convince nobody. Once you have won yourmain point, and established that criminal punishment is not aneffective approach to the problem -- no matter what you haveassumed about the dangers -- then you can go back and, at yourleisure, knock down their health evidence as well. My approach -- conceding all their evidence up front -- doesa complete end run. They expect me to argue that pot doesn'tcause cancer, etc. When I don't, and jump to the bottom linepolicy issue (prison), they are completely disarmed. They reallydon't know what to do. They never thought about their logicalnon-sequitir (Because XXXXX is dangerous, therefore prison is thesolution) and are completely unprepared to deal with argumentswhich address the logical disconnect. Once they are sitting therewith a stunned expression on their face -- knowing they have beencompletely cut off -- then I come back with the mop up campaignof addressing the health risks and comparing them with otherhealth risks for which we do not put people in jail. By thattime, they will be doing little but nodding their head andagreeing. I remember one debate in which my opponent showed up with awhole stack of medical references on the harmful effects ofdrugs. A few minutes into the debate he closed his folder andnever opened it again. Of course, as always, he conceded andagreed with me. TheSpecific Responses Now for the specific responses: Ok, you convinced me. Let's assume everything you say is true and it grows hair on your palms besides. How many millions of people do you suppose we ought to throw in prison for best results? Let's assume all the evidence you presented is 100 percent accurate. The evidence you presented shows that pot is perhaps three times as carcinogenic as cigarettes. What does this mean in terms of policy? Does it mean that the penalties for pot should be three times the penalties for cigarettes? Then, of course, there should be even higher penalties for cigars and chewing tobacco, right? So the argument is XXXXXX causes cancer. Therefore, the law is really based on trying to prevent people from doing things which might give them cancer, right? Should we have laws against staying out in the sun too long, eating cheeseburgers, or smoking tobacco? The reasons you have stated never did have anything to do with why the laws were passed in the first place. Please answer two questions: Why were the drug laws passed in the first place? When did the concerns over cancer become the reason behind the laws? If your concern is really the carcinogens, then we can just require that the active ingredient be distributed in its pure form. Or what if someone only uses it by distilling the active ingredient (a simple process) and thereby takes no carcinogens? Shouldn't they be free from penalties? Gosh, you convinced me. Let's solve the problem right away. We will elect you King so you can do _anything_ you want. And ... every pot smoker in America is lined up outside your door with a bag of dope in one hand and a signed confession in the other. Now what? Every major study of drug policy agreed that prohibition only multiplied the bad effects which already exist with drugs. For example, overdoses become more likely because users don't know what they are getting; there are no standards for drug purity so there is greater harm from contaminants, addicts are less likely to receive effective treatment, etc. The more you assume about the harmful effects of drugs, the more imperative it becomes to address them in a non-criminal manner. Your evidence states that pot may be a problem while driving. Let's assume (for the sake of argument) that this is true. Do we attempt to solve the problem of drunk driving by throwing wine and beer drinkers in jail? Why not? (Can you say "misapplication of resources"?) The argument that pot was found in the bloodstreams of any group of people who died from any cause is not indicative of anything other than that they might have used pot some time within the last two months before they died. It does not say anything about all the people who may have pot in their bloodstreams and still be alive and well. It doesn't even say anything about _why_ they died. For comparison purposes, as any competent doctor knows, we need control groups. We must be wary of false comparisons (as any competent doctor should know). For example, we had one previous example in which large numbers of people were dying with pot in their bloodstreams. It was called Vietnam. Pot smokers had a high death rate, but it had nothing to do with pot. Pot causes cancer. Therefore, the best approach to the problem is to put millions of people in prison. This is the basic argument. Can you say "non-sequitir"? Where did you get the idea that if something is a health hazard, we ought to throw people in prison? Name all the other health problems for which prison is the recommended treatment. Please make a list of the comparable health problems caused by say, alcohol, and then match the health problems with the appropriate criminal penalties. Then maybe you can tell me why every major study of drug policy in the last fifty years recommended decriminalization. (See the list of Biggest Studies of Drug Policy on my web page.) You know, we can dispense with all the details and cut to the bottom line. Rather than argue the details of what it _might_ cause, we can take a look at the actual stats on what it _does_ cause. When we look at the official stats, such as deaths from any pot-related cause, the numbers are trivial in comparison with the damage done by alcohol and tobacco. We are spending 99 percent of our budget on one percent of the real drug problems. If YourOpponent is a Doctor 16) Hey, Doc! What is the first rule of addressing a healthproblem? First, do no harm. Right? Putting people in prison doessignificant harm long before they are likely to get cancer. If my opponent is a doctor I will hammer him on points justlike the one above. If he is really concerned about pot as ahealth issue then, by God, he ought to be ready to address thatpart of the problem as he would any other health issue. Would heput people in prison for non-marital sex in order to preventvenereal disease? Obviously he wouldn't. Hit him with his ownvalues and evidence. And, if he is a doctor, I would hammer him repeatedly on thefact that he really didn't know anything about the subject. Like: So tell me why the Consumers Union Report on Licit andIllicit Drugs said that prohibition was the worst thing we coulddo for drug-related health problems. You haven't read it haveyou? The big problem here is ignorance, Doctor. It is one thingto read some medical literature about the harm these things cando and it is quite another to make the leap to an effectivepublic policy. Your problem, Doctor, is that you have read someof the medical evidence but haven't read the evidence on drugpolicy. Ignorance is a shameful thing in someone with as mucheducation as you have. In short, if I am in a debate with a doctor, he will fallbefore I am done -- because he is a doctor. I will goad him intoreading the CU Report by taunting him, calling him ignorant,cajoling him, or anything else I have to do. I will force him toeither read what I have read or look like a public fool. Oncethey read it, they always concede. For example, see my muchearlier post "Cliff Converts Doc". It was written by adoctor who fought me tooth and nail and then wound up tellingeveryone that I was right. Excerpts of my debate with him areposted on my web page. CliffSchaffer's Home Page WT02-B01-61IA086-000618-B047-255http://206.61.184.43:80/schaffer/Activist/claim10.htm 206.61.184.43 19970122030849 text/html 6878HTTP/1.0 200 OKDate: Wednesday, 22-Jan-97 03:08:42 GMTServer: WebSitePro/1.1f (S/N wpo-0deb)Allow-ranges: bytesContent-type: text/htmlLast-modified: Saturday, 28-Dec-96 07:28:01 GMTContent-length: 6661 Claim X: Drug legalization would have an adverse effect onlow income communities Contents | Feedback | Search DRCNet Library | Schaffer Library | The Drug Legalization Debate CLAIM X: DRUG LEGALIZATION WOULD HAVE AN ADVERSE EFFECT ONLOWINCOME COMMUNITIES DEA Statement Some proponents of legalization claim that current strict drugcontrol policies have a disproportionately adverse effect on poorcommunities. The Facts This much is obvious from even the most cursory examination ofthe statistics. DEA Statement The drug laws of the United States, and efforts to stop drugtrafficking and abuse, are designed to protect all people fromthe harm and denigration that illegal drugs cause. If oneeconomic group or another is disproportionately affected by theimplementation of current laws, that problem should be dealt within its proper context--not by legalizing drugs. The Facts As a matter of fact, the laws were based largely on racism andthe fears of such things as Chinese men luring white women totheir ruin in opium dens, and the mythical "Negro CocaineFiend." Harry Anslinger specifically stated that the primaryreason to outlaw marijuana (hemp) was "its effect on thedegenerate races." DEA Statement The participants at the Forum, many of them city policechiefs, disagreed with the notion that legalization would improvethe lot of the poor. Legalization proponents argue that fewer people would bearrested for drug trafficking crime and the violence associatedwith turf protection would be reduced if drugs were legalized.That argument assumes that drugrelated violence is limited torival drug gangs disputing turf, when in fact, most drug violenceis committed by people under the influence of drugs. The incidence of dysfunctional families, unemployability,family violence, and ruined lives would increase in lowincomecommunities, just as they would in every other community. Allcommunities would see increased aberrant behavior because ofincreased drug use; increased occurrences of child neglect;increased family disintegration; increased fetal damage caused bymothers' drug use; increased social welfare costs; loss ofworkforce productivity; increased auto accidents because driversare driving under the influence of drugs; increased industrialaccidents caused by impaired workers; increased absenteeism; andincreases in emergency room visits and overdose deaths. In short,all Americans would see a moral decline of society. Drug use in the inner city is a manifestation of otherproblems in the inner city; these problems would not go away ifmore drugs were available. If proponents truly believe thatlegalization would have a positive affect on communities, wechallenge them to set up a trial program in their own community. The Facts This is an empty challenge. If anyone tried it, the DEA wouldhave them in jail before the first results could be evaluated.This kind of trial program is the last thing the DEA wants tosee, as they have already stated by their opposition to anobjective Federal Commission to examine the evidence. DEA Statement Some facts which help to confirm the observations of the forumparticipants may be used in debates:  In his 1994 article in the New England Journal of Medicine,Dr. Herbert Kleber addresses the drug situation: "Ourcurrent drug situation follows a pattern of earlier drugepidemics. As the use of drugs drops from epidemic to endemiclevels, disadvantaged groups are more likely than others tocontinue using drugs because of their greater availability andfewer alternative opportunities. That is why minority communitieswant not only treatment facilities but also fair laws, justlyapplied to reduce the horrendous toll of drug related crime intheir neighborhoods. The illegal, open air drug bazaars thatflourish in southeastern Washington DC and the South Bronx wouldnot be tolerated in Georgetown or Scarsdale." The Facts Try as I might, I can't find anything in that statement whichsays that throwing massive numbers of people in prison for drugoffenses is a good idea. Contents | Feedback | Search DRCNet Library | Schaffer Library | The Drug Legalization Debate WT02-B01-62IA087-000627-B027-306http://206.61.184.43:80/olsen/MEDICAL/IOWA/event.html 206.61.184.43 19970122055319 text/html 3294HTTP/1.0 200 OKDate: Wednesday, 22-Jan-97 05:53:14 GMTServer: WebSitePro/1.1f (S/N wpo-0deb)Allow-ranges: bytesContent-type: text/htmlLast-modified: Sunday, 01-Dec-96 17:52:37 GMTContent-length: 3079 6B * Des Moines Register * August 6, 1995 Group fighting for medicinal use of marijuana Supporters say the plant should be treated like other drugs that are legal when prescribed by a doctor By Loren KellerRegister Staff Writer   George McMahon sat down on the steps of the Capitol building in Des Moines Saturday, leaned back, fired up a marijuana cigarette and casually inhaled -- and he wasn't breaking any laws.   McMahon, who suffers from a rare genetic defect that causes muscle spasmsand nausea, is one of eight people in the United States authorized by the federal government to use the drug legally.   "My hospital bills used to be thousands of dollars.  Now I smoke a plant," McMahon, of Bode, told more than 30 people gathered Saturday for a rally in support of legalizing the drug for medical purposes.  "I smoke marijuana because it makes me better.  The other pills I took made me worse."   Most who attended the rally, including McMahon, agreed that both corporate and government interests have prevented the drug's wide-spread legal use.   "They're fighting dirty, like in the 1930s when they said marijuana will make you mean," McMahon said.  "They're using weapons against you that you don't understand."   Barbara Douglass of Storm Lake, another person who may use marijuana legally, also attended the rally.  Douglass suffers from multiple sclerosis.   Carl Olsen of the group Iowans for Medical MarUuana, which sponsored the rally, said he remains optimistic about favorable legislation becoming law.   "The legislators aren't afraid they won't get elected for supporting this issue," he said.  "The public supports this issue."   Iowa Sen. Merlin Bartz, R-Grafton, who did not attend the rally but has agreed to draft legislation supporting the legal medical use of marijuana, said judgments about the drug's proper use should be left to the medical community.   "There are all other types of prescription drugs that are considered illegal if not used under the direction of a doctor," Bartz said, "and for some reason (marijuana) has been singled out as something that cannot be legally prescribed by a doctor.   "In no way is that an endorsement of legalizing the drug," he added.   Not all Iowa lawmakers agree.   Rep. Philip Wise, D-Keokuk, who teaches high school, did not attend the rally Saturday but said he would oppose such legislation.   "Having dealt with teens for the last 26 years, the last thing we need to do at this juncture is send the message that the use of any drugs, including softer drugs, is acceptable," he said. carlolsen@dsmnet.com WT02-B01-63IA087-000632-B037-83http://206.61.184.43:80/schaffer/Activist/bumper1.htm 206.61.184.43 19970122070814 text/html 4280HTTP/1.0 200 OKDate: Wednesday, 22-Jan-97 07:08:07 GMTServer: WebSitePro/1.1f (S/N wpo-0deb)Allow-ranges: bytesContent-type: text/htmlLast-modified: Saturday, 28-Dec-96 07:25:58 GMTContent-length: 4063 Bumper Sticker Ideas Bumper Sticker Ideas This page is a compilation of ideas people had for goodbumper stickers for a drug policy reform campaign. Enjoy. "Visualize Drugpeace," "It's the Prohibition -- Not Drugs," "Stop the War on Us," Prohibition love it or leave it. Peace on Drugs. CIA Cocaine in America. DEA: the competition Make love on drugs, Not war on drugs Fight real crime- End the drug war. - Ben Masel (I think) Just say know (or no thank you) Why can't we all just get abong? As Ira Glassner noted in his editorial printed in lastsundays NY times --in response to "It's Drugs Stupid"---Hey,"It's Prohibition Stupid." Legalize it, Don't Criticize it. Drug Prohibition is the Problem Not the Solution I read once that if you take a black sharpie and black-outthe "kids off" on the DARE bumper stickers, it reads, "DARE to keep drugs" Pro-MJ and I vote! Free the weed, the stalk and the seed! Free Pot (from tyranny) Drugs Are Real Expensive "Stop the Violence: End the Drug War" PROHIBITION = <the word "CONTROL" surrounded bya big slashed circle> REGULATION = CONTROL How about "DECLARE PEACE" superimposed over theimage of a pot leaf on one side and a hand with the V-shaped peace sign on the other? Stop drug violence End the drug war [Perhaps using red/white octagon STOP sign and yellow/blackdiamond END sign] DARE: Lying to kids about drugs [Lying to kids has to be in high contrast, bright yellow onblack] Save the trees Legalize hemp Prohibition _is_ our drug problem "It's Prohibition, Stupid" - (inspired by E.Nadelmann) Tax it. For Freedom of Diet -- Abolish Neo-prohibition! End the Drug War. Begin the War on Real Crime THE DRUG WAR BREEDS CRIME NOBODY'S SAFE FROM THE DEA WANT SAFE STREETS? END THE DRUG WAR! MAKE AMERICA SAFE: END THE DRUG WAR! OUR DRUG WAR: $100,000,000,000.00 DRUG LORD SUBSIDY PROHIBITION IS A FAILURE "WAR ON DRUGS" = WAR ON AMERICA LAND OF THE PRISONER HOME OF THE DRUG WAR (as in "land of the free, home of the brave".Superimposed on a waving American flag. In fact it would be really cool if"free" and "brave" were printed but scribbled out and"prisoner" and "drug war" were written in.) US OUT OF COLOMBIA - DEA OUT OF MENDOCINO ...Fight Crime, Not Drugs... ....End Drug Prohibition -- Before It's Too Late... How about: School free drug zone. >Prohibition: Didn't work Then >Of Drugs Doesn't Work Now! >Freedom still works better - Abolish Prohibition DEA OUT OF L.A. Save Our Children -- Stop the Drug War, or Save our Community -- Stop the Drug War CliffSchaffer's Home Page WT02-B01-64IA087-000632-B037-106http://206.61.184.43:80/schaffer/Activist/actlist.htm 206.61.184.43 19970122070823 text/html 65160HTTP/1.0 200 OKDate: Wednesday, 22-Jan-97 07:08:15 GMTServer: WebSitePro/1.1f (S/N wpo-0deb)Allow-ranges: bytesContent-type: text/htmlLast-modified: Saturday, 28-Dec-96 07:26:49 GMTContent-length: 64942 LIBERTY ACTIVISTS' LIST LIBERTY ACTIVISTS' LIST v 1.36 06/1995 So you're sick of the "War on Drugs"? Here's aninternational list of over 200 organizations which support druglaw reform, although most of them are in the US. Look for one inyour area. Please distribute this list widely, and send in anygroups which are not listed already. There's an active group herefor almost any taste. Joining your favorite organization is best,though if you're worried about persecution, just send anonymousmoney or a letter of appreciation. Take advantage of yourdemocratic rights while you still have some! If you're already in a law reform organisation, you can usethis list to contact others with similar interests, and shareinformation or facilities. Just knowing that there are othersworking on these issues can be a big morale booster. The power of pro-liberty organisations can be multiplied manytimes by fast and efficient communication, which spreads news andpromotes co-ordinated action. Electronic mail and conferencing isthe most efficient way to achieve these necessary abilities. Forexample, this list doubled its size in eight months ofcirculation over the Internet. I strongly encourage active groupsand individuals to use this powerful technology. This listing was originally kicked off with a list of groupsreproduced with permission from the February, 1992 issue of HighTimes magazine (contact details at the end of the list). Since then, it has grown considerably through the kindness ofthose who have contributed additional entries, including ChrisKlausmeier, Macca Macpherson, Dave Thomson and Keith Lim. Please reproduce and distribute widely with thisacknowledgment. Post it on bulletin boards if you can. PLEASE SEND NEW LISTINGS I don't know any more about most of these groups, than whatappears here. If you know about other active groups not listedhere, or if any entries need correction, please e-mail me atschaffer@smartlink.net, or mail to the address below, forincorporation in future editions of this list. Aldis Ozols GPO Box 127 SYDNEY 2001 AUSTRALIA * * * * * *AUSTRALIA* Adelaide University NORML c/- Clubs Association University of Adelaide Adelaide 5000 Internet: daroussy@teaching.cs.adelaide.edu.au groo@smug.student.adelaide.edu.au Australian Hemp Products 227 Grinsell Street Kotara, Newcastle, NSW 2289 Phone: +61 49 52 7802 Fax: +61 49 52 5211 (Grant Steggles) Australian Parliamentary Group for Drug Law Reform c/- Michael Moore, MP GPO Box 1020 Canberra ACT 2601 Phone: +61 6 205 0166 Fax: +61 6 205 0431 Notes: A group of Members of Parliament supporting the reform of drug laws. BIO-Logical PRODUCTS PO Box 768 Potts Point NSW 2011 Phone: +61 2 983 9857 Fax: +61 2 440 0140 Notes: Sells clothing made of hemp, and distributesinformation about the uses of hemp for paper, fuel, etc. Brisbane HEMP PO Box 332 Albert St 4002 Phone: +61 7 844 7499 Notes: Meetings at 50 Baynes St, West End on Monday nights at7.30pm. Flinders NORML c/- Clubs and Societies Association, Inc. Flinders University Bedford Park, SA 5042 Hemp For Paper Consortium c/- Harmsens 430 Tinderbox Road TINDERBOX TAS 7054 Phone: +61 02 29 2063 IDUN Communication Centre, NUAA PO Box 822 Bondi Junction 2022 New South Wales Phone: +61 2 369 3455 Fax: +61 2 369 3282 (Dave Burrows) Note: Injecting Drug User Group Network, promoting drug lawreform, harm reduction, education, outreach, and research. Mullers and Packers Union, C/o Clubs and Societies, Monash University, Clayton, Victoria 3168 Internet: c/- smalshy@yoyo.cc.monash.edu.au (a 'donated'account - messages will be passed on to the Secretary of the club) Notes: President is Tony Carden. Last Contacted: 2/93 New South Wales NORML GPO Box 91 Sydney, NSW 2001 Notes: This group is no longer very active, though some members can be contacted at the above address. Nimbin HEMP PO Box 177 Nimbin, NSW 2480 Phone: +61 66 89 1602 South Australia HEMP PO Box 7013 Hutt Street Adelaide 5000 Phone: +61 8 293 2838 Also: PO Box 1019 Kent Town 5071 Notes: Membership $10(conc) $15(waged) Last contact: Apr 95 West Australia HEMP PO Box 115 Mirrabrooke 6061 Phone: +61 9 344 1445 West Australia NORML PO Box 907 Morley, WA 6062 (Carl Turney) *BELGIUM* International Anti-Prohibitionist League (Europe) 97 Rue Belliard, Rem.512 1040 Brussels Phone: (32 2) 230 4121 Fax: (32 2) 230 3670 *CANADA* Assembly of the Church of the Universe 329 Wentworth St. North Hamilton, Ontario L8L 5W1 CANADA (416) 521-1804 (Rev. Bros. Walter A. Tucker & Michael A.Baldasaro) Notes: officially registered religious organisation Last Contacted: Dec 93 B.C. Anti-Prohibitionist League P.O. Box 8179 Victoria, B.C. V8W 3R8 CANADA (604) 382-7758 Last Contacted: Apr 94 Canadian Association for the Legalisation of Marijuana(C.A.L.M.) (B.C.) R.R. 1, Site 850D, Comp 2 Grand Forks, B.C. V0H 1H0 CANADA Last Contacted: Sep 93 Canadian Foundation for Drug Policy 70 MacDonald Street Ottawa, Ontario K2P 1H6 CANADA (613) 238-5909 (temporary number until a separate one isacquired) Fax: (613) 238-2891 (also temporary) Last Contacted: Dec 94 Canadian Hemp Association 312 Adelaide St. W. Suite 608 Toronto, Ontario M5V 1R2 CANADA cha@io.org (416) 977-4159 (Robin Ellins) Notes: A national organization to facilitate and promote thegrowth of a hemp industry in Canada. Last Contacted: Jun 94 (C.H.A. post to alt.hemp) Cannabis Canada Suite 420 21 Water St. Vancouver, BC. V6B 1A1 CANADA (Dana Larsen) Internet: Dana Larsen <muggles@hempbc.com>,http://www.hempbc.com Notes: The magazine of Canada's Cannabis Culture. 84 pages oncannabis paper. Citizens On Drugs (C.O.D.) 64 Augusta Ave. Toronto, Ontario M5T 2L1 CANADA (Tim Potts, Kenn Quayle) Phone: (416) 504 6131 Fax: (416) 703 7832 Internet: greenie@io.org Notes: Meetings are on the first and third Wednesday of each month at 7:00 pm at the Niagara Neighbourhood Health Centre(674 Queen St. W.). Fane of the Psilocybe Mushroom Association P.O. Box 8179 Victoria, B.C. V8W 3R8 CANADA Notes: officially-registered religious organization;publishes Sporeprint newsletter Last Contacted: Apr 94 Freedom Party of Ontario P.O. Box 2214, Station A London, Ontario N6A 4E3 CANADA (519) 433-8612 Notes: officially-registered Ontario political party;supports individual choice without either condoning or condemning cannabis use. Friends International 370-1027 Davie St. Vancouver, B.C. V6E 4L2 CANADA (604) 681-3704 (Leeroy Campbell, Jan Campbell) Notes: publishes Hempfest Times newsletter Last Contacted: Jun 94 HEMP BC 324 W Hastings Vancouver BC V6B 1K6 CANADA Internet: memery@hempbc.com, http://www.hempbc.com (604) 681-4620 (Marc Emery) (604) 681-4604 (fax line) Last Contacted: May 95 Notes: Canada's Largest retail and wholesale cannabis store.Carries everything related to cannabis, marijuana, and hemp. HEMP Canada PO Box 37154 769 Southdale Road East London, Ontario N6E 1B0 CANADA (519) 686-1415 (Mike Bourque - Director) Last Contacted: Apr 94 Hemp Lobby Hornby Island (604) 335-1276 (John West) Last Contacted: May 93 Hemp to Save the Rainforest 830 Gulfview Place Victoria, B.C. V8Y 2R6 CANADA (Thurles Loughran) Last Contacted: Mar 94 Hempsters #114-1472 Commercial Drive Vancouver B.C. V5L 3X9 Last Contacted: May 94 International Anti-Prohibitionist League (Canada) c/o Marie-Andree Bertrand PO Box 6128 University of Montreal Criminology Dept. Montreal, Quebec H3C 3S7 CANADA Last Contacted: Sep 93 League for Ethical Action on Drugs (LEAD) 1047 Yarmouth Street Port Coquitlam, B.C. V3C 5H4 CANADA (604) 942-1910 (Dana Larsen) Notes: uses a harm-reduction philosophy in lobbying for drugpolicy reform Last Contacted: Jun 94 Libertarian Party of Canada 922 Cloverley St. North Vancouver, B.C. V7L 1N3 CANADA (604) 980-7370 Last Contacted: Sep 93 Ligue antiprohibitioniste du Quebec 4566 rue de la Roche Montreal, Quebec H2J 3J6 CANADA (514) 454-7744 NAUN 155 Sherbourne Street #310 Toronto M5A 3W2 CANADA (Stean Collins) Note: Injecting Drug User Group Network, promoting drug lawreform, harm reduction, education, outreach, and research. NORML B.C. Depot 4, P.O. Box 7193 Victoria, B.C. V9B 4Z3 CANADA (604) 474-4771 (Norm Cholette) Last Contacted: Sep 93 NORML Canada R.R. #1 King City, Ontario L0G 1K0 CANADA (416) 833-3167 (Umberto Iorfida) (416) 833-3577 (Computer line) Last Contacted: Sep 93 Patriotic Canadians for Hemp Box 293 Ucluelet B.C. V0R 3A0 CANADA (604) 726-7239 (Chris Bennett, Tracy Chester) Notes: a.k.a. Sister Sativa's Genuine Hemp, Mama Indica'sHempseed Treats Last Contacted: Jun 94 Society of Free Thinkers (SOFT) P.O. Box 327 Paradise Newfoundland and Labrador (NfLb) A1L 1C7 CANADA Notes: Not solely dedicated to drug law reform. Methodsinclude posters, letters and leaflets. Anonymity is granted to members, uponrequest. Last Contacted: Jan 93 Simon Fraser University League for Ethical Action on Drugs(SFU LEAD) c/o SFSS Clubs Administration Simon Fraser University Burnaby, B.C. V5A 1S6 CANADA (604) 291-3181 (SFSS General Office: messages) Notes: area of interest is in finding policy alternatives tothe WoD that do not infringe on civil liberties. Last Contacted: Jun 94 *CANADA - INDIVIDUALS* J. Wayne Marsden (604) 668-6886 Notes: Libertarian Party candidate Last Contacted: Sep 93 *DENMARK* Fri Hash Bevaegelsen (Movement for legalization of marijuana) Hampens plads 1, Christiania Baadsmandsstraedet 43, 1407 KBH K Phone: +45 32966614 Internet: Nicolaj Tscherning Moller<frihashb@inet.uni-c.dk> *FINLAND* Suomen kannabisyhdistys PL 20 SF-00770 Helsinki Internet: sky@katto.kaapeli.fi WWW: http://katto.kaapeli.fi/~sky/ *FRANCE* Collectif d'Information et de Recherche Cannabique (CIRC) (Association for Marijuana Research and Information) 118-130 av. Jean Jaures 75019 PARIS CEDEX 19 Phone: +33 1 42 38 04 83 Fax: +33 1 42 38 02 99 Minitel: 3615 CIRC MLC: Mouvement for a Controlled Legalization President: Francis Caballero. Attorney. 59, av. Victor-Hugo 750016 Paris FRANCE Phone: +33 1 42 22 48 23 *GERMANY* AKZEPT (Bundesverband fu"r akzeptierende Drogenarbeit und humane Drogenpolitik e.V.) Friedrichstrasse 165 10117 Berlin Phone: +49 30 229 9043 ARCHIDO (Archiv und Dokumentationszentrum fu"r Drogenliterature.V.) Universita"t Bremen Fachbereich 8 Postfach 33 04 40 28334 BREMEN Phone: +49 421 218 3173 Fax: +49 421 218 4265 Notes: Working on a federal level for drug legalisation inGermany. Bundesarbeitsgemeinschaft Kritischer Polizistinnen und Polizsten (Hamburger Signal) e.V. c/o Reinhard Borchers Gaertnerstrasse 21 D-20253 Hamburg Phone: +49 40 422 5843 Fax: +49 40 422 9322 Internet: R.Borchers@cl-hh.comlink.de Notes: An organisation of German Policemen and Policewomen. Last contact: Feb 95 EIGDU C/- DAH Secretariate Berlin Dieffenbachstrasse 33 10967 Berlin Phone: +49 30 690087 56 Fax: +49 30 690087 42 (Werner Hermann) Note: Injecting Drug User Group Network, promoting drug lawreform, harm reduction, education, outreach, and research. H.A.N.F. e.V. Hanf als Nutzpflanze foerdern c/o Gecko Headshop Osterfelder Str. 2 42103 Wuppertal Phone: +49 202 304295 Fax: +49 202 316795 Kommunale Drogenpolitik (Verein fu"r akzeptierende Drogenarbeit e.V.) Kreuzstra(ss)e 29 28203 Bremen Phone: +49 421 76045 Fax: +49 421 75727 *HOLLAND* See *NETHERLANDS, THE* *ISRAEL* Israel Organization For the Reformation of Pot Laws, The PO Box 11438 Ariel 44839 Phone: +972 3 936 5407 Last contact: Jan 95 *ITALY* CORA - Coordinamento Radicale Antiproibizionista c/o Partito Radicale Transnazionale (Transnational Radical Party) Via di Torre Argentina 76 00186 ROMA (ITALY) Phone: +39 6 689791 Fax: +39 6 68805396 Telex: +39 6 610495 PRLIFEI Note: CORA also has a BBS. Its phone number is +39 669920412, or on the Internet, "telnet agora.stm.it". Inparticular, look at 'Conference Drugs' and 'News Cora' for info on Coraactivities. *NETHERLANDS, THE* IRDRHR (International Institute for Resource-sharing on Drugsand Human Rights) Drugs Peace Institute PO Box 15563 1001 NB Amsterdam giro 6663463 *NETHERLANDS, THE - INDIVIDUALS* Guido H. Koppes Tuinstraat 47-07 5038 DA Tilburg Phone: +31 13 356331 Internet: Guido Koppes <guido@freenet.scri.fsu.edu> *NEW ZEALAND* ADUN C/- Mainline communications 33 Hill Cresent, New Lynn Auckland 1007 Phone: +64 9 826 0977 Fax: +64 9 826 0977 Internet: Barry F Ryker <spike@bazza.ak.planet.co.nz> Note: Injecting Drug User Group Network, promoting drug lawreform, harm reduction, education, outreach, and research. Auckland University NORML C/- AUSA Private Bag 92019 Auckland University Auckland Christchurch NORML c/- PO Box 22301 Christchurch Internet: C/- Greg Kerdemelidis<gkerde@genix.equinox.gen.nz> Dunedin University NORML c/- OUSA PO Box 1436 Dunedin Hamilton NORML PO Box 19088 Hamilton Notes: Branch contact is Kath (phone 855 0762). Nelson Polytech NORML Contact: c/- Nelson Polytech Students' Association Last Contacted: September 1993 NZ NORML PO Box 19467 Avondale Auckland 7 Phone: (09) 828 4707 (Mike Finlayson) Notes: Palmerston North contact is: Linda Davis c/- StudentMail, City Court Hostel, B2-4, Massey University. Hawkes Bay contact is: Johnny Ropitini c/- Ropitini, Kakirawa Flats, Miriama Rd, RD 11, Paki Paki, Hastings. Wellington NORML C/- P.O.Box 11639 Wellington Notes: Located at Shop 272, Cuba St, Welington. Open everyFriday night 5.30 pm to 8.00 pm, and Saturday morning from 10.00 am to1.00 pm. *NORWAY* Fremskrittspartiets Ungdom Box 8867 Youngstorget N-0028 Oslo Phone: (+47) 22 41 07 69 Fax (+47) 22 42 32 55 Notes: This is the youth organisation of the Progress Party.A recent committee meeting voted in favour of cannabis legalisation,and it is likely that the national assembly of the youth organisationwill accept this as policy in early 1994. The mani body of the party doesnot as yet support this. *SLOVENIA* STIGMA Saranoviceva 5 61000 Ljubljana Slovenia Phone: +386 61 133 7011 Fax: as for voice phone (Dare Kocmur) Note: Injecting Drug User Group Network, promoting drug lawreform, harm reduction, education, outreach, and research. *SWITZERLAND* Verein Schweizer Hanf Freunde (Swiss Association of Hemp Friends) Postfach 323 9004 St. Gallen Last Contacted: Jan 93 *UNITED KINGDOM* Alchemy 261 Portobello Road London W11 Bridge (Drug Advice) Equity Chambers Piccadilly Bradford Phone: +44 274 72 3863 Campaign to Legalise Cannabis International 54c Peacock Street Norwich NR3 1TB CODD (Committee for an Open Debate on Drugs) BCM Entwine, London WC1N 3XX European Movement for Normalisation of Drug Policy (BritishSection) c/- Dr Russell Newcombe c/- 10 Maryland Street LIVERPOOL L1 9BX Phone: +44 51 709 3511 Fax: +44 51 709 4916 Legalise Cannabis Campaign BM Box 2455 London WC1N 3XX Phone: +44 71 585 1031 Libertarian Alliance 25 Chapter Chambers Esterbrooke Street London SW1P 4NN Phone: +44 71 821-5502 Fax: +44 71 834-2031 Internet: liberty@capital.demon.co.uk National Council for Civil Liberties 21 Tabard Street London SE1 4LA Phone: +44 71 403 3888 Peoples Right To Smoke Marijuana PO Box 23 Chigwell, Essex IG7 5EH Release (Drugs Legal & Emergency service) 169 Commercial Road London E1 6BW Phone: +44 71 377 5905 (daytime), +44 71 603 8654 (24-hourhelpline) *UNITED STATES OF AMERICA* Note: This portion of the list has been extensively revised by Chris Klausmeier, with extensive help and prodding fromBrian at University of Massachusetts at Amherst Cannabis ReformCoalition. Advocates for Self-Government 3955 Pleasantdale Road, #106-A Atlanta, GA 30340 Phone: (404)417-1304, (800)932-1776 Fax: (404)417-1305 Notes: The Advocates for Self-Government is a non-profiteducational organization. Our purpose is to present the freedomphilosophy honestly and persuasively to opinion-makers so that they can encounter, evaluate, and when ready embrace the ideals of self-government. Contributions are tax deductible undersection 501(c)(3). Last Contacted: July 1993 Alabama TEACH Rt 3 Box 620 Blountsville, AL 35031 (Johnny Bynum) Alaskans for Hemp Awareness 1013 E. Dimond Blvd. #227 Anchorage, AK 99515 Phone/Fax: (907) 248 HEMP Internet: 73237.422@compuserve.com (Len Karpinski) Notes: Since 1990 Albert Hofmann Foundation Notes: This organisation no longer accepts members and nolonger sells reference books. For psychedelic-related issues, please refer to the entry for the Multidisciplinary Association for Psychedelic Studies, below. Last contact: May 95 Alliance for Cannabis Therapeutics PO Box 21210 Washington, DC 20009 Phone: (202) 483 8595 Notes: Working to reform laws which prevent medical access tocannabis. American Anti-Prohibitionist League 4017 SE Belmont, Box 103 Portland, OR 97214 Phone: (503) 235 4524 Internet: Floyd.Landrath@f69.n105.z1.fidonet.org (Floyd Ferris Landrath) American Cannabis Research Experiment PO Box 3240 Charlottesville, VA 22903 Internet: jeg5s@uva.PCmail.virginia.edu American Cannabis Society PO Box 9208 Madison, WI 53715 American Civil Liberties Union 132 West 43rd St. New York, NY 10036 Phone: (212) 944 9800 Notes: While not explicitly a drug law reform group, the ACLU promotes human rights and supports alternatives to currentlaws. American Hemp Council PO Box 71093 Los Angeles, CA 90071-0093 Phone: (213) 288 4152 American Medical Marijuana Movement (San Francisco Headquarters) 3745 Seventeenth Street San Francisco, CA 94114 Phone: (415) 864 1961 Americans Against Hemp Prohibition P.O. Box 2062 Westminster, MD 21158 Phone: (410) 857 6484 Fax: (410) 346 7968 Ann Arbor NORML PO Box 6014 Ann Arbor MI 48106 Phone: (313) 677 0099 [RB] (Rich Birkett) Antiochans for Hemp Awareness Antioch College Community Government Yellow Springs, OH 45387 Phone: (513) 767 6427 Arizona NORML 703 W 12th Place Tempe, AZ 85281 Arkansas NORML PO Box 191031 Little Rock, AR 72219 Phone: (501) 562 3868 [GS]; (501) 371 0701 [WD] (Glen Schwarz - President; Wayne Davis - Legal Sponsor) Notes: Victory for Hemp! AZ 4 NORML PO Box 50434 Phoenix, AZ 85076 Phone/Fax: (602) 491 1139 BBS: (602) 921 2878 [Hemp Pipeline] (William R. Green) Beloit College Cannabis Club 700 College St. Beloit, WI 53511 Internet: C/- Vincent Whitacre<whitacre@stu.beloit.edu> Bill of Rights Society PO Box 44485 P.C., CA 91412 Boulder Hemp Initiative Project P.O. Box 729 Nederland, CO 80466 Phone: (303) 784 5632 Internet: bhip@darkstar.cygnus.com (Blair Wilson, Laura Kriho) Notes: Holds weekly meetings at 6.30 pm on Tuesdays inHellems Room 81 on the CU campus in Boulder. Bryan / College Station NORML PO Box 9077 College Station, TX 77842 Phone: (409) 268 HEMP (Craig Edge) Buffalo BACH 336 Esser Avenue Buffalo, NY 14207 Phone: (716) 873 0255 (Marilyn Craig) Business Alliance for Commerce in Hemp (BACH) PO Box 71093 Los Angeles, CA 90071-0093 Phone: (213) 288 4152 (Chris Conrad) California Marijuana Initiative 23342 Angeles Forest Hwy. Palmdale, CA 93550 California F.E.A.R. Phone: (714) 544 2577, (415) 380 9108 or (805) 496 2595. Notes: Fights against unjust forfeiture laws. See entry under'F.E.A.R.' California NORML 2215R Market St. #278 San Francisco, CA 94114 Phone: (415) 563 5858 Internet: canorml@igc.apc.org Cannabis Action Network (CAN WEST / National Headquarters) 2560 Bancroft Way #46 Berkeley, CA 94704 Phone: (510) 486 8083 Fax: Same Internet: caninfo@ccnet.com (Debby Goldsberry) Notes: CAN is a grassroots organization working to educateand mobilize concerned individuals to create change. We work withactivists in every area of the country to do national educational tours,regional conferences, rallies and other events. Last contact: Feb 95 Cannabis Action Network (CAN South / Southern RegionalOffice) 1025 Foucher New Orleans, LA 70115 Phone: (504) 899 1960 (Kevin Aplin) Notes: See above Last contact: Feb 95 CARE Art L. PO Box 1612 Bellflower, CA 90706 Cato Institute 1000 Massachusetts Ave. Washington, DC 20003 Phone: (202) 546 0200 Fax: (202) 546 0728 CCDS/BB 41 Sutter St., Suite 1688 San Fransisco, CA 94104 Central Valley NORML 4546 E. Ashlan Suite 3219 Fresno, CA 93726-2700 Phone: (209) 22 NORML (226 6765) Internet: CVNORML@aol.com Note: Public meetings on the second Monday of each month at7:00 PM at: The Matachi House, 985 N. Van Ness, Fresno, CA Christic Institute 8773 Venice Blvd. Los Angeles, CA 90034 Phone: (310) 287 1556 Fax: (310) 287 1559 (Bill Davis) Citizens Advocating the Protection of Privacy 12611 Research Blvd. #121 Austin, TX 78759 Phone (512) 448 4804 Notes: Specifically concerned with employer drug testing, especially by Motorola and Texas Instruments. Citizens Advocating the Protection of Privacy (Arizona) Internet: CAPPAZ@delphi.com Claremont Hemp Council c/o Chris Klausmeier Platt Campus Center Harvey Mudd College Claremont, CA 91711 Phone: (909) 398 4831 [CK]; (909) 624 3306 [MH] Internet: cklausme@jarthur.claremont.edu (Chris Klausmeier, Mark Hornaday) Notes: Registered 5-college organization at ClaremontColleges. Clergy for Enlightened Drug Policy St Luke's Methodist Church Wisconsin Ave. and Calvert St., NW Washington, DC 20007 Phone: (202) 333 4949 Club de Hashischins POB 313 Old Bridge, NJ 08857-0313 Internet: hash@whitebase.ukp.com Columbia University Harm Reduction Education Session (CUHRES) 203 Ferris Booth Hall Columbia University New York, NY 10027 Internet: (til May 95) C/- Noah Ben Potter<nbp2@columbia.edu> Notes: An undergraduate discussion group addressing societalresponses towards "problem behavior," at-risk populations,possible ways of "deinstitutionalizing" individuals. Community for Creative Non-Violence 425 Second Street, NW Washington, DC 20001 Phone: (202) 393 1909 Community Improvement, Inc. 104 E. Fowler Ave, Suite 203 Tampa, FL 33612 Phone: (813) 931 8028 Cures Not Wars 9 Bleecker Street New York City, NY 10012 Phone: (212) 677 7180 (answering machine) Notes: Focussed on `harm reduction. Organizes the annual `Stop the Drug War' rally and concert in New York'sWashington Square Park in May. Dallas/Fort Worth NORML PO Box 280586 Dallas, TX 75228-9186 Phone: (214) 502-4211 (Dana George) Daytona Beach Hemp Awareness Council PO Box 10384 Daytona Beach, FL 32120 Delaware Valley NORML 154 Uploand Ave Horsham, PA 19044 Des Moines Area Greens PO Box 25058 West Des Moines, Iowa 50265 Phone: (515) 270 8791 (Greg Nepstad) Drug Policy Foundation 4455 Connecticut Ave NW, Suite B-500 Washington, DC 20008-2302 Phone: (202) 537 5005 Fax: (202) 537 3007 Internet: 76546.215@compuserve.com, DPLetter@aol.com Notes: With donations of $25 or more you get a year'ssubscription to The Drug Policy Letter. Drug Policy Foundation (New York office) 888 Seventh Ave, Suite 1901 New York, NY 10106 Phone: (212) 887 0685 Fax: (212) 489 8455 Drug Reform Coordination Network (DRCNet) (also Foundation for Drug Policy Awareness) PO Box 381813 Cambridge, MA 02238-1813 Phone: (617) 648 2655 Fax: (617) 648 2713 Internet: drcnet@netcom.com Notes: Publishes "The Activist Guide" monthlynewsletter, and sends frequent announcements to its "rapid response team" by post,e-mail and fax. Full membership $25/year, $18 for newsletter only, $10 for rapidresponse team only, all material free by e-mail. DRCNet seeks local-action coordinators and volunteers for educational outreach andcoalition building activities. Last contact: Mar 95 DU NORML Student Government Office DUC -- North 2055 East Evans Denver, CO 80210 Phone: (303) 778 7574 (Todd Hall) Duke-CAN PO Box 92266 Durham, NC 27708 Internet: David Shaner Lebauer (President)<dsl4@acpub.duke.edu> End Drug Crime PO Box 1623 Albany, NY 12201 Phone: (518) 434 3279 Families Against Destructive Drug Rehab (FADD) 4654 Dower Drive Ellicott City, MD 21043 Families Against Mandatory Minimums (FAMM) 1001 Pennsylvania Ave., NW, Suite 200-S Washington, DC 20004 Phone: (202) 457 5790 Fax: (202) 457 8564 (Julie Stewart - President) Notes: National grassroots network working to overturnmandatory sentencing. In Oregon, contact is Lorraine Heller (292 5364). Family Council on Drug Awareness PO Box 71093 Los Angeles, CA 90071-0093 Phone: (213) 288 4152 Farmville BACH c/o Peter Gillis Longwood College Farmville, VA 23909 F.E.A.R. 265 Miller Avenue Mill Valley, CA 94941 Phone: (415) 388 8128 Internet: k.bergman@genie.geis.com Notes: While not specifically a drug law reform organisation,FEAR opposes the Civil Forfeiture laws which have been imposed inthe name of the "War on Drugs". Last contact: Jan 95 Flint Hills NORML SGS Union PO Box 70 Kansas State University Manhattan, KS 66502 Phone: (913) 532 5254 (Terry Weber) Florida Legalization Organization c/o Michael Geison PO Box 350 LaCrosse, FL 32658-0350 (Mchael Geison) Notes: Working to relegalize cannabis through publiceducation, Voter registration, and statewide hemp rallies. Foundation for Drug Policy Awareness (see Drug Reform Coordination Network) Freedom Fighters of America 235 Park Ave. So., 5th Flr. New York, NY 10003 Friends of Hemp PO Box 981 Mars Hill, NC 28754 Phone: (704) 652 8919 Fully Informed Jury Association (1 - National HQ) PO Box 59 Helmville, MT 59843 Phone/Fax: (406) 793 5550 or (800) TEL JURY (Don Doig, Larry Dodge, Kathy Ballard) Notes: Not explicitly a drug law reform group, the FIJApromotes awareness of the rights of Juries to judge the law itself. Fully Informed Jury Association (2) 4730 W Northern #1063 Glendale AZ 85301 Phone: (602) 930 1268 Fully Informed Jury Association of Iowa (Iowa FIJA) John Hartog PO Box 16223 Des Moines, Iowa 50316 Phone: (515) 262 4660 The Future of Freedom Foundation PO Box 9752 Denver, CO 80209 Gainsville NORML / Florida Legalization Organization PO Box 350 La Crosse, FL 32658-0350 (Michael Geison) Georgia NORML (aka St Petersburg NORML) PO Box 821 Lithia Springs, GA 30057 Phone: (404) 739 1870 (James Bell) Green Panthers! P.O. Box 9845 Washington D.C. 20016 Phone: (202) 363 0068 Fax: (202) 265 1078 (Loey Glover, Terry Mitchell - National Coordinators) Notes: We are the ONLY militant resistance to the War onDrugs. NOTE: Above address/phone may no longer be correct.Apparently the new phone number is: (513) 522 6264. GVSU NORML Student Activities Office Kirkhof Center Grand Valley State University Allendale, MI 49401 (Dave Speas) Hager for Congress, c/o Libertarian Party PO Box 636 Bloomington, IN 47402-636 Internet: hagerp@moose.cs.indiana.edu Notes: Paul Hager is a candidate for the Libertarian Party, and is pushing hemp law reform as a major element in hiscampaign. Hawaii NORML PO Box 2056 Pahoa, Hawaii 96778 Phone: (808) 965 8600 Fax: (808) 965 6242 (Roger Christie) Help Eliminate Marijuana Prohibition 5632 Van Nuys Blvd. Van Nuys, CA 91401 Hemp Advocates PO Box 10176 South Bend, IN 46680 Hemp Coalition, The PO Box 2382 Albany, NY 12220 Hemp Environmental Activists PO Box 4935 East Lansing, MI 48826 Phone: (517) 484 8287 (Don Patterson) Notes: We work for industrial uses of hemp, marijuana formedicine, and personal privacy rights. Hemp Hemp Hooray! c/o Craig Howard PO Box 1912 Mason City, IA 50401 Phone: (515) 696 5755 Hemp Renaissance Marin County, California Phone: (415) 721 1936 Internet: c/- pearl@crl.com Hemptek Industries Inc PO Box 27809 Dept HT-4C San Diego, CA 92198-1809 HJA NORML PO Box 11 Hollidaysburg, PA 16648-0011 (J.S. Vipond) Hoosier Cannabis Relegalization Coalition PO Box 5325 Bloomington, IN 47407 Internet: hagerp@iuvax.cs.indiana.edu (Paul Hager or Dennis Withered) Houston NORML PO Box 1952 Bellaire, TX 77402 Phone: (713) 465 8418 (Rich Potthoff) Human Environmental Mandate Proponents 1004 E. Preston St. Baltimore, MD 21202 Phone: (410) 547 6706 Modem: (410) 685 2894 (Larry Monoghan) Idaho BACH 3310 Driftwood Dr. Coeur d'Alene, ID 83814 Phone: (208) 773 3974 (Tom Klein) Indiana NORML, Inc. 3601 N. Pennsylvania St Indianapolis, IN 46205 Phone: (317) 923 9391 Fax: (317) 924 2920 (Dana York, Steve Dillon) Indianapolis NORML 3746 North College Avenue Indianapolis, IN 46218 Illinois Drug Ethics Alliance PO Box 4205 Urbana, IL 61801 Phone: (217) FOR JOSH (367 5674) Internet: Joshua Sloan <jsloan1@prairienet.org> Notes: Pro-relegalization. Illinois Marijuana Initiative / Illinois NORML PO Box 2242 Darien, IL 60559 Phone: (708) 836 8426 Internet: mmonningh@igc.apc.org, mrosing@igc.apc.org Institute for HEMP PO Box 65130 St. Paul, MN 55165 Phone: (612) 222 2628 Internet: insthemp@igc.apc.org (John Birrenbach) International Society for Individual Liberty 1800 Market Street San Francisco, CA 94102 Phone: (415) 864 0952 Fax: (415) 864 7506 Internet: 71034.2711@compuserve.com [71034,2711 viaCompuserve] (Vince Miller, Jim Elwood) Notes: Promotes liberty in 80 countries. Produces literatureseries including "Ending Our Drug Nightmare" and"Looting of America". Iowa Grassroots Party / Ames NORML PO Box 1136 Ames, IA 50014 Phone: (515) 233 6081 (Dr. Derrick Grimmer) Notes: Iowa's largest vote-getting 3rd party since itsinception in 1990. Iowa NORML / Iowans for Medical Marijuana Carl E. Olsen PO Box 4091 Des Moines, IA 50333 Phone: (515) 243 7351 Internet: carlolsen@dsmnet.com, iowanorml@commonlink.com, 73043.414@compuserve.com, Carl_E._Olsen@commonlink.com Note: Iowa NORML publishes a quarterly newsletter. Island Group 1803 Mission St. Suite 175 Santa Cruz, CA 95060 Phone: (408) 427-1942 Kalamazoo Cannabis Action Network C/- Western Michigan University Faunce Student Services Box 84 Kalamazoo, MI 49008 Lawrence, KS NORML PO Box 442478 Lawrence, KS 66044 Phone: (913) 832-9074 Internet: David Almquist <lawnorml@databank.com> Notes: We publicly protest the laws against hemp everySaturday night and noon on Sundays in downtown Lawrence with an array ofsigns including "Honk For Hemp". Last contact: Jan 95 Legalize? SIG PO Box 3240 Charlottesville, VA 22903 Internet: jeg5s@uva.PCmail.virginia.edu Notes: This is a MENSA Special Interest Group, open only toMENSA members. Libertarian Party 1528 Pennsylvania Ave. SE Washington, DC 20003 Phone: (202) 543 1988 or (800) 682 1776 Notes: USA's 3rd largest political party, pro-legalizationplatform. Libertarian Party of Iowa PO Box 1041 Waterloo, Iowa 50704 Phone: (319) 235 2894 Fax: (319) 232 8407 (Randy Herod) Little Sisters of the Mother Herb Route 1 Box 2142 Crewe, VA 23930 (Sandy Hayer) Phone: (804) 645 1038 Lone Reefer, The PO Box 515 Harmony, PA 16037 Phone: (412) 766 1842 Louisiana Cannabis Action Network 1025 Foucher New Orleans, LA 70115 Phone: (504) 899 1960 Last update: Apr 95 Los Angeles NORML 8749 Holloway Drive West Hollywood, CA 90069 Phone: (213) 652 8654 (Bruce Margolin) Maine Vocals PO Box 189 Anson, ME 04911 (Don Christen) Mankato State NORML PO Box 3663 Mankato, MN 56002-3663 (Ed Kroce) Notes: Active NORML chapter at a southern Minnesotauniversity. Working on informing the public, elected officials, and makingmarijuana relegalization a public debate. Marijuana Policy Project PO Box 77492 Washington, DC 20013 Phone: (202) 462 5747 Fax: (202) 232 0442 Internet: MPProject@AOL.COM Notes: The MPP's mission is to provide the marijuanalaw-reform movement with full-time, organized lobbying on the federal level.Membership dues are $50 annually or $5 monthly. Members receive themonthly newsletter, "Marijuana Policy Report." Last contact: Feb 95 Marylanders for Drug Policy Reform 2499 Davidsonville Road Gambrills, MD 21054 Phone: (410) 721-0129 Massachusetts Cannabis Reform Coalition (MASS CANN) 1 Homestead Road Marblehead, MA 01945-1122 Phone: (617) 944 2266 (CANN) (Bill Downing, Steven Epstein) Medical Marijuana Restoration Association 3745 17th St. San Francisco, CA 94114 Phone: (415) 864 1961 (Dennis Peron) Michigan Hemp Coalition PO Box 4935 East Lansing, MI 48826 Phone: (517) 484 8287 (Dan Patterson) Notes: MHC is a coalition of all the hemp groups in Michigan. Mid-South Tennessee NORML PO Box 254 Pulaski, TN 38478 Phone: (615) 565 3898 (Kenny Breeding) Milwaukee NORML 207 E Buffalo Street PO Box 92251 Milwaukee WI 53202 Phone: (414) 273-HEMP (Tom Scannell) Minnesota Grassroots Party PO Box 6197 Minneapolis, MN 55406 Phone: (612) 722 4477 Fax: (612) 729 2048 (Steve Anderson) Internet: stevea@geom.umn.edu Notes: Minnesota's largest vote-getting 3rd party since its inception in 1986. Last contact: Mar 95 Minnesota NORML PO Box 80522 Minneapolis, MN 55408 Phone: (612) 822 3396 Fax: (612) 777 4853 (Tim Davis) Notes: Affiliate of national NORML, active in publicoutreach, lobbying, and relegalization agitation. Missouri NORML 15 N. 10th Street Columbia, MO 65201 Phone: (314) 443 6866 Fax: (314) 443 1413 (Dan Viets) Mood For A Day POB 903 West Jordan, UT 84084 Phone: (801) 254 0278 Notes: Local hemp group, publishes a quarterly tabloid,"Regrowth", subs. $5 MOTHERS AGAINST MISUSE and ABUSE (M.A.M.A.) 2255 State Road Mosier, OR 97040 Internet: mama@igc.apc.org Notes: Founded in 1982 - Approach based on personal responsibility and informed decision making. Last Contacted: July 93 Movement Support Network Center for Constitutional Rights 666 Broadway, 7th Floor New York NY 10012 Multidisciplinary Association for Psychedelic Studies, Inc.(MAPS) 1810 Tippah Avenue Charlotte, NC 28205 Phone: (704) 358 9830 Fax: (704) 358 1650 Internet: RICKMAPS@aol.com, st.maps@cybernetics.net Notes: A non-profit organisation of scientists and otherresearchers interested in the study of psychedelic drugs and theireffects. National Drug Strategy Network 1899 L Street, Suite 500 Washington, DC 20036 Phone: (202) 835 9075 Fax: (202) 833 8561 Note: We publish "NewsBriefs," a monthly newsletterwith news about drug abuse, drug enforcement, and drug policy from around theworld. National Organization for the Reform of Marijuana Laws(NORML) 1001 Connecticut Avenue, NW, Suite 1119 Washington, DC 20036 Phone: (202) 483 5500 Fax: (202) 483 0057 1-900: (900) 97 NORML [$2.95/minute] Internet: natlnorml@aol.com (Richard Cowen - Executive National Director) Notes: Oldest and most active drug reform organization. Nevada NORML Sean B. Kind 4542 E. Tropicana Ave. Box 142 Las Vegas, NV 89121 (702) 698-1500 Notes: Newly organized and eager to grow! New Age Patriot PO Box 419 Dearborn Heights, MI 48127 Phone: (313) 563 3192 (Bruce W. Cain) New Jersey NORML PO Box 680 Navesink, NJ 07752 Phone/Fax: (201) 827 4780 [(800) 742 2002 in New Jersey andPhiladelphia] (Ken Krug) New Options Inc PO Box 19324 Washington, DC 20036 Phone: (202) 822 0929 No More Drug War Foundation PO Box 18780 Denver, CO 80218 NORML Colorado 137 W. County Line Rd. #500 Littleton, CO 80126 Phone: (303) 470 1100 (Mark Culverhouse) NORML Green Bay PO Box 22081 Green Bay, WI 54305 Phone: (414) 498 0648 (Bobbie Brien) Notes: Working for the legalization of hemp/pot. Northcoast Ohio NORML PO Box 771154 Cleveland, OH 44107-0049 Phone: (216) 521 WEED (John Hartman) Internet: john4norml@aol.com Notes: Promotes annual freedom festival to benefit NORML,conducts rallies, offers legal referrals and drug test info. Meets the fourthThursday of every month at the Lakewood Public Library, 15425 Detroit Rd,Lakewood, OH. The meetings start at 7pm and are open to the public. North Idaho NORML 3310 Driftwood Drive Coeur d'Alene, ID 83814 Phone: (208) 773 3974 (Tom Klein) North Iowans for Cannabis Education (NICE) PO Box 1912 Mason City, IA 50401 Phone: (515) 696 5755 (Craig Howard) Notes: We found the "Grow Hemp for the War" poster. NAUN C/- NASSEN 55 Dock Street #112 Tacoma, WA 98402 Phone: (206) 272 4857 Fax: (206) 272 8415 (Dave Purchase) Note: Injecting Drug User Group Network, promoting drug lawreform, harm reduction, education, outreach, and research. Ohio Hempery 14 N. Court Street #327 Athens, OH 45701 Phone: (614) 593 5826, (800) BUY HEMP [Info Hotline] (Donald Wirtschafter) Notes: Sells a variety of legal hemp products, e.g. paper,linen, twine. Ohio NORML PO Box 36 New Plymouth, OH 45654 Phone: (614) 385 4167 (Cliff Barrows) Ohio University NORML 415 Carriage Hill Drive Athens, OH 45701 Phone: (614) 592 5118 (James Davis) Oklahoma NORML PO Box 12545 Oklahoma City, OK 73157 Phone: (405) 840 4367 (Michael Pearson) Oklahoma Tulsa Chapter NORML 1023 West 23rd Tulsa, OK 74107 Phone: (918) 583 9041 (C. Rabon Martin) Omaha Hemp Movement 3144 N. 57th Street Omaha, NE 68104 PARTIE Party / Save Our Constitution! PO Box 46853 Mt. Clemens, MI 48046 Phone: (313) 463 3486 (Marvin "Marvin Marvin" Surowitz) Notes: People's Alliance to Reform, Transform, and ImproveEverything Partnership for a Free America c/o Sameer Parekh 829 Paddock Lane Libertyville, IL 60048-3743 Phone: (708) 362 9659 Internet: pfa@ddsw1.MCS.COM Partnership for a Lie Free Government PO Box 29 Fairfield, KY 40020 (Chuck Porter) Notes: Supports Gatewood Galbraith for governor, and allpoliticians who will speak the truth. Partnership for a Responsible America (Texas) [Part RATEX] PO Box 926042 Houston, TX 77292 Phone: (713) 683 9639 (Richard Lee) Partnership for a Responsible Drug Policy 792 8th St. Lake Oswego, OR 97034 Phone: (503) 697 3974 (Anthony Taylor) Patriots of Truth for United Earth, The Bob and Peggy Ross Po Box 262 Rose Lodge, OR 97372 Pay for Schools by Regulating Cannabis (PSRC) PO Box 86741 Portland, OR 97286 Phone: (503) 229 0428 Notes: Voter-initated ballot to legalize and tax cannabis inOregon. Last contact: Mar 95 Penn State University NORML 529 South Pugh Street State College, PA 16801 Phone: (814) 867 2266 (Robert Kampia) Pittsburgh NORML PO Box 4839 Pittsburgh, PA 15206 Notes: Affiliated with Pennsylvania NORML. Pot o' Gold Newsletter PO Box 5448 Evanston, IL 60204 Fax: (708) 328 1922 Internet: pfraterdeus@igc.org Progressive Economic Alliances Cultivating Energy PO Box 623 Kula, Maui, HI 96790-0623 Phone/Fax: (808) 878 3630 Project for a Calculated Transition Green Haven Correctional Facility Drawer B Stormville, NY 12582 Quad Cities Hemp Coalition Box 3592 Rock Island, IL 61201 Religious Coalition for a Moral Drug Policy 3421 M St. NW, Ste. 351 Washington, DC 20007 Rocky Mountain HEMP Network (also Green Democrats ofColorado) 1090 S Wadsworth Blvd #D Lakewood, CO 80226-4308 Phone: (303) 838 1235 Saint Paul NORML PO Box 2865 St Paul, MN 55102 Phone: (612) 776 5467 Saint Petersburg Association for Cannabis Emancipation(S.P.A.C.E.) PO Box 505 St. Petersburg, FL 33737 Last update: Apr 95 San Diego NORML 4895 Guymon St. San Diego, CA 92102 Phone: (619) 263 5733 (Joe Cravotta) San Diego County NORML PO Box 171396 San Diego, CA 92197 Phone: (619) 281 8586, (619) 571 0088 Internet: sdnorml@pro-harold.cts.com (Charles Blue) San Diego Hemp Council Internet: sdhc@pro-harold.cts.com Sanduski County NORML PO Box 282 Freemont, OH 43420 Phone: (419) 334 8215 (Doug) Santa Rosa Junior College Hemp Club Address mail to: Santa Rosa Junior College Attn: Student Activities Office / Hemp Club 1501 Mendocino Avenue Santa Rosa, CA 95401 Save Our Constitution (1) PO Box 3079 Ann Arbor, MI 48106 Phone: (313) 746 9670 Save Our Constitution (2) PO Box 4935 East Lansing, MI 48826 Save Our Liberties 187 Acalanes Dr. #14 Sunnyvale, CA 94086-5520 Phone: (415) 964 3655 Notes: Sells "End the Drug War" Stamps forenvelopes (Not postage stamps). SIUC NORML Office of Student Development Student Center, SIUC Carbondale, IL 62901 Phone: (618) 529 4821 (Drew Hendricks, Jerome Handler [anthroplogy] - CampusAdvisor) Notes: Campus-based education about civil rights aspects ofmarijuana issue. Sonoma Civil Rights Action Project PO Box 410 Cazadero, CA 95421 Phone: (707) 847 3642 (Carol Miller) South Bend NORML PO Box 10176 South Bend, IN 46680 Phone: (219) 233 6581 [SG]; (219) 287 9809 [PS] (Sean Gloster, Pete Szaday) Southern California NORML PO Box 71093 Los Angeles CA 90071-0093 Phone: (213) 288 4152 (Lenny Shaw) Stop Forfeiture of Children's Homes PO Box 91 Waterbury, VT 05676 (Dr. Kathleen DePierro) Students for Drug Policy Reform University of Washington HUB 207 Box 121 FM-25 Seattle, WA 98195 Students for the Legalization of Marijuana (aka University of Illinois NORML) PO Box 4205 Urbana, IL 61801 Phone: (217) 352 4367 (Joshua Sloan) Susquehanna Valley NORML PO Box 10505 Harrisburg, PA 17105-0505 Phone: (717) 697 4255 (Casey) SVA Freedom Fighters 209 E. 23rd St. New York, NY 10010 Phone: (212) 679 7350 ext. 206 (Happy) Texas Hemp Campaign (aka Texas NORML) PO Box 13549 Austin, TX 78711 Phone: (512) 441 4099, (512) 837 4674 Internet: thc@hitex.austin.tx.us (Joe Ptak) Notes: Branches at Corpus - (512) 882 3009, Houston - (713)683 9639, and San Antonio - (512) 654 8720. Therapeutic & Ecological Applications of Cannabis Hemp(TEACH) PO Box 1297 Youngstown, FL 32466 (Robert Lawrence) Tide Water NORML PO Box 8861 Virginia Beach, VA 23450 Phone: (804) 425 9978 (Karen Trimper) TN NORML RR 1 Box 47A Goodspring, TN 38460-9801 Tree Free EcoPaper 121 S.W. Salmon, Suite 1100 Portland, OR 97204 Phone: (1-800) 775 0225 Internet: treefreeeco@igc.apc.org Notes: Wholesale suppliers of hemp paper and hemp pulp.Samples and analysis certificates available. Truth In Marijuana Education (TIME) PO Box 7036 Chico, CA 95927 Phone: (916) 345 1154 (Ed Ostler) Notes: Not for profit, hemp info. publisher/distributor. Notethat _High Times_ gives the address as PO Box 2036, Zip code 95972- this may be incorrect. Tucson Hemp Coalition Box 78093 Tucson, AZ 85703-8093 UB NORML SUNY at Buffalo Student Association 111 Talbert Hall Amherst, NY 14260 UMSOM (aka Michigan NORML) 11280 McKinley Taylor, MI 48180 Phone: (313) 287 9077 (Chuck Kyle) Union County NORML 271 Indian Trail Unionville Road Indian Trail, NC 28079 Phone: (704) 821 8478 (Jerry Morse) University of Kansas NORML (KUNORML) PO Box 45 Lawrence, KS 66044 Phone: (913) 841 8278 (Laura Green) Internet: kunorml@falcon.cc.ukans.edu Last contact: Jan 95 University of Kentucky HEMP Student Organizations Office 9 Student Center Lexington, KY 40526 Phone: (606) 258 8227 Internet: bmkrem00@mik.uky.edu or lmcost00@ukpr.uky.edu University of Massachusetts at Amherst Cannabis ReformCoalition (UMACRC) SAO mailbox #2, 415 Student Union Building, UMass, Amherst, MA 01002 Phone: (413) 546-3413 (Aaron Wilson) Internet: verdant@titan.ucs.umass.edu Notes: Non-students welcome... drop in! University of Minnesota NORML CMU 235 300 Washington Ave. SE Minneapolis, MN 55455 Phone: (612) 673 9412 [Marni Frish] Fax: (612) 777 4853 (Marni Frish, Matt Neis) Notes: Promotes marijuana legalization. US HEMP 461 W. Apache Trail, Suite 130 Apache Junction, AZ 85220 Phone: (602) 983 7065, +1 (800) 501 HEMP Internet: ushemp@ibm.net Notes: Manufacture of hemp buttonfly jeans, willie nelsonline, Vans Hemp tennis shoes, jean jackets, shorts. Call for freecatalog of hemp goods. Vermont FEAR (Forfeiture Endangers American Rights) PO Box 537 Waitsfield, VT 05673 (Denny Lane) Notes: Community awareness, public forums, grassrootsorganizing. Vermont Legislative Liason RR #1 Box 638 West Charleston, VT 05872 (Daniel Shea) Phone: (802) 895 4173 Vermont Vocals 19 Bay St. Newport, VT 05855 Virginia BACH Route 1, Box 2142 Crewe, VA 23930 Phone: (804) 645 1038 (Lennice Werth) VPI and SU NORML PO Box 654 Blacksburg, VA 24063 Phone: (804) 953 9189 Internet: norml@vt.edu or samills@vt.edu Notes: Registered student organization; an affiliate of NORML Last contact: May 95 Washington Citizens for Drug Policy Reform PO Box 1614 Renton, WA 98057 Phone: (206) 622 1456 Fax: (206) 682 9937 Internet: 3281350@mcimail.com Notes: Executive Director - Hal Nelson; Attorney - JeffSteinborn; Business Manager - Tom Cluck; Technical Director - Gerald X.Diamond. Washington Hemp Education Network (W.H.E.N.) PO Box 1217 Olympia, WA 98507 Phone: (206) 589 8981 Internet: 72643.3237@compuserve.com Last contact: Jan 95 West Virginia HEMP Inc. 700 Kanawha Dr. Sutton, WV 26601 Phone: (304) 765 7444 (Roger Belknap) William Patterson College NORML 300 Pompton Road Student Government Association Office Wayne, NJ 07470 Phone: (201) 473 2452 (Darrin Feder) Wisconsin NORML PO Box 3481 Madison, WI 53703 Phone: (608) 257 5456, (608) 257 HEMP Internet: bmasel@igc.apc.org (Ben Masel) WWU/NORML Viking Union Box E-9 Western Washington University Bellingham, WA 98225 Phone: (206) 671 8921 Internet: norml@henson.cc.uwu.edu *USA - INDIVIDUALS* Carol Moore PO Box 65518 Washington, DC 20035 Larry Rowland PO Box 4392 Danville, VA 24540-0107 Phone: (804) 793 9509 Sandy Wells Coolidge House 307 Huntington Ave. Boston, MA 02115 Daytime (617)-859-8237 Evenings " " 4921 * * * * * _High Times_ is a monthly magazine produced in the US,devoted to psychedelic drugs and alternative culture issues. Their address is: c/- Trans-High Corporation 235 Park Avenue South New York NY 10003 USA Phone: +1 212 387 0500 Internet: hightimes@igc.apc.org For subscription details, call 1-800-827-0228 within the US. * * * * * Citizens for Truth in Drug Education (Maddi Webster & Steve Drury) P.O. Box 381813 Cambridge, MA 02238-1813 (617) 944-2266 DARE watchdog group Colorado Parents Against DARE (Gary Peterson) 1805 Crestmore Place Fort Collins, CO 80521 (303) 493-2290 North Carolina Parents Against DARE (Steve Wallace) 933-2997 CliffSchaffer's Home Page WT02-B01-65IA087-000632-B035-159http://206.61.184.43:80/schaffer/Activist/politic.htm 206.61.184.43 19970122070355 text/html 5158HTTP/1.0 200 OKDate: Wednesday, 22-Jan-97 07:03:49 GMTServer: WebSitePro/1.1f (S/N wpo-0deb)Allow-ranges: bytesContent-type: text/htmlLast-modified: Saturday, 28-Dec-96 07:25:05 GMTContent-length: 4941 Political Strategies for Drug Policy Reform PoliticalStrategies by Clifford A. Schaffer This is a first crack at the kinds of political strategies wemust use to end the drug war. We mustwin by knockout. I believe that we must pick issues where we can by knockout.The odds are so stacked against us that, unless we win byknockout, we will not win at all. While I agree with the economics and civil libertiesarguments for decriminalization, I do not favor the use of theseissues as a primary focus. The primary reason that I do not likethe arguments on economics or civil liberties is because they arehighly intellectual arguments which could be debated all day withno clear resolution. They make people think too much, and thatslows down decision-making. We want issues which will changepeople's minds forever -- and do it today. I believe that thesearguments may be useful to convince other people like us, but itwill not convince large masses of Americans. There are two primary issues where I believe we can win byknockout right now. They are the treatment of medical patients,and the issue of African-American men. In both cases we haveclear, overwhelming arguments which would get the immediateagreement of large masses of Americans. We mustbuild a coalition of constituencies. We must bring people of different persuasions together tosupport our cause. In our Resolution, we have already chosen abroadly based statement which does not use the "D" wordand which could be supported by people of all persuasions. Thatis step one. Next we, need to formally identify our constituencies and thespecific arguments which will be most relevant to those groups. Some constituencies are: Doctors - The relevant issues here are the persecution ofdoctors and the treatment of medical patients. Medical Patient Groups - The relevant issue is the treatmentof medical patients. African-Americans - The relevant issue is the incarcerationand economic destruction of African-American men. I believe that doctors and African-Americans are absolutelyvital to our success and that every one of us should takeimmediate steps to recruit them to our cause. We mustform "intervention groups" and target specificindividuals that we need on our side. We have used an approach which someone likened to an AlcoholsAnonymous intervention group. We assembled a group of people thatwe knew an important person would find persuasive. Then we allwent together to that person and explained our concerns in termsthat were important to that person. Then we asked for support,not for the "D" word, but for general drug policyreform. This technique is highly effective and will enable us tochange the thinking of many important people, or at least startthem down the slippery slope to the "D" word. I believethat we should all commit to participating in at least one ofthese intervention groups to change the mind of at least oneimportant person. We mustseek action. We have already asked for public hearings. As many of youhave already stated, public hearings may not come about and, evenif they do, they may not change anything. Therefore, we must seekother means which will also bring about clear publicconfrontations on the issue. When those confrontations occur, wemust all respond unanimously. We mustprovide support for people who speak out for drug policy reform. We all know that many people are reluctant to speak out forreform because of the McCarthy-like tactics of our opposition. Wemust come to the defense of anyone who is criticized or vilifiedbecause of their support for a change in drug policy. Point outthat people are not vilified because they are Republican,Democrat, or Libertarian, but people are vilified if they evenwant to discuss a different drug policy. This is McCarthyism. CliffSchaffer's Home Page WT02-B01-66IA086-000619-B005-137http://206.61.184.43:80/schaffer/Library/shrthist.htm 206.61.184.43 19970122033332 text/html 12615HTTP/1.0 200 OKDate: Wednesday, 22-Jan-97 03:33:10 GMTServer: WebSitePro/1.1f (S/N wpo-0deb)Allow-ranges: bytesContent-type: text/htmlLast-modified: Saturday, 28-Dec-96 06:39:15 GMTContent-length: 12397 A Short History of the Drug Laws A Short History of the Drug Laws by the National Clearinghouse for Alcohol and DrugInformation ------begin quote------- The history of nonmedical drug use, and the development ofpolicies in response to drug use, also extends back to the earlysettlement of the country. Like alcohol, the classification ofcertain drugs as legal, or illegal, has changed over time. Thesechanges sometimes had racial and class overtones. According to Mosher and Yanagisako, for example, Prohibitionwas in part a response to the drinking practices of Europeanimmigrants, who became the new lower class. Cocaine and opiumwere legal during the 19th century, and were favored drugs amongthe middle and upper classes. Cocaine became illegal after itbecame associated with African Americans followingReconstruction. Opium was first restricted in California in 1875when it became associated with Chinese immigrant workers.Marijuana was legal until the 1930s when it became associatedwith Mexicans. LSD, legal in the 1950s, became illegal in 1967when it became associated with the counterculture. ------begin quote------- ------begin full text---------- Historical Overview of Prevention Alcoholic beverages have been a part of the Nation's pastsince the landing of the Pilgrims. According to Alcohol andPublic Policy: Beyond the Shadow of Prohibition, a publicationcommissioned by NIAAA and prepared by the National Academy ofSciences, the colonists brought with them from Europe a highregard for alcoholic beverages, which were considered animportant part of their diet. Drinking was pervasive becausealcohol was regarded primarily as a healthy substance withpreventive and curative powers, not as an intoxicant. Alcohol wasalso believed to be conducive to social as well as personalhealth. It played an essential role in rituals of convivialityand collective activity, such as barn raisings. While drunkennesswas condemned and punished, it was viewed only as an abuse of aGod-given gift. The first temperance movement began in the early 1800s inresponse to dramatic increases in production and consumption ofalcoholic beverages, which also coincided with rapid demographicchanges. Agitation against ardent spirits and the public disorderthey spawned gradually increased during the 1820s. In addition,inspired by the writings of Benjamin Rush, the concept thatalcohol was addicting, and that this addiction was capable ofcorrupting the mind and the body, took hold. The American Societyof Temperance, created in 1826 by clergymen, spread theanti-drinking gospel. By 1835, out of a total population of 13million citizens, 1.5 million had taken the pledge to refrainfrom distilled spirits. The first wave of the temperance movement(1825 to 1855) resulted in dramatic reductions in the consumptionof distilled spirits, although beer drinking increased sharplyafter 1850. The second wave of the temperance movement occurred in thelate 1800s with the emergence of the Women's Christian TemperanceMovement, which, unlike the first wave, embraced the concept ofprohibition. It was marked both by the recruitment of women intothe movement and the mobilization of crusades to close downsaloons. The movement set out to remove the destructivesubstance, and the industries that promoted its use, from thecountry. The movement held that while some drinkers may escapeproblems of alcohol use, even moderate drinkers flirted withdanger. The culmination of this second wave was the passage of the18th Amendment and the Volstead Act, which took effect in 1920.While Prohibition was successful in reducing per capitaconsumption and some problems related to drinking, its socialturmoil resulted in its repeal in 1933. Since the repeal of Prohibition, the dominant view of alcoholproblems has been that alcoholism is the principal problem. Withits focus on treatment, the rise of the alcoholism movementdepoliticized alcohol problems as the object of attention, as thealcoholic was considered a deviant from the predominant styles oflife of either abstinence or "normal" drinking. Thealcoholism movement is based on the belief that chronic oraddictive drinking is limited to a few, highly susceptibleindividuals suffering from the disease of alcoholism. The diseaseconcept of alcoholism focuses on individual vulnerability, be itgenetic, biochemical, psychological, or social/cultural innature. Under this view if the collective problems of eachalcoholic are solved, it follows that society's alcohol problemwill be solved. Nevertheless, the pre-Prohibition view of alcohol as aspecial commodity has persisted in American society and is anaccepted legacy of alcohol control policies. Following Repeal,all States restricted the sale of alcoholic beverages in one wayor another in order to prevent or reduce certain alcoholproblems. In general, however, alcohol control policiesdisappeared from the public agenda as both the alcoholismmovement and the alcoholic beverage industry embraced the view,"the fault is in the man and not in the bottle." This view of alcoholism problems has also been the dominantforce in contemporary alcohol problem prevention. Until recentlythe principal prevention strategies focused on education andearly treatment. Within this view education is intended to informsociety about the disease and to teach people about the earlywarning signs so that they can initiate treatment as soon aspossible. Efforts focus on "high risk" populations andattempt to correct a suspect process or flaw in the individual,such as low self esteem or lack of social skills. The belief isthat the success of education and treatment efforts in solvingeach alcoholic's problem will solve society's alcohol problem aswell. Contemporary alcohol problem prevention began in the 1970s asnew information on the nature, magnitude, and incidence ofalcohol problems raised public awareness that alcohol can beproblematic when used by any drinker, depending upon thesituation. There was a renewed emphasis on the diverseconsequences of alcohol use--particularly trauma associated withdrinking driving, fires, and violence, as well as long termhealth consequences. The history of nonmedical drug use, and the development ofpolicies in response to drug use, also extends back to the earlysettlement of the country. Like alcohol, the classification ofcertain drugs as legal, or illegal, has changed over time. Thesechanges sometimes had racial and class overtones. According toMosher and Yanagisako, for example, Prohibition was in part aresponse to the drinking practices of European immigrants, whobecame the new lower class. Cocaine and opium were legal duringthe 19th century, and were favored drugs among the middle andupper classes. Cocaine became illegal after it became associatedwith African Americans following Reconstruction. Opium was firstrestricted in California in 1875 when it became associated withChinese immigrant workers. Marijuana was legal until the 1930swhen it became associated with Mexicans. LSD, legal in the 1950s,became illegal in 1967 when it became associated with thecounterculture. By the end of the 19th century concern had grown over theindiscriminate use of these drugs, especially the addictingpatent medicines. Cocaine, opium, and morphine were commoningredients in various potions sold over the counter. Until 1903,cocaine was an ingredient of Coca-Cola(R). Heroin, which wasisolated in 1868, was hailed as a nonaddicting treatment formorphine addiction and alcoholism. States began to enact controland prescription laws and, in 1906, Congress passed the Pure Foodand Drug Act. It was designed to control opiate addiction byrequiring labels on the amount of drugs contained in products,including opium, morphine, and heroin. It also required accuratelabeling of products containing alcohol, marijuana, and cocaine. The Harrison Act (1914) imposed a system of taxes on opiumand coca products with registration and record-keepingrequirements in an effort to control their sale or distribution.However, it did not prohibit the legal supply of certain drugs,especially opiates. Current drug laws are rooted in the 1970 ControlledSubstances Act. Under this measure drugs are classified accordingto their medical use, their potential for abuse, and theirlikelihood of producing dependence. The Act contains provisionsfor adding drugs to the schedule, and rescheduling drugs. It alsoestablishes maximum penalties for the criminal manufacture ordistribution of scheduled drugs. Increases in per capita alcohol consumption as well asincreased use of illegal drugs during the 1960s raised publicconcern regarding alcohol and other drug problems. Preventionissues gained prominence on the national level with the creationof the National Institute on Alcohol Abuse and Alcoholism (NIAAA)in 1971 and the National Institute on Drug Abuse (NIDA) in 1974.In addition to mandates for research and the management ofnational programs for treatment, both Institutes includedprevention components. To further prevention initiatives at the Federal level, theAnti-Drug Abuse Act of 1986 created the U.S. Office for SubstanceAbuse Prevention (OSAP), which consolidated alcohol and otherdrug prevention activities under the Alcohol, Drug Abuse, andMental Health Administration (ADAMHA). The ADAMHA block grantmandate called for States to set aside 21 percent of the alcoholand drug funds for prevention. In a 1992 reorganization, OSAP waschanged to the Center for Substance Abuse Prevention (CSAP), partof the new SAMHSA, retaining its major program areas, while theresearch institutes of NIAAA and NIDA transferred to NIH. The Office of National Drug Control Policy (ONDCP) wasestablished by the Anti-Drug Abuse Act of 1988. Its primaryobjective was to develop a drug control policy that includedroles for the public and private sector to "restore orderand security to American neighborhoods, to dismantle drugtrafficking organizations, to help people break the habit of druguse, and to prevent those who have never used illegal drugs fromstarting." In early 1992 underage alcohol use was includedamong the drugs to be addressed by ONDCP. While Federal, State, and local governments play asubstantial role in promoting prevention agendas, much of theactivity takes place at grass roots community levels. In additionto funding from CSAP's "Community Partnerships" grantprogram, groups receive support from private sources, such as TheRobert Wood Johnson "Fighting Back" program. While alcohol and other drug problems continue to plague theNation at intolerably high levels, progress is being made.National surveys document a decline in illicit drug use and aleveling off of alcohol consumption. And indicators of problemlevels, such as alcohol-involved traffic crashes, showsignificant declines. References A Promising Future: Alcohol and Other Drug Problem PreventionServices Improvement. CSAP Prevention Monograph 10 (1992) BK191 National Household Survey on Drug Abuse: Main Findings 1990(1991) BKD67 Mosher, J.F. and Yanagisako, K.L. "Public Health, NotSocial Warfare: A Public Health Approach to Illegal DrugPolicy," Journal of Public Health Policy 12(3):278-322, 1991 CliffSchaffer's Home Page WT02-B01-67IA086-000614-B048-317http://206.61.184.43:80/schaffer/Library/nylawyer.htm 206.61.184.43 19970122023349 text/html 98555HTTP/1.0 200 OKDate: Wednesday, 22-Jan-97 02:33:42 GMTServer: WebSitePro/1.1f (S/N wpo-0deb)Allow-ranges: bytesContent-type: text/htmlLast-modified: Saturday, 28-Dec-96 06:42:20 GMTContent-length: 98337 A Wiser Course: Ending Drug Prohibition Contents | Feedback | Search DRCNet Library | Schaffer Library | Major Studies | A Wiser Course, Ending DrugProhibition A WISER COURSE: ENDING DRUG PROHIBITION by the Association of the Bar of the City of New York June, 1994 The June 1994 issue of "The Record," the officialpublication of the Association of the Bar of the City of NewYork, will include a recently released report by theAssociation's Special Committee on Drugs and the Law. The reportis entitled "A Wiser Course: Ending Drug Prohibition"(the "Report"). In typewritten form, the Report is 83pages long and has 203 footnotes of sources and authorities. On June 15, 1994, the New York Law Journal (the dailynewspaper for lawyers in New York) printed on page one a newsarticle about the Report. Unfortunately, the rest of the"media" (e.g., the New York Times, The Daily News,Newsday, ABC, CBS, NBC, C-SPAN, TBS) have failed, at least sofar, to take any notice of this Report. To get the word out about this Report, the Association hasgiven permission for the Report to be distributed on theInternet. A full-length copy of the Report (about 96,388 bytesbut without the 203 footnotes) is posted here for your readingenjoyment. The dissent is also reproduced at the end. If anyone is interested in purchasing a hardcopy of "TheRecord" issue containing the footnoted version of theReport, please use the following information: The Association of the Bar of the City of New York 42 West 44th Street New York, New York 10036 (212) 382-6600 If you agree with opinions expressed in the Report, pleasetell the media, your state and federal representatives, yourfriends, and your family about the Report. Let's get the debateon the "War On Drugs" rolling!!!! A WISER COURSE: ENDING DRUG PROHIBITION TABLE OF CONTENTS I. INTRODUCTION II. THE COSTS OF PROHIBITION A. DISTORTION OF THE JUDICIAL SYSTEM 1. New York State 2. Other States 3. Federal Courts 4. The Judiciary is Impatient with the Present System 5. Efforts to Handle Court Congestion B. THE PRISON STATE C. EROSION OF THE RULE OF LAW AND CIVIL LIBERTIES 1. Perception of Ineffectiveness 2. Perception of a Self-Perpetuating System 3. Police Corruption 4. Poor Children are Victims of the "War on Drugs" 5. Selective Prosecution 6. Erosion of Constitutional Rights 7. Forfeiture's Heavy Hand 8. Erosion of Privacy Rights D. PROHIBITION-INDUCED VIOLENCE E. PROHIBITION'S FAILURE TO LIMIT DRUG USE F. PROHIBITION THREATENS PUBLIC HEALTH 1. Spread of Disease a. Sharing Needles b. Trading Sex for Drugs c. Neglect of Health d. Avoidance of the Health-Care System 2. Lack of Information and Quality Control a. Adulterated Drugs, Designer Drugs, and Drugs of Unknown Potency b. Lack of Knowledge About Safer Use c. Using Alcohol and Tobacco Instead of "Soft Drugs" 3. Injuries Due to Violence 4. Diversion of Resources from Treatment and Prevention 5. The Sense of Treating Drugs as a Public Health Problem a. Treatment Works b. Self-Help Groups c. Therapeutic Communities d. Other Inpatient Drug-Free Treatment Programs e. Outpatient Methadone Maintenance Programs f. Outpatient Drug-Free Therapy 6. Empirical Research on Effective Drug Treatment a. Studies Examining the Effects of Treatment on Substance Abuse b. Studies Examining the Effects of Drug Treatment on the Consequences of Drug Abuse 7. Education Works a. Life Skills Training Program b. Students Taught Awareness and Resistance c. Project Healthy Choices d. Student Assistance Program e. Smart Moves f. Seattle Social Development Project g. Programs for Children of Addicts III. TOWARD A NEW DRUG POLICY IV. CONCLUSION A WISER COURSE: ENDING DRUG PROHIBITION I. INTRODUCTION In 1986, the Association of the Bar of the City of New York,responding to a general perception that criminal and civil sanctions against the manufacture, distribution, or possessionof drugs were not "solving," or even ameliorating, theproblems associated with drug use in our society, formed aSpecial Committee on Drugs and the Law (the"Committee") to study our current drug laws and toreport its recommendations on the wisdom of such laws. The Committee has considered the complex legal, social,medical, economic, and political issues raised by our nation'scurrent drug control policies. Despite billions of dollars spenton law enforcement, criminal prosecution, and incarcerationduring the past 80 years, the United States has made little or noprogress toward reducing drug use or solving its "drugproblem." On the contrary, illegal drug use remains apervasive and powerful influence in our cities and in the nationat large. Beyond the continuing availability and consumption ofdrugs, the unintended consequences of our current prohibitionpolicy are ubiquitous: our courts, both state and federal, arejammed; our prison populations are burgeoning; urban and ghettochildren, as well as adults, are frequent victims of violent"turf wars"; our civil liberties are being eroded,along with our society's respect for the rule of law generally;our public health is threatened; the enjoyment of urban life hasdeclined; and our nation's institutions, as well as those of ourSouth and Central American neighbors, are undermined by theimmense wealth accumulated illegally under the currentprohibition policies. The Committee has concluded, in some cases reluctantly, thatthe costs of drug prohibition are simply too high and itsbenefits too dubious. The Committee recognizes that calling for an end to drugprohibition cannot be either the end of our inquiry or the sum ofour recommendations. There are several difficult questions thatremain to be answered: What forms of governmental regulation, ifany, are appropriate instead of prohibition? To what degree, ifany, should private distribution of drugs be permitted? Is aregulatory regime similar to one now used to control alcoholicbeverages appropriate for some, if not all, drugs? How should anew regulatory regime treat children, adolescents, or pregnantwomen? What kinds of prevention and treatment programs shouldthere be and how should they be funded? These and other issues demand both the urgent attention andhonest judgment of our Committee and, more broadly, our society. The Committee believes the necessary inquiry cannot begin inearnest so long as our nation remains committed to the illusionthat drug use can be prohibited at an acceptable cost. Only byrecognizing that this is no longer true can we fashion a methodof controlling drugs other than the current coercive drug laws,which have been largely ineffective and which are sapping thevitality of our cities, our legal system, and our society as awhole. It is the Committee's hope that this report will advancethe discussion of this important issue. II. THE COSTS OF PROHIBITION A. DISTORTION OF THE JUDICIAL SYSTEM At a time of ever-increasing competition for scarce publicfunds, the volume of drug prosecutions and convictions continuesto increase, as does the strain on judicial budgets, personnel,and facilities in the federal and state systems. The addedburdens on the judiciary due to drug prosecutions havesubstantially diminished the courts' capacity to manage the civildocket. Criminal cases take priority, with civil jury trialsrelegated to the bottom of an increasing waiting list. Somecourts, for purely budgetary reasons, have been forced to suspendall civil jury trials for periods of time. 1. New York State The majority of drug cases are handled by state and localcourts. Consequently, it is instructive to review first theimpact of these increased caseloads and costs on New York State. In 1991, New York State spent a total of $8,641,418,000 forall judicial and legal services (including police protection,$3,662,389,000; courts, $932,314,000; prosecution and legalservices, $461,790,000; and public defense, 197,194,000). It isdifficult to obtain specific dollar figures for the cost of drugarrests and prosecutions in New York State, but by combining theavailable data on caseloads and judicial costs it is possible tomake some rough estimates. In 1987, total arrests in New YorkState were 481,676, whereas in 1991 the total was 506,710, anincrease of 5.2%. During the same period, felony drug arrestsrose from 42,655 (approximately 9% of total arrests) in 1987 to54,184 in 1991 (11% of all arrests), a 27% increase. By contrast,between 1987 and 1991, misdemeanor drug arrests dropped from53,621 to 36,489, a decrease of 32%. In 1991 a tremendous volumeof caseload activity confronted the Judiciary's judges andnonjudicial personnel. Nearly 79,000 felony indictments andsuperior court informations were filed in Supreme and CountyCourts throughout New York. That number represents a 54% increasecompared with 1985. Most of the statewide increase was the resultof phenomenal caseload increases in New York City. This year, theSupreme Court Criminal Term in New York City received over 52,000felony filings, an astonishing 70% increase since 1985. Theremarkable level in felony filings is primarily caused byincreases in drug-related filings. . . . Unquestionably, these caseload increases are the productof the drug crisis which, perhaps for the first time in ourState's history, threatens to test our ability to administerjustice on the local level, not just in New York City, butstatewide. The increasing number of drug prosecutions in New York'scourts has taken its toll on the judicial system. One New YorkState Supreme Court Justice has summarized the impact of theso-called "war on drugs" on New York's criminal justicesystem as follows: Our court calendars groan under the burden of ever-increasingnew drug cases. New York City's Corrections Department estimatesthat 70 percent of its inmates are charged with drug-relatedcrimes. Yet these ever-growing prosecutions and incarcerationsare having little or no impact on drug crimes. In 1980 only 11percent of the total inmate population was incarcerated for drugoffenses, yet by 1992 this figure rose to 44 percent. At a costof $30,000 per year to maintain each prisoner, our state spentover $195 million in 1992 to confine drug offenders alone. Lastyear the state's Office of Court Administration requested anadditional $40 million just to cover the expense of drug cases.Since the advent of crack a decade ago, the city has hired 9,000new police, 700 additional assistant district attorneys, and hasadded 18,000 new cells on Rikers Island. The total cost: $591million a year. 2. Other States State court convictions for drug law violations have increaseddramatically nationwide since the mid-1980s. Between 1986 and1988, there was a nearly 70% increase in the number of personsconvicted of felony drug trafficking or possession charges (from135,000 to 225,000). The number of persons convicted who receivedstate prison sentences rose from 49,900 to 92,500. In 1988, drugoffenses accounted for approximately one-third of all felonyconvictions in all state courts. 3. Federal Courts The case loads and concomitant costs of managing drug cases infederal courts also have increased substantially over the pastdecade. In 1982, the budget for prosecution of all federal drugcases in the United States was $78.9 million; in 1993, the budgetwas ten times as much -- $795.9 million. In federal districtcourts in 1989, a total of 54,643 criminal cases were prosecuted;of those 16,834 (approximately 30%) were for drug offenses. In1990, 19,271 defendants were prosecuted for drug offenses; ofthose 3,083 were not convicted, and 16,188 were convicted: 13,036by guilty plea (81%), and 3,121 after trial (19%). Between July1992 and June 1993, 50,366 defendants were convicted in thefederal courts, and 27% of these (18,576) were convicted offederal drug offenses. Expenses associated with appeals offederal drug cases rose from $8.2 million in 1982 to $104.2million budgeted in 1993. A significant portion of this increaseresulted from appeals filings in drug-related cases, whichtotalled 1,583 in 1981, 4,386 in 1989, and 5,658 in 1990 (a 29%increase from the previous year alone and, overall, a 383%increase in ten years). In 1991, there were 5,570 federaldrug-related appeals filed. 4. The Judiciary is Impatient with the Present System Federal and state judges throughout the United States havepublicly expressed frustration with the present laws prohibitingdrugs, and some senior federal judges have even refused to sit ondrug cases. In the Southern District of New York and in theEastern District of New York, Judges Whitman Knapp, Robert Sweet,and Jack Weinstein have spoken out publicly against the presentlaws and their associated draconian penalties, and Judges Knappand Weinstein have refused, as is their right as senior judges,to preside over drug trials and sentences. State judges in NewYork have also protested the increasing time on their calendarsthat drug cases take and the Second Offender sentencing rule thatcompels them to give lengthy prison sentences to second-time drugoffenders. These judges seek a solution to the "war ondrugs" before the whole judicial system breaks down underthe strain. 5. Efforts to Handle Court Congestion Because of the enormous increase in drug cases, especially inlarge urban areas, several stop-gap solutions are being pursuedto balance limited court resources against the burgeoningcaseloads. In New York City and New Orleans, for instance,special narcotics divisions have been established to expediteprocessing of drug felonies. These experimental programs aredesigned to hear cases just prior to grand jury proceedings withthe goal of inducing defendants to accept plea bargains that arebetter than would be expected if the case proceeded through thegrand jury process. Also, special court parts -- staffed bypersonnel with expertise in drug cases, addiction, and communitytreatment centers -- have been established in New York City todeal exclusively with drug cases. Unfortunately, none of theseshort-term solutions will correct the fundamental distortion ofthe priorities of the state and federal judicial systems causedby the "war on drugs." B. THE PRISON STATE One of the most tangible, measurable effects of the "waron drugs," has been the creation of a "prisonstate". According to the Federal Bureau of Investigation'sstatistics, one million arrests are made annually for violationsof the federal and state drug laws. As a result of these massivenumbers of arrests each year, "the United States has ahigher proportion of its population incarcerated than any othercountry in the world for which reliable statistics areavailable." Incarceration in America is now at an all-time high. From 1925through 1973, the American prison population fluctuated between90 and 120 people in prison per 100,000 of the population; in1973 the rate was 98 per 100,000, a ten-year low. Between 1973 and 1980, however, there was a 40% increase, to135 people in prison per 100,000; and by 1986, following thestart of the modern "war on drugs," the incarcerationrate had jumped to 200 per 100,000. In 1993, the rate ofAmericans serving prison time stood at 325 per 100,000. In 1993,the number of inmates in federal and state prisons in New Yorkincreased by 4.6%, to 64,600. On average, it costs $20,000 per year to maintain oneprisoner, $100,000 to build a single prison cell, and $20,000 peryear to staff a prison cell. More than one in forty American males between the ages 14 and34 are locked up. Between 1980 and 1990, the total prison population in theUnited States increased by 133% to over 771,000 prisoners. In 1993, the total prison population reached 949,000, nearlythree times as many as in 1980. During the 1980s, newimprisonments on drug charges increased over 1,000%. Drug offenders have accounted for an increasing percentage ofthe population in State and Federal correctional facilities. Drug offenders constituted an estimated 22% of the Stateprison population in 1991, up from 6% of the population in 1979.In Federal correctional facilities, drug offenders accounted for61% of the population, up from 16% in 1970, 25% in 1980, and 52%in 1990. The vast majority of the prison population increase during the1980s, which doubled the number of persons under custody for allcharges, involved drug law violations. Due to the great increasein drug-related incarcerations, the federal and state prisonsystems are overwhelmed, as reported almost daily in thenewspapers. Prison overcrowding persists despite an unprecedentedboom in prison construction. For example, between 1983 and 1992,New York State built 29 prisons, increasing the number of prisonsin the state to 68 and the inmate capacity from 29,253 to 57,862. No one wants overcrowding. It riles inmates, strains prisonguards, encourages the spread of illness and generally makesprisons more volatile places. In the past, when there was moneyto spend, the solution to overcrowding would have been clear --create more space. Not any more. With money scarce and a sensethat more prison beds have not resulted in less crime, manylawmakers are being forced to conclude they can no longer buildtheir way out of the problem. According to the United States Department of Justice,"drug offenders" are becoming a larger share of theprison population for two reasons: first, the likelihood that aconviction will result in incarceration is increasing; andsecond, those convicted on drug charges are receiving longerprison sentences. Mandatory sentencing laws, such as the federal sentencingguidelines, exacerbate the problem by forcing judges to imposelengthy sentences for simple possession of small amounts ofdrugs. These laws, first passed in the 1970s but increasinglyrelied on as a weapon in the "drug war" in recentyears, have in large measure been responsible for today's severeovercrowding. Mandatory minimum sentences require judges toimpose a statutorily-defined minimum period of incarcerationwithout the possibility of parole, with no consideration of thespecific facts of the crime or any mitigating circumstances.Faced with mandatory sentences laws, there has been at a growingmovement at the state level to minimize their draconian effects.In New York, for example, the courts had been cooperating withprosecutors and defense attorneys to avoid the harsh effects onsecond-time drug offenders. New York's Governor, Mario Cuomo, inhis 1994 budget message has asked the Legislature to restorediscretion to judges meting out second-time drug felony sentences"to relieve overcrowding in state prisons." For all of the extra burden on the prison and judicial systemsand on the taxpayer caused by the "war on drugs,"American society has little to show for it. "If suchtoughness had much to do with crime, you'd think we'd have seensome results by now. But . . . overall crime has decreased only6% since 1973; violent crimes are up 24%. The National ResearchCouncil of the National Academy of Sciences recently concludedthat a tripling of time served by violent offenders since 1975had `apparently very little' impact on violent crime." With61% of today's federal inmates incarcerated on drug lawconvictions, judiciary and corrections overcrowding and escalatedcosts would necessarily be reduced were the current drug policyaltered toward a less punitive, more humane approach whichremoves the profit motive fueling the black market in illegaldrugs. C. EROSION OF THE RULE OF LAW AND CIVIL LIBERTIES One of the more insidious effects of the "war ondrugs" has been the gradual erosion of the rule of law andthe public's civil liberties. Several interrelated elementscontribute to this particularly destructive consequence of thecurrent drug laws. 1. Perception of Ineffectiveness Politicians from the President of the United States to mayorsrunning in local elections are importuned by the people for theassurance that increasing crime and the criminal element becontained in our society. Our country, with the highest rate ofdrug abuse of any industrial country in the world, also has thelargest budget in the world to enforce its laws prohibitingdrugs. Despite huge increases in the federal government's budgetfor the "war on drugs," the so-called "drugproblem" with all of its ramifications, has notsignificantly abated. The public's perception of its politicalleaders' ineffectiveness in alleviating drug-related violenceadds to the general atmosphere of lawlessness and breeds cynicismand disrespect for the law. Instead of progress since the firstfederal anti-drug law was passed in 1914, nearly 80 years of drugprohibition have yielded few inroads against the sale or use ofdrugs. This, understandably, suggests to the public that the lawitself is an ineffectual tool for dealing with the issue. 2. Perception of a Self-Perpetuating System The large sums of money appropriated for law-enforcementcreate enormous, self-perpetuating bureaucratic agencies, such asthe United States Drug Enforcement Agency ("DEA"),which fight for independence and scarce public resources whilemaking little headway against the "drug problem." Theseagencies have ample motivation to exaggerate or distort theextent and danger of "drug abuse" so as to justify (andthereby insure) their continued existence. Being inherentlybiased, they have great potential to ignore the public's truewelfare. 3. Police Corruption The fact that drug prohibition breeds corruption has beenknown for decades. Every day there are news stories of lawenforcement officers being arrested for their involvement withdrug dealers. The sums of money involved in the drug business aretoo great and too inviting for the law enforcers not to seektheir share. Corrupt police behavior creates a furtherdisillusioned public. In addition, just as organized crime becameentrenched during Prohibition, the current prohibitionist regimeis currently subsidizing the mafia and other organized crimegroups because of the highly inflated prices on the black market. 4. Poor Children are Victims of the "War on Drugs" There is no reason to believe that recognized market forcescease to apply where the drug business is concerned. There ispublic recognition that youths and unemployed adults often cannotjust say "no" to drugs when saying "yes" as adealer or a dealer's helper is much more profitable than are thealternatives. Children living in poor, urban neighborhoods areparticularly susceptible to being drawn into illegal drug-relatedactivities by visions of status and easy money. Laws againstdrugs thus discourage many youths and adults from productivelegitimate employment that would benefit society. 5. Selective Prosecution Criminal prosecutions for violations of the federal and statedrug laws appear to be disproportionately directed againstminorities. Understandably, there is widespread public concernthat the drug laws are selectively enforced with vigor againstthe poor and disenfranchised, while rich and middle class drugusers are permitted to indulge without serious fear of legalconsequences. 6. Erosion of Constitutional Rights The pursuit of a "drug-free" society has resulted ina panoply of intrusions into the lives of United States citizens:The Bill of Rights is in danger of becoming meaningless in casesinvolving drugs. Tenants charged with no crime are evicted fromhomes where police believe drugs are being sold. Public housingprojects are sealed for house-to-house inspections. The SupremeCourt has permitted warrantless searches of automobiles, the useof anonymous tips and drug-courier profiles as the basis forpolice searches, and the seizure of lawyers' fees in drug cases.Property on which marijuana plants are found can be forfeitedeven if the owner is charged with no crime. Prosecutors have beenallowed to try the same person at the state and federal levelsfor the same drug-related crime. A few examples will illustrate the erosion in individual civilliberties occasioned by the "war on drugs." In 1991,the United States Supreme Court in Florida v. Bostick, upheld theconstitutionality of a police tactic of boarding long- distancebuses and asking permission to search passengers' baggage,overruling the Florida Supreme Court's ruling that such anencounter with the police is so inherently coercive that noconsent given for such a search could be truly voluntary. TheFlorida v. Bostick decision was merely one of a number of rulingssince the early 1980s which authorized police stops andquestioning of airline, train, and bus passengers without thelevel of suspicion generally required for Fourth Amendment searchand seizure purposes. The search for tell-tale evidence of drug use has evendescended to the level of compelling federal employees to giveurine samples for analysis, without regard to whether such aprivacy intrusion is related to job performance. The public --led by the government -- appears to be willing to jump on thebandwagon "to restrict civil liberties, and even acceptwarrantless searches of homes and cars, in order to reduce theuse of illicit drugs." 7. Forfeiture's Heavy Hand Forfeiture has become one of the most publicized andcontroversial weapons in the government's anti-drug arsenal. Anyassumption, however, that the law would be deployed only against"drug kingpins" and major players has provedunwarranted as small time dealers and marginal users are moreoften targeted: Under Zero Tolerance, which targets casual drugusers, the government has seized thousands of cars, boats, andhomes because occupants or guests allegedly carried drugs. In1990, seizures exceeded $527 million, and they are expected toexceed $700 million in 1991. The U.S. Marshalls Services now hasa $1.4 billion inventory of seized assets including more than30,000 homes, cars, businesses and other property. In the fiscal year 1993, "the DEA made 14,430 domesticseizures of nondrug property, valued at approximately $669million." Moreover, forfeitures have become a popular way togenerate additional revenue. The in rem nature of a civil forfeiture proceeding, repletewith its many procedural pitfalls, rests on the legal fictionthat the property itself is guilty of wrongdoing. The unevenburdens of proof assigned the parties reveals the imbalance inthe system. To prevail, the government need only have reasonablegrounds to believe the property is subject to forfeiture. Itfalls to the claimant to prove by a preponderance of the evidencethe negative proposition that the property was"innocent." As a result of the over-zealous applicationof the forfeiture statutes, the judiciary has attempted to curbsome of the more visible excesses. For instance, absent exigentcircumstances, pre-hearing seizures of homes, where the tenantswere either evicted outright or were permitted to stay at thesufferance of the United States Marshall, are no longertolerated. And the forfeiture of real property is now expresslysubject to the limitations of Eighth Amendment proportionalityanalysis. A claimant's ability to defend against a forfeiture has longbeen compromised by the maze of rules allowing for the freezingof assets, which alone often discourages private counsel fromtaking on a case. Too often, the failure to secure experiencedcounsel results in the loss of the property. Finally, with newsaccounts of law enforcement personnel driving around in expensivecars seized during drug operations, reports of police helicopterswith sophisticated detection equipment hovering over homes, andthe intrusive subpoenaing of records from bona fide businesses(such as those offering hydroponic gardening equipment), it isclear that forfeiture laws require an overhaul. 8. Erosion of Privacy Rights Although the Ninth Amendment guarantees that "[t]heenumeration in the Constitution of rights shall not be construedto deny or disparage others retained by the people," oursociety has struggled to find a balance between individualliberty and privacy and governmental intrusion. Although theUnited States Supreme Court has recognized certain activities asbeing beyond the reach of most state or federal governmentalintrusion (e.g., birth control, abortion during the firsttrimester, and the possession of adult pornography in the home),drug use has never been found to be within the "right ofprivacy" that the Court has forged. Because the law, as itstands today, does not recognize the right to use drugs, the"war on drugs" has become "in effect, if not inintention, a war on drug users." Year after year, state andfederal laws that prohibit the possession of drugs, demonize andcriminalize the users of drugs, estimated to be at least 20million in the United States alone. Yet, "[d]rugs have beenused to alter consciousness in most societies throughout history,and different drugs have been considered acceptable at differenttimes and places." As Lester Grinspoon and James B. Bakalarhave stated: Of all the Prohibition era mistakes we are now repeating, themost serious is trying to free society of drugs by the use offorce. There is no reason to believe that the inclination toingest substances that alter consciousness can be eradicated. Adrug-free society is an impossible and probably an undesirabledream. . . . Our present drug policies are immoral because theyrequire a war of annihilation against a wrongly chosen enemy. Wewill never be able to regulate the use of consciousness-alteringdrugs effectively until our ends are changed along with the meansthat serve them. Ending drug prohibition would enable the Court and our societyto recognize the right of individuals to alter theirconsciousness (the most private of matters), so long as they donot harm the persons or property of others. D. PROHIBITION-INDUCED VIOLENCE In New York and elsewhere in the United States, wild shootoutsin urban areas are frequently publicized. These reports revealthat innocent bystanders in these areas are often caught in thecross-fire. It is, however, far from clear that the use of orneed for prohibited drugs causes this sort of violent crime.Rather, the available evidence tends to support the conclusionthat it is the prohibitionist laws against drugs that cause theviolent crimes that people generally deplore. So-called "drug-related crime" is often related onlyindirectly to the drugs themselves, resulting instead from theillegal black market in drugs that is, in turn, spawned by lawsprohibiting the legal sale of drugs. For example, the Los Angelespolice have long known that the lucrative black market in cocainehas provided the incentive (as well as the financing) for thebloody gang turf wars in that city. Similarly, it is estimatedthat 40% of the homicides in a study of 414 homicides in New YorkCity precincts were indirectly attributable to black markettrafficking in drugs. Further supporting the fact that it is drugprohibition rather than drug use which is causing the alarming"drug-related" violence saturating our culture is thehistorical precedent of alcohol Prohibition which was accompaniedby the same type of violence. There is no reason to believe that black markets would notdisappear with the ending of drug prohibition. Common senseindicates that without the immense profits guaranteed by thenecessarily restricted nature of the outlets, there would belittle advantage to maintaining such black markets. The currentpatterns of drug-sale related turf violence would besubstantially, if not wholly, undermined. E. PROHIBITION'S FAILURE TO LIMIT DRUG USE Proponents of the "war on drugs" often eagerlydeclare that the draconian prohibitionist laws of the state andfederal government are causing a decline in drug use. Theevidence, however, tends to show that "the number of heavydrug users in the United States is undiminished." Inaddition, recent surveys show an increasing number of high schoolstudents using marijuana and lysergic acid diethylamide("LSD"). Even proponents of the "war ondrugs" candidly admit that "drug abuse cannot beentirely eliminated." Some experts have estimated that thegovernment has spent close to $500 billion dollars over the past20 years to enforce the prohibitionist laws against drugs, whileduring the same period use levels rose and the number of arrestsand the amounts of drugs seized increased unabated annually.750,000 people were incarcerated for violating the prohibitionistdrug laws during a twenty-year period, costing an average of $25billion annually and $61 billion for 1991 alone. Although the vast majority of Americans polled stated thatthey would not take now-prohibited drugs if they were legalized,many people voice the concern that use would escalate sharplyupon legalization. Implicit in the idea that use of drugs wouldrise upon legalization is the assumption that the currentprohibitionist laws discourage many people from using them. Theavailable evidence tends to show that Americans can and dovoluntarily control their use of drugs. The recent decline in middle class use of drugs as well asrecent declines in alcohol and tobacco consumption have beenattributed by many experts to factors (such as education, healthand fitness awareness, and social pressures) other than theprohibitionist laws against drugs. Experts have recognized theseother factors as the basis for the current levels of use of drugs(including alcohol and tobacco) rather than the existence ofprohibitionist laws. Indeed some observers have cited theprohibitionist laws against drugs as a significant factor leadingto increased use and greater numbers of addicts than we wouldotherwise have: [T]he growth of addiction over the last fourdecades in the US had little to do with price reductions or, forthat matter, with the growth of real income. The crucial factorin the spread of the drug habit has been the unrelenting pressureexerted by legions of street pushers in the continuing endeavorto widen the circle of the customers. In other words, the crucialfactor in spreading the drug habit has been the super profitsmade possible only by governments' illegalization of thetrade." It is impossible to prove the levels of post- legalization useof now-prohibited drugs, but reasonable extrapolations may bemade by referring to similar experiences in this country andabroad. Prohibition of alcohol in the United States earlier in thiscentury is a basis for comparison, albeit an imperfect one. Areview of alcohol consumption patterns during and afterProhibition shows that during most of the Prohibition era percapita alcohol consumption actually increased. After"Prohibition's repeal in 1933, consumption remained fairlystable until after the Second World War when, without any changein public policy, it began increasing." The prohibitionistlaws, therefore, seem to have little impact on an individual'sdecision whether to use drugs. Another useful example is theexperience of the ten states that decriminalized the possessionof small amounts of marijuana for personal consumption in the1970s. There was no increase in the level of marijuana use inthose states. Indeed marijuana consumption declined in thosestates just as it did in states that retained criminal sanctionsagainst marijuana. In 1976, the Dutch decriminalized marijuanaconsumption, although possession and small sales technicallyremained illegal. The level of use actually declined afterdecriminalization. Indeed marijuana use in the Netherlands issubstantially lower than in countries waging a "war ondrugs," including the United States and, at least untilrecently, Germany. Among Dutch youths aged 17-18, only 17.7% usedmarijuana at least once in their lifetimes, as opposed to 43.7%of Americans. Only 4.6% of the Dutch had used marijuana at leastonce in the past month, as opposed to 16.7% of the Americans. While indicating clearly that prohibitionist laws do notprevent the use of drugs, these statistics also tend to show thatlegalizing now-prohibited drugs, at least marijuana, does notinevitably cause an increase in use. Under an exception to theBritish prohibitionist system, doctors may provide prohibiteddrugs to addicts. Dr. John Marks of Liverpool commenced such aprogram in 1982, and, to his astonishment, he noted that thenumber of new addicts decreased in Liverpool while in a nearbytown operating under prohibition the rate of new addicts wastwelve-fold higher. Dr. Marks attributed the decline in thenumber of new addicts to the fact that addicts received theirneeded drugs from his program for pennies, thus there was nolonger any need for addicts to bring in new customers to raiseenough money to support their habits. Others addressing the issueof whether the levels of use of now prohibited drugs wouldescalate to overwhelming proportions after legalization (as manyprohibitionists have predicted) have likened possible patterns ofillegal drug use to patterns of alcohol use, with which we have asolid familiarity. They point out that Western cultures havehandled alcohol consumption with tolerable skill for centuriesand point out that most of the American population that drinksoccasionally, or even every day, exercises moderation. Indeed the available data indicate that the vast majority ofthe American population that uses now-prohibited drugs does sowith moderation. According to United States governmentstatistics, more than 75 million persons in the United Stateshousehold population have used prohibited drugs. The NationalInstitute on Drug Abuse estimates that close to 40 millionAmericans continue to consume these substances. Yet, only acomparatively minuscule number of deaths due to drug overdoses,4,242, occurred in 1991 according to medical examiner datacompiled by the Drug Abuse Warning Network. Once the distinctionbetween use of prohibited drugs and abuse is acknowledged, theavailable statistics show that the vast majority of Americans whouse drugs do not abuse them. Based on our experience with American states' and foreigndecriminalization of marijuana, it appears that decriminalizationdoes not lead to greater levels of use nor to abuse. Likewisethere is evidence to support the proposition that thedecriminalization of the so-called "hard drugs" doesnot lead to increased rates of addiction. Perhaps mostimportantly, data analysis strongly indicates that social factorswholly apart from the criminalization of drugs account in thegreatest measure for reduced rates of use. Based on the evidence,it would not be unfair to say that the predicted,post-legalization explosion in the use of drugs has been greatlyoverstated and that use in continued moderation would be the muchmore likely result. European countries, such as the Netherlands,have benefitted from an approach to drugs that focuses on"harm reduction" rather than draconian measures toenforce prohibition. F. PROHIBITION THREATENS PUBLIC HEALTH 1. Spread of Disease a. Sharing Needles Because the possession of hypodermic needles is generallyillegal, users of injectable drugs routinely share needles andsyringes with one another, often in "shootinggalleries" where dozens of addicts may line up to use asingle needle rented out by the dealers and not sterilizedbetween uses. This sharing of needles has become a major sourceof transmission of blood-borne diseases such as acquired immunedeficiency syndrome ("AIDS") and hepatitis. Accordingto a recent national review, "more than 33% of new AIDScases occur among injecting drug users or people having sexualcontact with them." In New York State, the majority of newAIDS cases since 1988 have been reported among users ofinjectable drugs and their sexual partners. Both the Centers forDisease Control and the New York State Department of Health haveestimated that more than 75% of pediatric AIDS cases are childrenwhose mothers either injected drugs or were the sexual partnersof persons who injected drugs. The data suggest, at the veryleast, that sterile hypodermic needles should be readily andfreely available to drug users. So long as drug use remainsunlawful, however, free needle distribution is not likely toattract a substantial portion of the user population. Inresponse, some courts have circumscribed laws dealing with theunlawful possession of hypodermic needles by applying defenses ofmedical necessity. b. Trading Sex for Drugs Because illicit drugs are expensive, many addicts turn toprostitution to make money to support their habits, or exchangesexual services directly for drugs. Prostitute drug addicts oftendo not protect themselves from contracting sexually transmitteddiseases carried by their customers, and they pass such diseaseson to other customers, their lovers, and their children. Thecrack epidemic, in particular, has been blamed for the recentlynoted resurgence of syphilis and other sexually transmitteddiseases. Dr. Robert Rolfs of the Centers for Disease Control placed theblame squarely on cocaine and its high cost: People -- especiallywomen -- have high-risk sex and practice prostitution to supporttheir habits. And it is occurring in a relatively poor populationwhere people have a lot of things that prevent their access totreatment. Therefore, they stay infected longer and are morelikely to pass their infections on to others. Fewer addicts wouldbe forced to resort to prostitution if the current prohibitionsagainst drugs were lifted. c. Neglect of Health Because of addicts' preoccupation with obtaining and usingdrugs, and the debilitating effects of some of the drugsthemselves, many addicts are in very poor health. Malnutrition isa frequent problem and, in turn, contributes to many others.Addicts' poor health makes them especially susceptible todiseases ranging from scurvy and shingles to tuberculosis and theflu. Addicts are also more likely to contract communicablediseases and therefore more likely to spread them. Theinterrelated urban problems of homelessness and illegal drugabuse have contributed to the development of multi-drug-resistantstrains of diseases such as tuberculosis, which was once thoughtto be on the verge of eradication. These more virulent diseasesknow few geographical limitations and pose risks to the generalpopulation. d. Avoidance of the Health-Care System Individuals who use illegal drugs often put off addressingtheir health problems for fear of prosecution or other adverseconsequences (e.g., rebuffs by doctors, loss of job). Thisreluctance to seek medical care is compounded by the fact thatmany drug addicts have no private physicians and rely instead onpublic hospitals or clinics for any care they might get.Prohibition, therefore, has perverse results on health; drugabusers tend to enter the health-care system only if and whentheir need for care is acute, which is also when care is mostcostly to deliver. If, for example, a woman avoids pre-natalcare, she may give birth to a baby with low birth weight andother medical difficulties. If a drug abuser puts off seekingtreatment for illnesses and injuries, he or she may end up in theemergency room and the intensive care ward. Mothers and pregnantwomen face the additional and justifiable fear that anydetectable drug use may be reported as a possible indication ofchild abuse or neglect. In many large city hospitals, the urineof newborn babies is tested for prohibited drugs, and motherswhose babies test positive for pre-natal exposure are reported tothe child abuse authorities. Until recently, in New York City, such babies were routinelykept from their mothers pending investigations that often lastedmany months, interfering with normal bonding and necessarilyadversely affecting the infant's development and relationshipwith the parent. Moreover, these women have, in somejurisdictions, been prosecuted for pre-partum distribution ofprohibited drugs. In addition to the obvious costs to the individuals who becomeinfected with catastrophic illnesses directly through drug use,and the high costs to the health care system of treating them,prohibition contributes to the spread of such diseases throughoutsociety, particularly to the sexual partners and children ofinfected drug users. Left untreated, users and addicts are morelikely to give birth to unhealthy children, to abuse or neglecttheir children after they are born, or to have their childrenplaced in foster care. 2. Lack of Information and Quality Control a. Adulterated Drugs, Designer Drugs, and Drugs of UnknownPotency Because drugs are manufactured and distributed in secret, itis impossible for users to guard against adulteration or todetermine the purity and potency of the drugs they use. Theproblem is compounded by drug growers, manufacturers, anddistributors who, to minimize the risks of apprehension, developand purvey the drug varieties that pack the most intoxicatingeffect into the smallest package. According to an experienced NewYork City researcher, The fact that cocaine, heroin and relateddrugs are illegal encourages the use of injection. Severestatutory restrictions greatly increase the cost of illicitsubstances to nonmedical users. Injecting provides a way toeconomize. Injectable forms of opiates and coca are much moreconcentrated than traditional forms, such as opium or coca tea.Injection provides an intense and economical effect by maximizingthe amount of drug that reaches the brain. People who sniff orsmoke drugs say that if they inject they need only one third ofthe amount of the drug to maintain a habit. Because the injection forms of illicit drugs are concentrated,they are [also] relatively easier to ship. It has beendemonstrated that, as law enforcement and criminal penaltiesintensify, dealers also find other ways to economize by inventingnew drugs -- so-called "designer drugs" -- that are notyet prohibited. This places the ill-informed consumers of suchdrugs at greater risk of overdose and other health problems.Illnesses and deaths have resulted from (1) the introduction ofdangerous substances into drugs that could otherwise have beenused with greater safety, (2) inadvertent overdoses due tovariations in potency, and (3) the development of "designerdrugs" intended to give the effect of familiar intoxicantswith new chemical compositions that put them beyond the reach ofcurrent laws. Just as the prohibition against alcohol led tosales of poisonous wood alcohol and the prohibition againstabortion led to coat-hanger abortions, the prohibition againstdrug manufacture, sale, and possession results in unnecessarydeaths due to adulteration, variable purity, and "designerdrugs." This contrasts sharply with the government's currentregulation of alcoholic beverages, which ensures that thebeverages are pure and that buyers know how strong they are andwhat some of their health effects may be. Experts have noted that heightened efforts to enforce druglaws and amend them to encompass new formulations or banprecursor substances may only push dealers to take greater risks,selling ever more potentially dangerous substances. b. Lack of Knowledge About Safer Use Because many drugs are outlawed, individuals considering druguse rarely have access to accurate information about the effectsof drugs. While a cautious user may err on the side of avoidingcertain activities while under the use of drugs, he or she mayhave no way of knowing, beyond trial and error, the possibleadverse health consequences of certain combinations of drugs andhis or her individual tolerance for particular substances.Because of its penchant for exaggeration and cartoonish treatmentof the issues, most current education about drugs is not takenseriously by young people. As a result, it is far less effectivethan other health education (e.g., about nutrition, fitness, andsmoking cigarettes). c. Using Alcohol and Tobacco Instead of "SoftDrugs" Alcohol and tobacco are completely legal yet do much moreharm, statistically speaking, than illegal drug use. It is alsogenerally recognized that alcohol, at least when used to excess,can cause aggressive, anti-social behavior. The currentprohibitionist laws against marijuana, generally considered an"a-motivational" drug, and other so-called "softdrugs" have the effect of influencing some people to choosealcohol over these "soft drugs." Peter Reuter, aneconomist at the Rand Corporation, concludes that "Ifmarijuana is a substitute for alcohol . . . , alcohol is, bydefinition, a substitute for marijuana. Thus tough marijuanaenforcement must increase drinking." Similarly, FrankChaloupka, an economist at the University of Illinois, foundthrough statistical analysis "that states without criminalsanctions against marijuana possession suffered fewer autofatalities." Finally, Karen Model, a Ph.D. candidate atHarvard, found that "states decriminalizing marijuanareported lower overall rates of drug- and alcohol-relatedemergencies." To the extent that users are choosing alcoholrather than marijuana or other "soft drugs," theoverall public health effects are probably worse than they wouldbe otherwise. 3. Injuries Due to Violence The high prices commanded by prohibited drugs createcompetition among groups and individuals willing to break the lawto supply drugs to consumers. Their competition often becomesviolent and has contributed to the build-up of arms and thepervasiveness of violence in many areas. Gunshot wounds and othertraumas due to the illegal drug business have become commonplacein big-city hospital emergency rooms. Not only traffickers, butalso law enforcement officers and innocent bystanders are oftenthe victims. Mayor Rudolph Giuliani recently noted: The victims of the[] gun battles [of street-level drugdealers] are innocent bystanders -- and often young children.Last year alone, about 500 New York City children were shot; ofthese, 89 were innocent bystanders hit by crossfire. The cost ofprohibiting drugs must be measured in terms of lost lives andexpensive medical care and include the hidden costs of lostproductivity and the psychological damage to individuals andentire communities living in fear, helpless and hopeless. With the possible exceptions of cocaine and PCP, drugsthemselves do not generally cause violent behavior. It is,instead, turf wars for the control of black markets and the drugusers' need for money to purchase such substances that leads toviolence. Indeed, marijuana and heroin have been shown to rendertheir users disinclined to violence or incapable of violencewhile under the influence. These substances are much lessdangerous in this regard than alcohol. 4. Diversion of Resources from Treatment and Prevention Prohibition diverts money that could otherwise be used forpreventing and treating drug abuse. Federal anti-drug legislationprovides a single budget for "supply reduction" and"demand reduction" efforts. Law enforcement agencieshave always received much more than prevention, treatment, andresearch programs combined. The ABA recently reported that"[s]ince the early 1980s, treatment has been a decliningpriority. In 1991, treatment received 14% of the $10.5 billionfederal drug budget compared to 25% ten years earlier."During the same period, "federal spending on law enforcementincreased 737%, with interdiction efforts leading theincrease." Ending drug prohibition would, by definition,eliminate the need for any special law enforcement funds for druginterdiction. It would also allow for the redirection of lawenforcement resources to concentrate on violent crime and qualityof life issues. 5. The Sense of Treating Drugs as a Public Health Problem a. Treatment Works The vast majority of resources in the United States availableto meet this country's "drug problem" have beenutilized for interdiction rather than education and treatment.This allocation of resources has skewed the public's perceptionof the problem, which is seen largely as one of law enforcement.However, drug abuse and drug addiction are fundamentally a publichealth problem. Reallocation of resources away from interdiction and intoeducation and treatment is essential to the successful managementof this problem. Drug abuse and drug addiction are healthproblems that can be treated. Dr. Herbert D. Kleber, formerDeputy Director of the Office of National Drug Control Policy,now Medical Director of the Center on Addiction and SubstanceAbuse and lecturer in psychiatry at Columbia University Collegeof Physicians and Surgeons, has identified a basic fallacyresponsible for the predominant pessimistic outlook: Drug dependence has been viewed as a chronic relapsing illnesswith an unfavorable prognosis. However, there are thousands offormerly dependent individuals in the United States and elsewherewho have remained off both illicit drugs and excess use of licitdrugs like alcohol for decades, functioning as productivecitizens . . . . [T]here are already effective methods oftreatment if the right approach [and] the right person can bebrought together. No one should conclude that treatment is not effective justbecause drug abuse, like alcohol abuse and cigarette smoking,often cannot be "cured" with a single treatment effort.Most people who do conquer drug addiction succeed only aftermultiple efforts and relapses. Because effective treatmentdepends on finding the best method of helping a particular personat a particular time, several attempts may be needed to discoverwhat will work. b. Self-Help Groups Some substance abusers manage their problem with the help ofAlcoholics Anonymous ("AA"), Narcotics Anonymous("NA") or similar groups. These voluntary self-helpassociations offer the structure of a program following"twelve steps" to sobriety and the support of fellowabusers in different stages of recovery. Since these groupsmaintain members' confidentiality and do not keep records ofattendance at meetings, their success has not been measuredstatistically; however, anecdotal evidence of their effectivenessis strong. Additionally, many respected treatment programs relyon methods developed by the self-help groups and prescribeattendance at AA and NA meetings for their patients. c. Therapeutic Communities One of the best-known methods of professional treatment fordrug abuse is a highly structured, long-term residentialinpatient program known as a therapeutic community. The Committeevisited three therapeutic community facilities in New York City-- programs operated by Daytop Village, Project Return andPhoenix House. Patients in therapeutic communities generallyspend one to two years, sometimes more, living and working in thefacility. Through individual counseling and group therapy, thepatients address the causes and effects of their substance abuseand other problems and attempt to rebuild their lives free ofdrugs. Education, vocational training and work experience areimportant components of the treatment, because therapeuticcommunity patients frequently lack necessary skills for makingtheir own way in society. Successful patients gradually re-enterthe outside world, first obtaining jobs and ultimately moving tohomes outside the program. While many patients drop out of thesechallenging and restrictive programs, research has shown thatthree-quarters of the patients who stay for the prescribed courseof treatment remained drug-free seven years later. One studyfound that 56% of the individuals entering residential treatment(including those who dropped out) no longer used heroin orcocaine one year later. By the end of the study, more than 80% ofthe patients no longer used any prohibited drug other thanmarijuana. Another different national study that focused onopiate addicts revealed that nearly three quarters (74%) of theaddicts who entered therapeutic communities were not usingopiates regularly (i.e., on a daily basis) three years later. d. Other Inpatient Drug-Free Treatment Programs Substance abusers with health insurance or other means ofpayment often seek residential treatment in less restrictivesettings and for shorter periods of time. Two of the best-knownprograms providing this sort of inpatient treatment are the BettyFord Center in Palm Springs, California, and the Hazelden programin Minnesota. Patients usually participate in intensiveindividual counseling, group therapy, and AA or NA meetings.Patients most commonly stay for four weeks and are thendischarged to "aftercare" programs for continuingoutpatient treatment or are advised to seek AA or NA meetings inthe community. Many prominent citizens have testified publicly tothe efficacy and value of these sorts of treatment programs. e. Outpatient Methadone Maintenance Programs Methadone maintenance is the most widely used treatment fornarcotics addiction in the United States. Drs. Vincent P. Doleand Marie Nyswander developed the treatment at RockefellerUniversity in the early 1960s. Heroin addicts who are medicatedwith an appropriate daily dose of methadone, a long-actingsynthetic opiate, lose the desire to use heroin but do notexperience either withdrawal symptoms or the euphoric orimpairing effects of narcotic use. Methadone patients canfunction normally and perform successfully in the workplace injobs ranging from attorney to architect to bus driver. In the early stages of treatment, methadone patients visit theprogram daily to receive their doses. They are granted moreflexible schedules as they show progress in treatment byremaining free of other drugs, maintaining steady employment, andmaking progress in other areas. Methadone programs also providecounseling and other health care and usually arrange forvocational rehabilitation, education, and other services. Successful methadone patients may remain in treatment for manyyears, often at reduced doses; and some eventually leavetreatment entirely. A high proportion of methadone patients stay in treatment(more than two-thirds, by many reports), and more than 85% ofthose remaining in treatment for a year never use heroin again. Asubstantial proportion also stop using alcohol and other drugs.The results of research assessing the effectiveness of methadonemaintenance have been strikingly consistent. One major studyfound that, within a year of beginning treatment, 70% of thosewho had entered methadone treatment were no longer using heroin.After three years, use by patients who had remained with theprogram for at least three months had declined by almost 85%.Another study examining AIDS infection among injection drug usersfound that methadone maintenance treatment effectively reducedintravenous drug use by 71%. An earlier study had found that morethan three quarters of the patients who entered methadonemaintenance treatment were still not regularly using opiatesthree years later. f. Outpatient Drug-Free Therapy Substance abusers who cannot commit themselves to inpatienttreatment and do not want methadone treatment (or would notbenefit from it because their primary drug of abuse is notheroin) can participate in a variety of outpatient drug-freetherapies, including the full range of "talk"therapies, supervised twelve-step programs, and programs that useacupuncture to reduce the craving for drugs. Outpatient programsoften are recommended as follow-ups to short-term hospital-based"detoxification" programs, which generally areeffective only for short-term crisis intervention purposes. The Committee visited the Lincoln Hospital Substance AbuseDivision in New York City, which has been treating drug abusepatients with acupuncture for more than 15 years. Acupuncture treatment, which involves the insertion of fiveneedles in the outer ear while the patients sit quietly in acommon room for 30 to 45 minutes, is meant to control withdrawalsymptoms and the craving for drugs and to have a general calmingeffect. At Lincoln Hospital it is used in combination with groupcounseling on the Narcotics Anonymous model, as well asurinalysis monitoring. Like methadone treatment, acupuncturebegins as a daily treatment, with successful patients"graduating" to less frequent schedules. Outpatientdrug-free treatment programs, whether they employ acupuncture ornot, differ in the nature, length and frequency of treatmentsessions. The usefulness of acupuncture treatment for substance abusehas been demonstrated in several studies. Outpatient programs,generally, have demonstrated a fair amount of success in treatingsubstance abusers. One national study found that nearlythree-quarters of the patients who entered outpatient drug-freeprograms for opiate abuse were not using opiates regularly threeyears later. A later study of similar scope revealed that, aftera year in treatment, 42% of the regular cocaine users who stayedin outpatient drug-free treatment for at least three months hadstopped using cocaine completely. Over three to five years,regular heroin use by patients who had received treatment for atleast three months fell by half, and fewer than 20% of thepatients who stayed in treatment for at least three months wereregular users of any prohibited drug except marijuana. 6. Empirical Research on Effective Drug Treatment Virtually all studies conducted over the last 20 years showthat the most commonly practiced methods of treatment do work.Treatment has been shown to reduce substance abuse and ameliorateits consequences. The outcome of treatment has not been found todiffer significantly with the type of treatment received.Methadone programs, inpatient residential programs, andoutpatient drug-free programs all show dramatic results. a. Studies Examining the Effects of Treatment on SubstanceUse The most comprehensive study of the effectiveness of drugtreatment, the Treatment Outcomes Prospective Survey("TOPS") funded by the National Institute on Drug Abuse("NIDA"), strongly confirmed the efficacy of treatmentin reducing drug use. For up to five years after their treatment,TOPS followed 10,000 substance abusers who had been admitted to37 different treatment programs across the country. The programsincluded residential and outpatient drug-free programs andoutpatient methadone maintenance programs. Heroin and cocaine usedeclined significantly for patients in all treatment modalities.After a year in treatment, heroin use by patients in methadonemaintenance programs declined by 70%, while 75% of outpatientdrug-free patients and 56% of residential treatment patients hadstopped using heroin or cocaine. By the end of the study, fewerthan 20% of the patients regularly used any illegal drug exceptmarijuana, and 40% to 50% of the patients abstained altogether. Other studies have reached virtually identical conclusions. Astudy sponsored by NIDA to address the risk of AIDS infection forinjection drug users found that methadone maintenance treatmenteffectively reduced intravenous drug use by 71% among those whoremained in the program for one year. An earlier NIDA study basedon the Drug Abuse Report Program ("DARP") tracked thedrug use of 44,000 opiate addicts admitted to treatment between1969 and 1974. The study found that most patients stopped usingopiates daily and had not resumed daily use three years afterthey were discharged from treatment. More than three quarters ofthe patients who entered methadone maintenance treatment (76%)and nearly three quarters of the patients who entered therapeuticcommunities (74%) or outpatient drug-free programs (72%) werestill not using opiates regularly three years later. A recentfollow-up study of 405 of the original 44,000 addicts found that74% were not using heroin regularly twelve years after theirtreatment ended. Researchers have uniformly concluded that the three mostcommon forms of treatment are effective despite "the varietyof problems suffered by clients, their long histories of deviantand debilitating lifestyles, and a lack of support in thecommunity" that lead so many addicts not to completetreatment programs at all. Researchers also agree that the longeraddicts remain in treatment, the better their chances of success.National studies of the behavior of thousands of addicts haveshown that, while one-third of the patients who stay in treatmentfor more than three months are still not using drugs a yearlater, two-thirds of those who stay in treatment for a year ormore stay off drugs. b. Studies Examining the Effects of Drug Treatment on the Consequences of Drug Abuse Researchers have studied the impact of drug treatment on manyof the health and social problems that drug abuse contributes to-- the spread of AIDS and other diseases, premature death, crime,unemployment, costly medical care -- as one way of assessing thesuccess of drug treatment. Their studies have shown thattreatment reduces these associated consequences of drug abuse.Treatment prevents the transmission of HIV and other blood-bornediseases that spread when addicts share needles or sell sex fordrugs. Two studies have shown that the rate of HIV infectionamong heroin addicts in New York City not in treatment (46%-47%)is twice the rate of infection among addicts in methadonetreatment programs (23%-27%), and a recent study found that noneof a group of methadone patients with ten or more years intreatment tested positive for HIV. Research has shown that treatment also prevents crime. TheTOPS survey found that, in the six months following treatment,97% of the residential therapeutic community clients and 70% ofthe outpatient clients who had admitted committing predatorycrimes in the year before they entered treatment engaged in nocriminal activity at all. Three to five years after treatment,the proportion of addicts involved in predatory crimes had fallenby one half to two-thirds. The DARP study found that arrest ratesfell by 74% after treatment, for all treatment modalities.Research reveals that treatment helps recovering addicts work, aswell. Only 33% of the 44,000 patients in the DARP study worked inthe year before admission to treatment, but 57% were employed inthe year following their discharge. Two- thirds of therapeuticcommunity patients were gainfully employed after discharge. Theemployment rate of clients tracked in the TOPS study also surged.Three to five years after patients entered treatment, theemployment of patients admitted to residential programs haddoubled over pre-treatment levels, while the employment ofaddicts receiving outpatient treatment rose by more than half. The costs of medical treatment for all sorts of healthproblems decline when addicts receive treatment. As noted earlierin this report, addicts themselves suffer many costly illnessesas a result of drug use, ranging from hepatitis, syphilis andtuberculosis to shingles, malnutrition and psychiatric problems.In 1989, general hospital stays in which drugs or alcohol wereidentified as a major factor accounted for 1.9 million days ofhospitalization in New York State alone. Using a conservativelyestimated average cost of $500 a day, that amounts to $9.5billion worth of medical care. Successful drug treatment starts addicts on their way tophysical recovery and therefore reduces these medical costs.Successful drug treatment also prevents the spread of diseases toothers, such as children born to addicted mothers, and stems thecost of medical care for them, as well as the cost of foster carefor children whose addicted parents cannot care for them. Otherbenefits of treatment flow from its effects on criminal behaviorand employment. Treated addicts are much more likely to beemployed and therefore to contribute to the public coffers ratherthan receive welfare. They make more productive employees and areless likely to have accidents at work. Treated addicts are farless likely to commit crimes and therefore will save society thecost of property loss and prosecuting criminal activity. Onestudy that calculated the cost of crime, poor employmentactivity, and medical treatment attributable to drug addictionfound that the total of these costs was ten to twenty-five timesthe cost of treating drug addiction, depending on the cost of thetreatment chosen. The cost of treating an addict in a long-termresidential drug-free program, for example, was found to amountto only four percent of the cost to society of not treating theaddict. A comparison of costs also shows that treatment is much morecost-effective than incarceration. In New York City, residentialdrug treatment costs approximately $17,000 a year per treatmentbed, and outpatient treatment costs only $2,300-$4,000 a year pertreatment slot; the annual operating cost of a prison bed isabout $40,000, and the cost of building new prison cells exceeds$100,000 each. Diverting drug abusers from prison to treatmenttherefore saves New York State or City half the operating costsof incarceration. It also alleviates the need to build expensivenew prisons. If the proven effect of treatment on criminalrecidivism is included, the savings to the criminal justicesystem in the future would be even more substantial. Treatmentworks and is, in fact, a much more cost-effective way of dealingwith substance abuse than arresting drug offenders and lockingthem in prison. Successfully treated drug addicts give up crime,become productive and more healthy citizens, and ultimately makefewer demands on the public for social and medical servicesthroughout their lives. Their cure also reduces the overalldemand for drugs. 7. Education Works One way to reduce the demand for illegal drugs is to preventindividuals at an early and impressionable age from initiatingdrug use. Using the school system and community programs toeducate children about drug use and its destructive consequencesis an idea that would undoubtedly be supported by many segmentsof society. Logic suggests that education programs should beeffective in diverting young people from experimenting withdrugs. Mathea Falco, in her book The Making of a Drug Free America,details both school-based and community-based educationalprograms which have proven results in preventing drug, alcoholand tobacco use. Education has been shown to be effective inpreventing and reducing drug as well as tobacco and alcohol useamong children and teenagers. Simply to advocate"education," however, may not be enough; the assumptionthat "education," and any type of education program,will be effective may be erroneous. Studies of the effectivenessof drug education and prevention strategies seem to suggest thatlong- term programs geared towards examining the "socialinfluences" leading to drug, alcohol, and tobacco use aremore successful in diverting and reducing subsequent use ofdrugs, alcohol, and tobacco. These successful educationalprograms are generally coupled with community and home preventionand education programs. In contrast, certain short-term educationprograms, which lack the corresponding community programs, havenot proven effective in actually reducing drug use. a. Life Skills Training Program This 15 session curriculum, which is geared towards juniorhigh school students, is designed to teach students personalcoping skills so that they may be better able to make decisionsand feel more confident in social situations. Evaluations of thisprogram, which has been taught in 150 junior high schools in NewYork and New Jersey for the past ten years, show that rates ofsmoking and marijuana use are one-half to three-quarters loweramong students who have participated in this program than thosewho have not. b. Students Taught Awareness and Resistance This program, taught to first-year high school students,combines a thirteen session classroom curriculum withcoordinating community, media, and family programs in an effortto teach resistance skills to teenagers and reinforce the socialdesirability of not using drugs. The program is followed-up witha five-session booster course the following school year. Thisprogram, in a five-year follow-up study, has been proveneffective in reducing the rate of tobacco, marijuana, and alcoholuse by 20% to 40% and cocaine use by 50%. c. Project Healthy Choices This program, geared towards sixth and seventh graders,integrates discussions about drugs and alcohol into the everydaycurriculum by training teachers to incorporate the discussion ofdrugs and alcohol into their teaching of academic subjects. Thisprogram is currently implemented in approximately one hundred NewYork City schools. It is believed that this approach willreinforce prevention messages as the students will hear thisdiscussion as part of their learning on a wide variety ofsubjects. The long-range effectiveness of this approach has notyet been determined. d. Student Assistance Program This program, which has been implemented in junior and seniorhigh schools in twenty states, offers counseling during theschool day on a voluntary, confidential basis. A study of theWestchester County, New York school system where the program wasoriginally implemented showed a significant reduction in alcoholand marijuana use. More significantly, studies showed that therates of drinking and drug use were 30% lower among students atschools which implemented the SAP program. e. Smart Moves "Smart Moves" is a program operated out of Boys andGirls Clubs in the inner-cities where children live in high crimeneighborhoods. By offering after-school prevention programs andrecreational, educational, and vocational activities, thisprogram attempts to teach children to recognize the pressures touse drugs and how to develop the verbal and social skills toresist these pressures. Again, studies have shown that this typeof program can reduce cocaine and crack use and improve schoolbehavior and parental involvement. f. Seattle Social Development Project This comprehensive program seeks to strengthen the bondbetween children from high crime neighborhoods and their familiesand schools. The program provides to parents techniques tomonitor their children better; teachers get better training tomaintain order and resolve conflicts; and children, as in theother programs, are taught skills to resist peer pressure.Interestingly, while the program has shown results in deterringgirls from alcohol, tobacco, and drug use, it has not shownsimilar effectiveness with boys. g. Programs for Children of Addicts Finally, a number of cities are attempting to developprevention programs geared towards the children of drug addicts.These programs attempt to teach parents communication andparenting skills and provide children with support and socialskills. Two such programs are "Strengthening Families,"which has been implemented in Salt Lake City, Detroit, and Selma,Alabama, and the "Safe Haven" program in Detroit.Evaluations of the "Strengthening Families" programsuggest it strengthens family and school relationships andaffects attitudes towards alcohol and tobacco use. This provides a summary of the types of successful programsalready available in the communities. Their success depends upona school and community commitment to implementing comprehensiveprograms geared towards preventing drug use by children. Thediversity of the structure of the programs illustrates thecomplexity of the problem. In addition to reaching out to the"average" school age youth and warning them about thedangers of substance abuse, there are children in high-risk homesand crime-ridden neighborhoods who need additional supportstructures to resist the pressures of drug use. III. TOWARD A NEW DRUG POLICY Joycelyn Elders, the United States Surgeon General, hassuggested that a study be made of our current drug policies andperhaps a new drug policy adopted. Despite the Administration'srejection of her suggestion, public perception is that she may beright. Our government tried to prohibit alcohol consumption andfound it did not work. As demonstrated in this report, drugprohibition is also a failure that causes more harm than the druguse it is purportedly intended to control. The obvious answer isthat we must take the necessary steps towards a new approach todrug policy. Several different alternatives to drug prohibition are beingdiscussed. Federal District Judge Whitman Knapp suggests thatCongress should repeal all federal laws banning drug sales orpossession and permit states to devise alternatives toprohibition. This is the present approach to alcohol in theUnited States since the repeal of the 18th Amendment and theVolstead Act. Federal District Judge Jack Weinstein suggests"standing down" and making fewer arrests, having fewerprosecutions, and spending more money on treatment. M.A.R.Kleiman of the Kennedy School of Government at Harvard suggestsas a solution to the drug problem a "grudgingtoleration" allowing for sale of certain drugs throughstate-regulated stores, but the strategy would be to discourageconsumption. These and other alternatives to drug prohibition should bethoroughly considered so that our society may choose a newapproach that will avoid the widespread evils caused by thecurrent drug laws. Any alternative to drug prohibition shouldallow continued criminal sanctions against conduct affectingothers (the most obvious example being operating a vehicle whileunder the influence). It is the Committee's belief that a new approach to drugpolicy should leave state and local governments free to employthe full panoply of coercive penal sanctions when drug use isrelevant to conduct affecting others. For instance, as mentionedabove, operating any vehicle while under the influence of drugsis not tolerated and that should not change. Although in NewYork, voluntary intoxication remains relevant to negate specificintent, the Legislature may wish to restore individual liabilityin this area and make any intoxication that is voluntaryirrelevant as to mitigation, on the theory that by this voluntaryact the actor will be held responsible for the consequences ofhis conduct while under the influence. Such a sanction is hardlyunreasonable, nor would it strike anyone as being unfair,especially if facilities to deal with cases of actual addictionwere readily available. Finally, any alternative to drug prohibition should notpreclude state and local governments from addressing"quality of life" issues. Government should not bepowerless to control persons who are obviously and publiclyintoxicated. Through enforcement of the existing laws dealingwith public behavior, or appropriate amendments to such laws toinclude specific conduct, government intervention would havegreater effect and would be readily accepted as appropriate bythe overwhelming majority of the population. IV. CONCLUSION The Special Committee on Drugs and the Law has spent thebetter part of a decade examining this country's "drugproblem" and the mechanisms utilized to manage it,principally a federal and state system of criminal proscription. In recent years, the criminal penalties for possession anddistribution of proscribed drugs have increased, with mandatorysentences being imposed at both the state and federal levels. Theprison population in the United States has more than doubled inthe past ten years, largely as the result of these prohibitionistlaws. The scarce resources of the federal and state judiciaryhave been increasingly devoted to drug cases. Despite all of these efforts, the drug war rages on. TheCommittee recognizes the urgent and compelling need to makeadditional resources available for education and treatment. Webelieve that even at increased levels, however, treatment andeducation are not enough to control this country's drug problem.The Committee opposes the present prohibitionist system andrecommends the opening of a public dialog regarding newapproaches to drug policy, including legalization and regulation. KATHY HELLENBRAND ROCKLEN, CHAIR* ANN ROBERTSON, SECRETARY Hon. Harold Baer Jr. Stephen L. Kass Nancy A. Breslow Charles Edward Knapp Kenneth A. Brown Daniel Markewich Ellen M. Corcella Eleanor Jackson Piel Edward John Davis James Warwick Rayhill Eugene R. Dougherty Chester B. Salomon John H. Doyle, III Hon. Felice K. Shea Virginia M. Giddens John Trubin * The Committee wishes to express its special thanks to the Honorable Robert W. Sweet, the former Chair of the Committeeand a tireless advocate for drug policy reform. Justice Shea and Ms. Corcella abstained from voting on thereport. Mr. Doyle and Mr. Markewich dissented, in part. See, Separate Statement, infra. SEPARATE STATEMENT TO A REPORT OF THE SPECIAL COMMITTEE ON DRUGS AND THE LAW ENTITLED "A WISER COURSE: ENDING DRUGPROHIBITION" We are in agreement with the Report insofar as it calls forthe opening of a public dialog regarding new approaches to drugpolicy but disagree with its conclusion that drug prohibitionshould be ended. Our disagreement is based upon our concern thatthe legal sale of drugs would increase substantially the numberof persons who use and/or become addicted to drugs, causing harmnot only to themselves but to society. Such harm would, in ourview, outweigh the benefits of eliminating drug prohibition. 1. Legalizing Drugs Would Reduce Their Cost to the Public,Thereby Increasing Demand, Use and Addiction The theory of drug legalization is that it would take theprofit motive out of illegal drug dealing, eliminating the evilsof drug prohibition. In order to accomplish this result drugswould have to be sold at prices lower than their present illicitlevels. Many commentators have reached the conclusion that lowerprices would increase the demand for drugs. In Searching ForAlternatives - Drug-Control Policy in the United States, Editedand With Introduction by Melvyn B. Krauss and Edward P. Lazear,Hoover Institution Press, Stanford University, Stanford,California (1991), the authors have compiled commentar- ies fromboth proponents and opponents of drug legalization, most of whomacknowledged that lessening cost and increasing access may createhigher drug use. See, e.g., id. at 22-25; 83; 107. 2. The Report Fails to Provide a Concrete Proposal The Report states that "The Committee opposes the presentprohibitionist system . . . ." However the Report providesno concrete proposal that would permit us to determine whetherany net benefit to society would result from legaliza- tion.Should we endorse either (i) the legal sale of crack,amphetamines, hallucinogens and similar dangerous drugs or (ii)the sale of drugs to minors? Certainly, if we accept the propo-sition advanced by many commentators that the legal sale ofdrugs, at lower prices than the prices of illegal drugs, wouldgreatly widen demand, we should reject the proposal that suchharmful substances as those mentioned above be legally sold orthat any drugs be sold to minors. On the other hand, prohibitionof sale of those substances, or of drugs generally to minors,would give illegal drug traffickers a continuing opportunity toexploit these markets, and thus by definition the proposal wouldnot end the evils of drug prohibition. The Report's failure to provide a specific proposal leavesthese critical issues unresolved. We agree with the Report'sstatement that "These and other alternatives [types oflegalization proposals] should be thoroughly considered so thatour society may choose a new approach that will avoid the wide-spread evils caused by the current drug laws." A simple endto drug prohibition, however, cannot be accepted as a solution tothese evils, because the "solution" would producegreater social harm than the present system. 3. The Report Does Not Set Forth Any Convincing Basis for ItsConclusion That "Use in Continued Moderation" Would BeThe "Much More Likely Result of Decriminalization" The Report states that "the available evidence does notsupport [the] assumption" that the current prohibitionistlaws discourage many people from using drugs, citing: risinglevels of drug use, arrests and seizures; recent declines inalcohol and tobacco consumption; the role of drug pushers inboosting demand; a description of Prohibition suggesting nocorrelation between prohibition and use; the results of a 1970'sexperiment in which 10 states decriminalized possession of smallamounts of marijuana; and a poll taken of the general public. TheReport also cites drug use trends in the Netherlands and England,where the problems are less severe than in the United States.Since neither the United States nor any other developed countryhas legalized the sale of drugs, there is, of course, noempirical evidence directly on point. None of the evidence citedin the Report refutes the strong likelihood that reducing pricesand facilitating access would significantly increase demand fordrugs. Recent reductions in use of tobacco and alcohol are notreliable guidelines for legalized drugs because the pleasure-enhancing and tolerance-producing (i.e., addictive) characteris-tics of cocaine, crack and heroin are far more powerful thanthose of tobacco and alcohol. See, id. at 18, 24, 78. The resultsof Prohibition suggests a correlation between prohibition anduse. Alcohol use declined at the outset of Prohibition and thenincreased to only 60% to 70% of pre- Prohibition levels.Immediately after Repeal, alcohol use re- mained the same, but itincreased to pre-Prohibition levels during the next decade. See,Miron, "Drug Legalization and the Consumption of Drugs: AnEconomist's Perspective", published in Searching ForAlternatives - Drug-Control Policy in the United States, at id.,pages 74 to 75. England and the Netherlands both prohibit drug traf- fickingand have relaxed enforcement only at the level of the consumer orpatient. The experiences in those countries do not provide anybasis for predictions as to the impact of drug legalization inthe United States where there are far higher levels of bothsupply and demand of illegal drugs. See id. at 172-188.Similarly, the ten states where possession of small amounts ofmarijuana was decriminalized are not reliable indica- torsbecause trafficking and sale continued to be prohibited. 4. The Report is Mistaken in Characterizing Drug Abuse as anIndividual "Right" rather than as a Social Evil The Report argues that "Ending drug prohibition wouldenable the Court and our society to recognize the right of indi-viduals to alter their consciousness (the most private of mat-ters) so long as they do not harm others." Consistent withthis approach, the Report notes that "Any alternative todrug prohibition shall allow the continued minimal control ofconduct affecting others (the most obvious example beingoperating a vehicle while under the influence)." In characterizing drug abuse as a "right of individu-als" the Report ignores its social costs, which includephysical damage to babies born of drug using mothers; abuseand/or neglect by users of parents, offspring, friends andrelatives; death by overdose; teen suicides; homelessness;drug-induced altered states of consciousness producing violence,particularly from the use of cocaine and crack; loss ofproductivity of drug-using workers; waste of educationalresources used in attempts to teach drug-abusing students; theripple effect on the economy from the presence of large numbersof incapacitated or impaired individu- als; and the enormous costof drug treatment programs. See, Commentary by various authors inKrauss and Lazear, supra, at pages 97-107; 202-206; 227-236. 5. The Report Should Stress the Need to Reduce Demand forDrugs Without Endorsing Legalization The Report is enormously thoughtful and comprehensive anddeserves the most serious study. It describes accurately andcompletely the importance and effectiveness of harm reduction anddrug treatment programs. For the reasons stated above, however,the Report should not recommend ending drug prohibition. Becauseof the risk of catastrophic social harm from legalization, manyof the most thoughtful recent works on this topic do not recom-mend this approach. Mathea Falco, in The Making of a Drug-FreeAmerica (1992), cited in the Report, urges against a "biggerdrug war" (emphasis supplied) and that "[w]e need anentirely differ- ent approach" . . . "one that putsinto practice what we have learned in recent years about reducingthe demand for drugs." Id. at 191, 201. The author pointsout that ". . . law enforce- ment plays an important role,but it should not be the center- piece of drug policy." Id.at 199. In Reckoning Drugs, the Cities, and the American Future(1993), Elliot Currie, while noting the same evils of drugprohibition relied upon in the Report, states: ". . . no one seriously doubts that legalization wouldindeed increase availability, and probably lower prices for manydrugs. In turn, increased availability, as we know from theexperience with alcohol, typically leads to increasedconsumption, and with it increased social and public healthcosts." Id. at 187. In Addiction From Biology to Drug Policy (1994),Dr. Avram Goldstein recommends retaining the present prohibitionon heroin, cocaine and the amphetamines while endorsing a varietyof harm reduction and drug treatment methods aimed at reducingdemand. Id. at 268-285. In Drug Use in America (1994), (Peter J.Vesturelli, Editor) Prof. Patricia A. Adler recommends a"middle ground . . . between the extremes of legalizing alldrugs and bearing the costs of the zero tolerance approach."Id. at 260. The author endorses the regulated sale of marijuanawith the use of law enforcement savings for anti-drug abuseprograms aimed at heroin and cocaine. Id. at 262. Prof. Nadelmannhas commented, and we agree, that: "Today, studies similarto that of the Wickesham Commission and the RockefellerFoundation report [on prohibition and alcohol-control strategiesrespectively] are necessary to any systematic evaluation of drugprohibition and its alternatives." Krauss & Lazear,supra, at 242. CONCLUSION For the reasons above stated we agree with the emphasis of theReport on further public dialog, harm reduction and drugtreatment but disagree with its conclusion that drug prohibitionshould be ended. Contents | Feedback | Search DRCNet Library | Schaffer Library | Major Studies | A Wiser Course, Ending DrugProhibition WT02-B01-68IA086-000614-B048-341http://206.61.184.43:80/schaffer/Library/studies/nylawyer/nylawyer.htm 206.61.184.43 19970122023406 text/html 5924HTTP/1.0 200 OKDate: Wednesday, 22-Jan-97 02:34:00 GMTServer: WebSitePro/1.1f (S/N wpo-0deb)Allow-ranges: bytesContent-type: text/htmlLast-modified: Monday, 16-Dec-96 07:35:30 GMTContent-length: 5709 A Wiser Course: Ending Drug Prohibition A Wiser Course: Ending Drug Prohibition A Report of The Special Committee on Drugs and the Law of the Association of the Bar of the City of New York June 14, 1994 Introduction The Costs of Prohibition Distortion of the Judicial System New York State Other States Federal Courts The Judiciary is Impatient with the Present System Efforts to Handle Court Congestion The Prison State Erosion of the Rule of Law and Civil Liberties Perception of Ineffectiveness Perception of a Self-Perpetuating System Police Corruption Poor Children are Victims of the "War on Drugs" Selective Prosecution Erosion of Constitutional Rights Forfeiture's Heavy Hand Erosion of Privacy Rights Prohibition-Induced Violence Prohibition's Failure to Limit Drug Use Prohibition Threatens Public Health Spread of Disease Sharing Needles Trading Sex for Drugs Neglect of Health Avoidance of the Health-Care System Lack of Information and Quality Control Adulterated Drugs, Designer Drugs, and Drugs of Unknown Potency Lack of Knowledge About Safer Use Using Alcohol and Tobacco Instead of "Soft Drugs" Injuries Due to Violence Diversion of Resources from Treatment and Prevention The Sense of Treating Drugs as a Public Health Problem Treatment Works Self-Help Groups Therapeutic Communities Other Inpatient Drug-Free Treatment Programs Outpatient Methadone Maintenance Programs Outpatient Drug-Free Therapy Empirical Research on Effective Drug Treatment Studies Examining the Effects of Treatment on Substance Use Studies Examining the Effects of Drug Treatment on the Consequences of Drug Abuse Education Works Life Skills Training Program Students Taught Awareness and Resistance Project Healthy Choices Student Assistance Program Smart Moves Seattle Social Development Project Programs for Children of Addicts Toward a New Drug Policy Conclusion WT02-B01-69IA086-000614-B049-14http://206.61.184.43:80/schaffer/Library/studies/nylawyer/iif1.htm 206.61.184.43 19970122023418 text/html 17403HTTP/1.0 200 OKDate: Wednesday, 22-Jan-97 02:34:12 GMTServer: WebSitePro/1.1f (S/N wpo-0deb)Allow-ranges: bytesContent-type: text/htmlLast-modified: Saturday, 28-Dec-96 06:44:29 GMTContent-length: 17185 Costs of Prohibition - Threatens Public Health Contents | Feedback | Search DRCNet Library | Schaffer Library | Major Studies | AWiser Course, Ending Drug Prohibition Part II Continued The Costs of Prohibition Prohibition Threatens Public Health Spread of Disease Sharing Needles Because the possession of hypodermic needles isgenerally illegal, users of injectable drugs routinely shareneedles and syringes with one another, often in "shootinggalleries" where dozens of addicts may line up to use asingle needle rented out by the dealers and not sterilizedbetween uses. This sharing of needles has become a major source of transmission ofblood-borne diseases such as acquired immune deficiency syndrome("AIDS") and hepatitis. According to a recent nationalreview, "more than 33% of newAIDS cases occur among injecting drug users or people havingsexual contact with them." In New York State, the majorityof new AIDS cases since 1988 have been reported among users ofinjectable drugs and their sexual partners. Both the Centers forDisease Control and the New York State Department of Health haveestimated that more than 75% ofpediatric AIDS cases are children whose mothers eitherinjected drugs or were the sexual partners of persons whoinjected drugs. The data suggest, at the very least, that sterilehypodermic needles should be readily and freely available to drugusers. So long as drug use remains unlawful, however, free needle distribution is notlikely to attract a substantial portion of the user population.In response, some courts havecircumscribed laws dealing with the unlawful possession ofhypodermic needles by applying defenses of medical necessity. Trading Sex for Drugs Because illicit drugs are expensive, manyaddicts turn to prostitutionto make money to support their habits, or exchange sexualservices directly for drugs. Prostitute drug addicts often do notprotect themselves from contracting sexuallytransmitted diseases carried by their customers, and theypass such diseases on to other customers, their lovers, and theirchildren. The crack epidemic, in particular, has been blamed forthe recently noted resurgence of syphilis and other sexuallytransmitted diseases. Dr. Robert Rolfs of the Centers for DiseaseControl placed the blame squarely on cocaine and its high cost: People---especially women---have high-risk sex and practice prostitution to support their habits. And it is occurring in a relatively poor population where people have a lot of things that prevent their access to treatment. Therefore, they stay infected longer and are more likely to pass their infections on to others. [133]. Fewer addicts would be forced to resort to prostitution if thecurrent prohibitions against drugs were lifted. Neglect of Health Because of addicts' preoccupation with obtainingand using drugs, and the debilitating effects of some of thedrugs themselves, many addicts are in very poor health. Malnutrition is a frequent problemand, in turn, contributes to many others. Addicts' poor healthmakes them especially susceptible to diseases ranging from scurvyand shingles to tuberculosis and the flu. Addicts are also morelikely to contract communicable diseases and therefore morelikely to spread them. The interrelated urban problems ofhomelessness and illegal drug abuse have contributed to thedevelopment of multi-drug-resistantstrains of diseases such as tuberculosis, which was oncethought to be on the verge of eradication. These more virulentdiseases know few geographical limitations and pose risks to thegeneral population. Avoidance of the Health-Care System Individuals who use illegal drugs often put offaddressing their health problems for fear of prosecution or otheradverse consequences (e.g.,rebuffs by doctors, loss of job). This reluctance to seek medicalcare is compounded by the fact that many drug addicts have noprivate physicians and rely instead on public hospitals orclinics for any care they might get. Prohibition, therefore, has perverse results on health; drugabusers tend to enter the health-care system only if and whentheir need for care is acute, which is also when care is mostcostly to deliver. If, for example, a woman avoids pre-natalcare, she may give birth to a baby with low birth weight andother medical difficulties. If a drug abuser puts off seekingtreatment for illnesses and injuries, he or she may end up in theemergency room and the intensivecare ward. Mothers and pregnant women face the additional and justifiablefear that any detectable drug use may be reported as a possibleindication of child abuse or neglect. In many large cityhospitals, the urine of newborn babies is tested for prohibiteddrugs, and mothers whose babies test positive for pre-natalexposure are reported to the child abuse authorities. Untilrecently, in New York City, such babies were routinely kept fromtheir mothers pending investigations that often lasted manymonths, interfering with normal bonding and necessarily adverselyaffecting the infant's development and relationship with theparent. Moreover, these women have, in some jurisdictions, been prosecuted for pre-partum distributionof prohibited drugs. In addition to the obvious costs to the individuals who becomeinfected with catastrophic illnesses directly through drug use,and the high costs to the health care system of treating them,prohibition contributes to the spread of such diseases throughoutsociety, particularly to the sexual partners and children ofinfected drug users. Left untreated, users and addicts are morelikely to give birth to unhealthy children, to abuse or neglecttheir children after they are born, or to have their children placed in foster care. Lack of Information and Quality Control Adulterated Drugs, Designer Drugs, andDrugs of Unknown Potency Because drugs are manufactured anddistributed in secret, it is impossible for users to guardagainst adulteration or to determine the purity and potency ofthe drugs they use. The problem is compounded by drug growers,manufacturers, and distributors who, to minimize the risks ofapprehension, develop and purvey the drug varieties that pack themost intoxicating effect into the smallest package. According toan experienced New York City researcher, The fact that cocaine, heroin and related drugs are illegal encourages the use of injection. Severe statutory restrictions greatly increase the cost of illicit substances to nonmedical users. Injecting provides a way to economize. Injectable forms of opiates and coca are much more concentrated than traditional forms, such as opium or coca tea. Injection provides an intense and economical effect by maximizing the amount of drug that reaches the brain. People who sniff or smoke drugs say that if they inject they need only one third of the amount of the drug to maintain a habit. Because the injection forms of illicit drugs are concentrated, they are [also] relatively easier to ship. [140]. It has been demonstrated that, as law enforcement and criminalpenalties intensify, dealers also find other ways to economize byinventing new drugs---so-called "designer drugs"---thatare not yet prohibited. This places the ill-informed consumers ofsuch drugs at greater risk of overdose and other health problems.Illnesses and deaths have resulted from (1) the introduction ofdangerous substances into drugs that could otherwise have beenused with greater safety, (2) inadvertent overdoses due tovariations in potency, and (3) the development of "designerdrugs" intended to give the effect of familiar intoxicantswith new chemical compositions that put them beyond the reach of current laws.Just as the prohibition against alcohol led to sales of poisonouswood alcohol and the prohibition against abortion led tocoat-hanger abortions, the prohibition against drug manufacture,sale, and possession results in unnecessarydeaths due to adulteration, variable purity, and"designer drugs." This contrasts sharply with thegovernment's current regulation of alcoholic beverages, whichensures that the beverages are pure and that buyers know howstrong they are and what some of their health effects may be.Experts have noted that heightened efforts to enforce drug lawsand amend them to encompass new formulations or ban precursorsubstances may only push dealers totake greater risks, selling ever more potentially dangeroussubstances. Lack of Knowledge About Safer Use Because many drugs are outlawed, individualsconsidering drug use rarely have access to accurate informationabout the effects of drugs. While a cautious user may err on theside of avoiding certain activities while under the use of drugs,he or she may have no way of knowing, beyond trial and error, thepossible adverse health consequences of certain combinations ofdrugs and his or her individual tolerance for particularsubstances. Because of its penchant for exaggeration andcartoonish treatment of the issues, most current education aboutdrugs is not taken seriously by young people. As a result, it isfar less effective than other health education (e.g., aboutnutrition, fitness, and smoking cigarettes). Using Alcohol and Tobacco Instead of"Soft Drugs" Alcohol and tobacco arecompletely legal yet do much more harm, statistically speaking,than illegal drug use. It is also generally recognized thatalcohol, at least when used to excess, can cause aggressive, anti-social behavior.The current prohibitionist laws against marijuana, generallyconsidered an "a-motivational" drug, and otherso-called "soft drugs" have the effect of influencingsome people to choose alcohol over these "soft drugs."Peter Reuter, an economist at the Rand Corporation, concludesthat "If marijuana is a substitute for alcohol..., alcoholis, by definition, a substitute for marijuana. Thus tough marijuana enforcement must increasedrinking." Similarly, Frank Chaloupka, an economist atthe University of Illinois, found through statistical analysis"that states without criminal sanctions against marijuanapossession suffered fewer autofatalities." Finally, Karen Model, a Ph.D. candidate atHarvard, found that "states decriminalizing marijuanareported lower overall rates ofdrug- and alcohol-related emergencies." To the extentthat users are choosing alcohol rather than marijuana or other"soft drugs," the overall public health effects areprobably worse than they would be otherwise. Injuries Due to Violence The high prices commanded by prohibited drugscreate competition among groups and individuals willing to breakthe law to supply drugs to consumers. Their competition oftenbecomes violent and has contributed to the build-up of arms andthe pervasiveness of violencein many areas. Gunshot wounds and other traumas due to theillegal drug business have become commonplace in big-cityhospital emergency rooms. Not only traffickers, but also lawenforcement officers and innocent bystanders are often the victims. Mayor Rudolph Giulianirecently noted: The victims of the [ ] gun battles [of street-level drug dealers] are innocent bystanders---and often young children. Last year alone, about 500 New York City children were shot; of these, 89 were innocent bystanders hit by crossfire. [151]. The cost of prohibiting drugs must be measured in terms oflost lives and expensive medical care and include the hiddencosts of lost productivity and the psychological damage toindividuals and entire communities living in fear, helpless andhopeless. With the possible exceptions of cocaine and PCP, drugs themselves do not generally causeviolent behavior. It is, instead, turf wars for the controlof black markets and the drug users' need for money to purchasesuch substances that leads to violence. Indeed, marijuana andheroin have been shown to render their users disinclined toviolence or incapable of violence while under the influence.These substances are much lessdangerous in this regard than alcohol. Diversion of Resources from Treatment andPrevention Prohibition diverts moneythat could otherwise be used for preventing and treating drugabuse. Federal anti-drug legislation provides a single budget for"supply reduction" and "demand reduction"efforts. Law enforcement agencies have always received much morethan prevention, treatment, and research programs combined. TheABA recently reported that "[s]ince the early 1980s,treatment has been a declining priority. In 1991, treatmentreceived 14% of the $10.5 billion federal drug budget compared to25% ten years earlier." During the same period,"federal spending on lawenforcement increased 737%, with interdiction efforts leadingthe increase." Ending drug prohibition would, by definition,eliminate the need for any special law enforcement funds for druginterdiction. It would also allow for the redirection of lawenforcement resources to concentrate on violent crime and qualityof life issues. Forward A Wiser Course: Ending Drug Prohibition A Report of The Special Committee on Drugs and the Law of the Association of the Bar of the City of New York June 14, 1994 Contents | Feedback | Search DRCNet Library | Schaffer Library | Major Studies | AWiser Course, Ending Drug ProhibitionWT02-B01-70IA087-000632-B036-224http://206.61.184.43:80/schaffer/Activist/GHANDI1.HTM 206.61.184.43 19970122070730 text/html 31241HTTP/1.0 200 OKDate: Wednesday, 22-Jan-97 07:07:19 GMTServer: WebSitePro/1.1f (S/N wpo-0deb)Allow-ranges: bytesContent-type: text/htmlLast-modified: Saturday, 28-Dec-96 07:25:50 GMTContent-length: 31023 A Summary of M.K. Gandhi's Technique for Political Action A Summary of M.K. Gandhi's Technique for Political Action By Mary Sibley February 1995 PREFACE I have prepared this description of the political actiontechnique of M.K. Gandhi at the request of Dave Hall fordistribution to the DrugReform Coordination Network (DRCNet) andother drug policy reform advocates who may have an interest inGandhi's technique. I have read much about Gandhi's technique andknow that I still do not fully comprehend its application andimplications. My knowledge is especially scanty in the area oforganizational structures through which Gandhian campaigns wereconducted, although I surmise that Gandhi's campaignorganizations were highly structured. I am currently seekingtexts describing and analyzing Gandhi's organizationalstructures. If anyone has such a text, I would appreciate accessto it. If anyone has studied Gandhi's life and work and readssomething within this that seems to be wrong, misleading, or amisinterpretation, I would welcome suggestions. In addition, Iwould be glad to participate in further discussion. CREDITS For assistance in organizing my thoughts, I give credit toJoan V. Bondurant, whose book "Conquest of Violence: TheGandhian Philosophy of Conflict" (second edition, 1965,Princeton University Press) I consulted occasionally whilewriting this. In the text that follows, annotations are sparse.If anyone is interested in reading more about a particular topic,let me know and I will provide references. INTRODUCTION How this Discussion Is Organized This discussion is organized into three sections. The firstsection discusses the cultural context and other conditions underwhich Gandhi conceived and conducted political campaigns. Thesecond section discusses the fundamental principles of a Gandhiancampaign. The last section discusses the steps in a Gandhiancampaign and includes my opinions about the similarities betweenthese steps and steps that have been taken by drug policy reformadvocates. A Short Definition of Gandhi's Political TechniqueGandhi's political technique is a process of creatively engagingwith others to transform an unjust cultural, economic, social, orgovernmental system into one that is more just. Scope of Gandhi'sTechnique Gandhi is most famous for his political activism withrespect to ending British rule in India. He used the techniquenot just to work toward reform and ultimately removal of Britishrule in India, but also in many conflict situations betweenIndians only. For example, he organized and led programs designedto change how the upper class Hindus treated the lower classHindus. Gandhi himself considered his most important work theconstructive programs designed to remove the underlying causes ofpoverty and to rebuild strong local economies in impoverishedareas. Without this work, poor Indians would not have had thesustenance needed to participate in the many campaigns that ledto home rule. Martin Luther King applied techniques similar toGandhi's in the United States when working to end civil rightsinjustices based on race. Many of King's programs, speeches, andwritings strongly resemble Gandhi's, with terminology and otherspecifics tailored to the issues and systems at hand. Another20th century leader who has successfully used similar techniqueswhen engaging a cruel and conscience-less government is VaclavHavel. The injustices that these leaders were working to overcomeoccurred in widely varying cultures, social systems, andgovernments. Because I assume that most readers are specificallyinterested in political strategies with regard to changing unjustlaws in the U.S., the following discussion focuses on theapplication of Gandhi's techniques in conflicts with governments. SECTION 1. CONTEXT AND CONDITIONS The Cultural Context in which Gandhi Developed His Techniques India is multi-cultural with most cultures based onreligions. The Hindus are the largest group, followed by theMuslims, who constitute a large minority. Then come a muchsmaller number of Sikhs. Many other religious groups exist, butthey are very small in numbers. People of these religions hadlived side-by-side in relative peace for thousands of years whenthe British arrived. As the British became establishedeconomically, they started an insidious campaign to divide theIndian people along religious lines, especially by planting inMuslims fear of discrimination from Hindus should the British notkeep the Hindu influence in check. The British were quitesuccessful in promoting disunity between the Hindus and Muslims,a legacy that to this day engenders hatred and bloodshed. TheSikhs were selected to be the native component of theBritish-controlled police force. The Sikhs were a large enoughminority to provide enough police for British purposes, and yet asmall enough group that Sikh police were patrolling andincarcerating primarily Hindus and Muslims. After a couple ofhundred years of British encroachment on the cultures,inter-cultural fear and suspicion that had not existed before theBritish became the norm. Gandhi's Starting Place in Society Gandhi was born a Hindu. The Hindu society is stratified(some say "calcified") into classes referred to ascastes. The caste into which one is born determines the jobs onemay have, the education one may pursue, the privileges one isallowed, the places one may gather water, the people with whomone may eat, etc. The highest caste is the Brahmans; the lowest,the untouchables. Outside of these are the outcastes. Theoutcastes are those who violated the rules of their caste to theextent that the authorities within the caste cast them out.Thereafter, they are to be shunned by others in the caste--no onemay help them, they are not allowed to work within the caste,etc. Gandhi was a member of the Bania caste, which participatedin business and government in his home state. Gandhi was publiclyordered an outcaste when he was in his late teens because he wentto Britain to study law; his caste's leaders said it was againstthe religion to leave the country. The leaders actually went sofar as to inform the caste members that if they saw him off whenhe left for England, they would be fined! Gandhi wrote in hisautobiography, "The order had no effect on me, and I took myleave . . ." ( M.K. Gandhi, "An Autobiography: TheStory of My Experiments with the Truth," Part I, ChapterXII, [1927] translation by Mahadev Desai, published in the U.S.in 1957 by Beacon Press, Boston). SECTION 2. FUNDAMENTAL PRINCIPLES Gandhi adhered to four fundamental principles familiar to theWesterner. Three are truth, non-violence, and self-suffering. Thefourth is concerned with means and ends. All campaigns conductedunder his guidance were consistent with these principles(occasional errors arose due to the experimental nature of thetechnique and limitations in campaigners' previous experience).These fundamental principles are summarized below. Truth Gandhi did not fully define the "truth" but insteadsaid that he was seeking after it. He was seeking after itthrough socio-political action, just as others might seek afterit through a mystical or spiritual path, the study ofmathematics, or the creation of art. I gather from my readingsthat the goals of most his contemporaries were much moreimmediate and concrete (like a cost-of-living increase forworkers in a textile mill, the right for untouchables to walkpast a temple used by Brahmans, the replacement of British rulewith home rule, etc.). The replacement of British rule was amighty goal. Those who held it accepted the need for a largenumber of intermediate goals that they collectively agreed (oftenafter long and arduous debate) would contribute directly orindirectly to achievement of the mighty goal. Some of theintermediate goals included things that even the most uneducated,illiterate, and impoverished could grasp immediately, like: (1)Having all Indians weave their own cloth rather than buy Britishcloth (most Indians made their own clothing) and (2) Repealing asalt taxation and regulation scheme that drove the cost of saltso high that the poor could not afford it. Salt is an essentialdietary element in India's climate and can be collected fromIndia's ocean beaches or retrieved from inland deposits by anyoneafter a bit of instruction. The salt laws brought the Britishsignificant revenues. Enforcement of the salt laws included finesand incarceration for those who were caught making or collectingsalt for personal use and most especially if the person wasproducing and distributing marketable amounts outside of thegovernment's regulatory structure. Non-Violence Gandhi maintained that no human or group of humans could knowthe complete truth. No matter how close one thinks one might beto the truth, one could be in error either wholly or in somelesser way that is not immediately apparent. Because of this, hemaintained that no one could use violence toward others to presshis or her view of the truth forward. This principle excluded allacts of violence, and Gandhi's definition of violence was broad.As one might expect, physical violence could not be used againstan opponent. He also maintained that there should be no violencein one's expression and words. The non-violence principlerequired that an opponent be treated with utmost respect. Smearcampaigns aimed at defamation of character were not in hispolitical action toolbox, just as murder of lawmakers, judges,bureaucrats, and police were not in his toolbox. Gandhi'snon-violence is a full antonym for violence. Not only doesnon-violence refrain from destructive acts, it is aggressivelyand provocatively constructive. Thus, Gandhi's campaigns did notseek to defeat an opponent, but instead to convert the opponentto a more just position and to challenge the opponent to act uponthe new position. In addition, Gandhi held that there must be anopportunity for an opponent to save face, so long as nofundamental principle or aim of the action was therebycompromised. Self-Suffering Self-suffering is an integral element of Gandhi's techniqueand a necessary corollary to provocative non-violent action.Self-suffering can take the form of material and socialsacrifice. For example, loss of employment, property, or incomeas a result of holding to one's view of the truth is a form ofself-suffering. Self-suffering reaches its personal extremes inincarceration, physical injury, and the sacrifice of one's life.Gandhi wrote: "Suffering injury in one's own person is . . .of the essence of non-violence and is the chosen substitute forviolence to others." (M.K. Gandhi, "Non-violence inPeace and War," 2nd edition, Ahmedabad: Navajivan, 1944, p.49). He also wrote, "Non-violence in its dynamic conditionmeans conscious suffering. It does not mean meek submission tothe will of the evil-doer, but it means the pitting of one'swhole soul against the will of the tyrant." (M.K. Gandhi, in"Young India," August 11, 1920 ). Self-suffering ispreferred over submitting to humiliation and pr ovides a way topreserve one's personal dignity in the face of those who wouldtreat one unjustly. Throughout his writings and campaigns, Gandhiemphasized that inviting self-suffering is something that mustnot be done lightly. One who invites self-suffering must beprepared for the fullest possible sacrifice that may result fromone's actions. Means and Ends Gandhi believed that means do not serve ends, rather meanscreate ends. Thus, to attain an end that is positive andtruthful, one must use means that are positive and truthful. Thisphilosophy can be summarized by his statement, "the meansare the ends in the making." Means that create ends have twointeresting implications. First, one cannot define a just,non-violent end and then use unjust and violent means to attainit--for the end will be in character with the means used. Thisview precludes taking actions under the philosophy summarized inthe statement "the ends justify the means"--aphilosophy that seems to permeate current U.S. policy-making.Indeed, the "ends" being created by current governmentpolicy with regard to some drugs are very different than theofficially stated goals. A second implication is that, while one must always be movingtoward a goal of pure truth and justice, the end cannot bedefined precisely in advance. Each action one takes creates thenext action and that one, the next, each action always in keepingwith the last and moving progressively closer to truth andjustice. Through actively engaging with fellow activists and theopponent, one grows in understanding of what must be done, a stepat a time, to create the most just and truthful end. The technique becomes dynamic when it succeeds in provokinginternal change in the opponent. Thus the knowledge andunderstanding of both the activist and the opponent growsimultaneously toward truth and justice. However, the techniqueis not self-propelling; it is usually used in a context of astagnant, inert, or deliberately destructive force and requirestremendous energy. The activist must constantly reassess theopponent's comprehension and adjust the program so that it ismore than reactive to the opponent's change--every change must beviewed as an opportunity to press the campaign further forward. What Gandhi's Contemporaries Thought About the FundamentalPrinciples A few of Gandhi's contemporaries adhered to the fundamentalprinciples as inviolable guides by which to conduct one'spersonal life as well as one's social or political actions.However, the majority of his contemporaries accepted thefundamental principles as policies. They recognized the successof the principles in empowering the disempowered and realizedthat, even if viewed as policies, the principles were the key towinning "home rule" with an unarmed and impoverishedarmy of the disenfranchised. This acceptance as policy rather than principle caused Gandhisome dismay. When the activists with whom he was working rejectedthese even as policy, he would leave the political sphere andreturn to his constructive work toward remedying the devastatingeconomic problems in the villages of India. Eventually, hiscontemporaries always asked him to return to the politicalsphere. SECTION 3. STEPS OF A GANDHIAN CAMPAIGN The Progress of a Campaign Upon discovering an opportunity for reform or change, acampaign is conducted through several steps. Each step is anecessary prerequisite to the next, for each must fully developthe context in which the next occurs. The early steps develop thepublic stage upon which later steps, if they become necessary,can be played out. Some of the steps initiated early in thecampaign, especially education, continue throughout the campaign.The progression is designed to maximize early in the campaign allopportunities for the opponent to make positive changes and saveface without campaigners moving to more provocative measures. Thecareful progression provides fullest opportunity for thecampaigners to adjust their position if they discover that theyhave inadvertently violated a fundamental principle. It givescampaign leaders the opportunity, through engaging with theopponent early in relatively low-risk situations, torealistically assess their own strengths and weaknesses and thoseof the campaigners and to determine what more provocative stepscan and cannot be taken successfully. A Summary of the Steps of a Gandhian Campaign The steps of a campaign are: -- Investigation of the facts, situation, and conditions -- Education of the campaigners, the public, and the opponent -- Negotiation and arbitration -- Preparation of the campaigners for more provocativemeasures -- Agitation -- Issuing of an ultimatum -- Economic boycott and forms of strike -- Non-cooperation -- Civil disobedience -- Creation of alternate structures In India, these steps eventually led to the establishment ofa parallel government in some places, which provided Indians withsome of the experience needed to assume self-government whenBritish rule was removed. The steps of a campaign are described in the paragraphsbelow. In brackets I have mentioned my current opinion of wheredrug policy reform advocates have made the most progress.Investigation of the Facts, Situation, and Conditions A Gandhiancampaign is founded on an objective assessment of the facts. Allfacts are considered; none are rejected or downplayed if they donot fit the expectations of the campaigners--to do so would be tomove away from the complete truth. The situation of campaignersand those experiencing the injustice are examined. As full anunderstanding of the situation as possible is developed among allinvolved. The conditions at the time--public awareness andopinion, the situation of the opponent, and other relevantfactors are all considered and weighed. [Drug policy reform advocates seem to me to be strongesthere. The only difficulty I've seen is the occasional attempt toreject or downplay a pertinent fact that doesn't quite"fit," but this is usually remedied through discussionamong reform advocates.] Education of the Campaigners, the Public, and the Opponent With the facts in hand and the situation and conditions fullyexamined, education begins. All who join the campaign must beeducated; they become representatives through their associationand must be fully informed. The public is often unaware of ormisinformed about injustices; they must be educated to understandwhy change is needed. Many opponents are similar to thepublic--they are unaware or misinformed. Gandhi felt that therewere only a few pponents who would actually want injustices to beperpetuated or continue. Gandhi was an optimist and believed eventhose few could be converted. [Drug policy reform advocates areweak here, but getting stronger. At the International Conferencefor Drug Policy Reform last November, attendees recognized theneed to raise public awareness about injustices of the drug war.I understand that organizations like NORML are following up withactivities geared toward education of the general public. TheWashington Hemp Education Network (W.H.E.N.) was started by agroup of marijuana policy reform activists in Washington Statewho recognized the need for education. My personal experience hasbeen that many of the people who join W.H.E.N. recognize theinjustices and are looking for the facts. Others join becausethey have much knowledge and want opportunities to educate andpersuade others. Some relish entering the opponents' sphere andeducating! Also, Cliff Schaffer's persuasive strategies providean excellent example of guidelines that have been tailored tomove the opponent toward the truth given an opponent's entryposition in a discussion. Such guidelines must be assessed andmodified periodically to ensure that they keep pace with theinevitable progress the opponents will make when so persuaded.] Negotiation and Arbitration Remedy for the injustice is sought first through establishedchannels within the existing system. Petitioning for change ofunjust laws, challenging unjust laws in the courts, and otherlegislative or legal methods fall under this step. [Drug policy reform advocates working on reform of marijuanalaws have done plenty of negotiation and arbitration at thefederal level and in many states. I am not aware of as high of alevel of negotiation effort for substances like heroin, cocaine,etc.] Preparation of the Campaigners for More Provocative Measures Immediately upon recognizing the existence of a conflictsituation that might lead to more provocative measures, Gandhi'stechnique calls for intense preparation. The motives ofcampaigners are examined, weaknesses of the group are identified,and exercises in self-discipline undertaken. The goal of thisstep is to assess and develop the campaigners' ability to adhereto fundamental principles and to continue action in the face ofsignificant risks. There is much discussion of the issues athand, the current situation and conditions, and of the potentialresults of various courses of action. [I have not heard of drugpolicy reform advocates undertaking such self-examination andparticipating in mutually agreed upon exercises inself-discipline. I have heard discussions and analyses aboutpotential actions that fall under subsequent steps.] Agitation Agitation includes legal high-profile activities such asrallies and picketing. Such events are opportunities for theleaders to assess the group's readiness to proceed with higherprofile and more difficult steps without deteriorating intoviolence. Mass gatherings also provide an opportunity to begininstructing campaigners who have not been trained previously inthe fundamental principles, to communicate developments in thecampaign, and to explain the next step. [I haven't heard much about this kind of agitation. AgitationI have heard about has involved small numbers of people and, asfar as I know, it has not been part of a sequence of steps suchas described here. I do not believe that Hemp Fests, even if noone smoked, would meet the criteria by which Gandhi definedagitation because they are not part of a highly focused politicalcampaign and do not have a strong educational focus.] Issuing of an Ultimatum A strong appeal is made to the opponent. The appeal is quiteexplicit. It states the problem, identifies a constructivesolution and the responsibilities of each party in the solution,and explains what the campaigners will do if the opponent doesnot participate in the solution. The ultimatum should includeprovision for the opponent to save face within the scope of thefundamental principles. The opponent is fully informed about thenext step. In fact, from this step forward, every single steptaken is preceded by a full advance disclosure to the opponent ofwhat will be done, when, and where. Before each step commences,the opponent is offered the opportunity to change. [If drug policy reform advocates started a Gandhian campaigntoday, I believe that they would be years from being able toissue ultimatums that actually carried any weight.] Economic Boycott and Forms of Strike In India, Indians boycotted foreign cloth with such successthat they had a significant impact on the mills in Britain.Strikes have been used extensively in the U.S. for in all kindsof reform campaigns A scene in the movie "Gandhi" showsthe power of a nationwide strike. [To conduct an economic boycottrequires economic alternatives for the boycotters. To conduct aneffective strike, a campaign needs great numbers of campaignersand who have economic alternatives. As far as I can tell, drugpolicy reform advocates are generally dependent on the dominanteconomic structures and so are weak on this point.] Non-Cooperation Non-cooperation involves refusal to support the portions ofthe system that require reform or accept benefits from thesystem. For example, during the campaign to remove British rule,Indians resigned from government posts, removed their childrenfrom government schools, returned awards and medals that they hadreceived from the government, and so on. Economic boycott andstrikes described in the previous step can be regarded as formsof non-cooperation. [The judges who refuse to try drug cases areengaged in non-cooperation. People who refuse to provide urinesamples as a condition of employment are engaged innon-cooperation.] Civil Disobedience Civil disobedience extends non-cooperation to the active andopen breaking of selected laws. Gandhi set complete and voluntaryobedience to laws as a prerequisite for civil disobedience. Lawsto be broken were selected very carefully for their position atthe heart of the problem or for their symbolic value. Civildisobedience involves a deliberate courting of arrest and, uponarrest, no defense is offered in the courts. In fact, fulladmission of guilt is required. The prosecutors, juries, andjudges are challenged to see the injustice of the law that theyare defending against the civil disobedient and to cease theircooperation with the injustice. In mass campaigns involving civildisobedience in India, prisons filled up very quickly. Veryoften, the leaders were arrested in an attempt to dishearten thecampaigners and end the campaign. Sometimes they were arrestedupon delivery to the authorities of their notice of intent todisobey! Other times, the government ignored them completelywhich, of course, encouraged more people to join the campaign. Ifthe government ignores the first civil disobedients, theprovocative nature of increasing numbers of civil disobedientseventually compels the government to act. And compelling theopponent to act is the point of civil disobedience. Two importantorganizational points must be mentioned here. Every campaign inwhich the leaders may be arrested must provide succession ofleadership. A succession procedure must be planned in advance sothat civil disobedience continues apace no matter how manyleaders have been arrested. The second point involves support forthe families of the civil disobedients. There must always bepeople who are willing to forego civil disobedience and remainfree to take care of the children, the aged, and the ill. Supportpeople should be identified in advance and should, under nocircumstances, court arrest. [Medicinal marijuana suppliers and users come to mind as apossible example of civil disobedients, although an analysiswould reveal that very few of these civil disobedients actuallymeet all of the criteria set forth by Gandhi.] Creation of Alternate Structures If, after all of these steps, the existing system fails tobecome more just, an alternate means of ensuring justice must bedeveloped. This is especially important when the existing systemis so corrupt that people are disobeying it not just as part of acampaign, but simply because they find themselves unable toconduct their lives peacefully without disobeying it. Such asystem is approaching inevitable collapse by virtue of itsinherent flaws. Alternate structures must be built in advance notonly to provide for immediate needs, but also to prevent (or atleast mitigate) the potential release of destructive,anger-driven energy that often follows an oppressive system'scollapse. [Medicinal marijuana buyers' clubs provide an exampleof an alternate structure.] Demands of Gandhi's Technique on Campaigners Gandhi's technique exacts a great deal from a campaign'sleadership and those who follow them. They must tirelessly planand monitor the progress of the campaign, reassess their positionand the position of the opponent, and respond creatively andprovocatively to events as they unfold. Leaders must be flexibleenough to respond to change. At the same time, they must have the insight to know whichpotential responses might lead to stagnation of the campaign orwill compromise a fundamental principle--for either will lead tosetbacks. Leaders must be consummate communicators: with the opponent,the public, potential supporters, and those who have joined thecampaign--else misunderstandings and misinterpretations can ariseas the campaign is adjusted to changing conditions and events.Leaders must have an ability to organize, inspire, and use fullythe talents of an extremely diverse group of people who volunteertheir services to a campaign. People with widely varyingperspectives and beliefs must be transformed from a disorganizedscattering of supporters in conflict not just with thegovernment, but often with each other, to a coherent, responsiveunit that can target its actions and responses with great force.Finally, all in the campaign must have an ability to manage ordispel the tension and anger that can arise when their effortsappear to be frustrated, when there are disagreements amongcampaigners, and when they directly confront an often-hostileopponent. CONCLUSION Many drug policy reform advocates have been using politicalaction techniques similar (though not identical) to the stepsdescribed above. But drug policy reform advocates have notcatalyzed into a dynamic, coherent group that can actsynchronously to achieve a clearly defined goal. I believe that,if reform advocates' efforts were synthesized in a Gandhiansequence with an underpinning of the fundamental principles,success would be inevitable. --Mary CliffSchaffer's Home Page WT02-B01-71IA087-000632-B019-235http://206.61.184.43:80/schaffer/library/graphs/17.htm 206.61.184.43 19970122092705 text/html 1845HTTP/1.0 200 OKDate: Wednesday, 22-Jan-97 09:26:56 GMTServer: WebSitePro/1.1f (S/N wpo-0deb)Allow-ranges: bytesContent-type: text/htmlLast-modified: Saturday, 28-Dec-96 06:38:22 GMTContent-length: 1628 Drug War Costs Contents | Feedback | Search DRCNet Library | Schaffer Library Contents | Feedback | Search DRCNet Library | Schaffer Library WT02-B01-72IA086-000615-B002-345http://206.61.184.43:80/schaffer/Library/graphs/10.htm 206.61.184.43 19970122025032 text/html 1875HTTP/1.0 200 OKDate: Wednesday, 22-Jan-97 02:50:24 GMTServer: WebSitePro/1.1f (S/N wpo-0deb)Allow-ranges: bytesContent-type: text/htmlLast-modified: Saturday, 28-Dec-96 06:38:34 GMTContent-length: 1658 Rates for homicides from 1900 to the Present Contents | Feedback | Search DRCNet Library | Schaffer Library Contents | Feedback | Search DRCNet Library | Schaffer Library WT02-B01-73IA086-000615-B003-19http://206.61.184.43:80/schaffer/Library/graphs/17.htm 206.61.184.43 19970122025129 text/html 1845HTTP/1.0 200 OKDate: Wednesday, 22-Jan-97 02:51:24 GMTServer: WebSitePro/1.1f (S/N wpo-0deb)Allow-ranges: bytesContent-type: text/htmlLast-modified: Saturday, 28-Dec-96 06:38:22 GMTContent-length: 1628 Drug War Costs Contents | Feedback | Search DRCNet Library | Schaffer Library Contents | Feedback | Search DRCNet Library | Schaffer Library WT02-B01-74IA087-000632-B019-132http://206.61.184.43:80/schaffer/library/graphs/08.htm 206.61.184.43 19970122092604 text/html 1889HTTP/1.0 200 OKDate: Wednesday, 22-Jan-97 09:25:56 GMTServer: WebSitePro/1.1f (S/N wpo-0deb)Allow-ranges: bytesContent-type: text/htmlLast-modified: Saturday, 28-Dec-96 06:38:36 GMTContent-length: 1672 Risk of death - Deaths per year per 100,000 people at risk Contents | Feedback | Search DRCNet Library | Schaffer Library Contents | Feedback | Search DRCNet Library | Schaffer Library WT02-B01-75IA086-000615-B003-116http://206.61.184.43:80/schaffer/Library/graphs/25.htm 206.61.184.43 19970122025305 text/html 1867HTTP/1.0 200 OKDate: Wednesday, 22-Jan-97 02:53:00 GMTServer: WebSitePro/1.1f (S/N wpo-0deb)Allow-ranges: bytesContent-type: text/htmlLast-modified: Saturday, 28-Dec-96 06:38:05 GMTContent-length: 1650 Annual Deaths from Drugs in the US Contents | Feedback | Search DRCNet Library | Schaffer Library Contents | Feedback | Search DRCNet Library | Schaffer Library WT02-B01-76IA086-000615-B003-130http://206.61.184.43:80/schaffer/library/graphs/26.htm 206.61.184.43 19970122025314 text/html 1894HTTP/1.0 200 OKDate: Wednesday, 22-Jan-97 02:53:08 GMTServer: WebSitePro/1.1f (S/N wpo-0deb)Allow-ranges: bytesContent-type: text/htmlLast-modified: Saturday, 28-Dec-96 06:38:02 GMTContent-length: 1677 Arrests for Drug and Alcohol Violations in the US1940-1990 Contents | Feedback | Search DRCNet Library | Schaffer Library Contents | Feedback | Search DRCNet Library | Schaffer Library WT02-B01-77IA086-000615-B002-318http://206.61.184.43:80/schaffer/Library/graphs/08.htm 206.61.184.43 19970122025019 text/html 1889HTTP/1.0 200 OKDate: Wednesday, 22-Jan-97 02:50:11 GMTServer: WebSitePro/1.1f (S/N wpo-0deb)Allow-ranges: bytesContent-type: text/htmlLast-modified: Saturday, 28-Dec-96 06:38:36 GMTContent-length: 1672 Risk of death - Deaths per year per 100,000 people at risk Contents | Feedback | Search DRCNet Library | Schaffer Library Contents | Feedback | Search DRCNet Library | Schaffer Library WT02-B01-78IA087-000632-B019-110http://206.61.184.43:80/schaffer/library/graphs/07.htm 206.61.184.43 19970122092550 text/html 1930HTTP/1.0 200 OKDate: Wednesday, 22-Jan-97 09:25:41 GMTServer: WebSitePro/1.1f (S/N wpo-0deb)Allow-ranges: bytesContent-type: text/htmlLast-modified: Saturday, 28-Dec-96 06:38:39 GMTContent-length: 1713 Habitual Use Potential Contents | Feedback | Search DRCNet Library | Schaffer Library | Major Studies Contents | Feedback | Search DRCNet Library | Schaffer Library | Major StudiesWT02-B01-79IA087-000632-B020-89http://206.61.184.43:80/schaffer/library/graphs/25.htm 206.61.184.43 19970122092900 text/html 1867HTTP/1.0 200 OKDate: Wednesday, 22-Jan-97 09:28:52 GMTServer: WebSitePro/1.1f (S/N wpo-0deb)Allow-ranges: bytesContent-type: text/htmlLast-modified: Saturday, 28-Dec-96 06:38:05 GMTContent-length: 1650 Annual Deaths from Drugs in the US Contents | Feedback | Search DRCNet Library | Schaffer Library Contents | Feedback | Search DRCNet Library | Schaffer Library WT02-B01-80IA087-000632-B035-185http://206.61.184.43:80/schaffer/Activist/localact.htm 206.61.184.43 19970122070412 text/html 7701HTTP/1.0 200 OKDate: Wednesday, 22-Jan-97 07:03:58 GMTServer: WebSitePro/1.1f (S/N wpo-0deb)Allow-ranges: bytesContent-type: text/htmlLast-modified: Saturday, 28-Dec-96 07:25:16 GMTContent-length: 7484 Local Action strategies for drug policy reform LocalAction strategies by Clifford A. Schaffer 1. Contactyour local media. Tell them about these web pages and theinformation on them. 2. Readthe newspapers and respond. Make it a point to read the largest newspapers in your areaand be alert for drug-policy related news stories. Write short,punchy letters to the editor to make your views heard. 3. Contactthe talk shows in your area. Most TV and radio talk shows need a steady stream ofcontroversial subjects to make the shows interesting. Sooner orlater, they will all do a show on drug policy. Go through your TVlistings and locate all talk and news shows. Call the stationsand ask for the producers of the show. In most cases, it willsurprise you how easy it is to get through. Tell them about theresolution and the people supporting it. Let them know that thereare prominent people now willing to come forward and debate thisidea publicly. Producers are probably extremely busy, so keep itshort, punchy, and sweet. Have some juicy "sound bites"planned to stimulate interest. Follow up with a letter andprinted material such as the things I have enclosed. Keep intouch with them every ninety days or so, just to make sure thatthey don't forget you. If you get a spot on a good TV show and then don't know whatto do -- call me. We'll work something out. 4. Developa constituency. Contact groups and members of groups to put on a presentationand persuade them to support the resolution. There are all kindsof groups which may support this resolution, each for their ownindividual reasons. They include African-Americans, ministers,doctors, medical patients, law enforcement officials, AIDSgroups, and many others. Pick groups that you think you canpersuade and then develop the issues which are most important tothem. 5. Pickone influential person at a time and persuade them. When you have persuaded them that it is time for a change,and that we should at least look at other drug policy options,get them to commit to going with you to persuade at least twomore influential people. Use this technique to "move up theladder" to more and more influential people. Use the "intervention group" approach. Assemble asmall group of people whom your target will view as influentialand persuasive. Arrange a meeting where all can attend and haveall those people ask the person to reconsider their point ofview. Don't ask them to support legalization ordecriminalization, because it is unlikely that you could persuadethem in one meeting anyway. Just get them to admit that there isenough of a question about the issue that it is time tore-examine the evidence and commit to the investigation of thepossibility of change. 6. Enlistyour friends to create a steady "rain" of resolutionson the White House. Get everyone to commit to sending a resolution a week. Keepit up until we get the commission. Let Clinton know that thisresolution is not going to go away. 7. Developphone networks to get people to respond when we need them torespond. The National Rifle Association is powerful because, at anygiven time, it can bombard the President and Congress withmillions of letters and phone calls. We need the same type ofresponse. 8. Put ondebates and seminars at colleges. Colleges and universities often have philosophy, publicadministration, law enforcement, or political science professorswho might like to put on a public forum or debate on drug policy.Call the local colleges and ask for the heads of thesedepartments, or anyone else you think might be interested.Suggest the idea to them. I have enclosed a sample speech from one of the debates I wasin. You can edit it as appropriate to your needs. I have neverhad anyone make an intelligent comeback to that speech. The enclosed charts can be blown up to 18 inch by 24 inchsize by places such as Kinko's Copies for about $2.50 to $5.00each, depending upon whether you get them on ordinary paper or oncard stock. For large audiences, consider taking 35mm slidepictures of the graphs. If you are out in the middle of the woodsand can't do either of those things, write to me and, if you payfor it, I will have it done for you. The biggest problem you may have with this tactic is that thelocal gendarmes and prosecutors are becoming increasinglyreluctant to come out in public and defend the drug war. Theyhave been getting their butts kicked far too much lately and eventhe most fervent drug warriors are now having a hard time withtheir beliefs. 9. Contactlocal civic organizations. In most towns, there are various local civic organizationsthat might want to have presentations on the drug war for any ofa variety of reasons. Some of them will do it just for theentertainment value. Go through the phone book and locate theRotarians, the Elks, etc. and ask them if they would beinterested. 10. Writeto and call your local Congressman. Most members of Congress are chowder-heads, but there aresome out there who are intelligent enough to read the facts andstand up for the truth. We won't know who they are until peoplelike you can find them. 11.Produce Local Access Cable Shows. You can become a producer for local access cable channelswith as little as five hours of mostly free classes. Call yourlocal cable company for information. Once you become a produceryou can use their facilities to tape shows, or you can broadcasttapes which were prepared by others. We have already done this afew times and have a number of shows which can be made availableto anyone who is hooked in to their local access cable channels. 12. Don'tget discouraged. It may take time to build your persuasive skills and even thebest of us don't persuade everybody the first time around. Keepit up, despite the setbacks, and you will eventually prevail. CliffSchaffer's Home Page WT02-B01-81IA087-000632-B019-150http://206.61.184.43:80/schaffer/library/graphs/10.htm 206.61.184.43 19970122092614 text/html 1875HTTP/1.0 200 OKDate: Wednesday, 22-Jan-97 09:26:06 GMTServer: WebSitePro/1.1f (S/N wpo-0deb)Allow-ranges: bytesContent-type: text/htmlLast-modified: Saturday, 28-Dec-96 06:38:34 GMTContent-length: 1658 Rates for homicides from 1900 to the Present Contents | Feedback | Search DRCNet Library | Schaffer Library Contents | Feedback | Search DRCNet Library | Schaffer Library WT02-B01-82IA086-000615-B002-376http://206.61.184.43:80/schaffer/Library/graphs/12.htm 206.61.184.43 19970122025052 text/html 1889HTTP/1.0 200 OKDate: Wednesday, 22-Jan-97 02:50:42 GMTServer: WebSitePro/1.1f (S/N wpo-0deb)Allow-ranges: bytesContent-type: text/htmlLast-modified: Saturday, 28-Dec-96 06:38:28 GMTContent-length: 1672 Homicide Motives - Reasons for Murder in the United States Contents | Feedback | Search DRCNet Library | Schaffer Library Contents | Feedback | Search DRCNet Library | Schaffer Library WT02-B01-83IA086-000615-B003-38http://206.61.184.43:80/schaffer/Library/graphs/18.htm 206.61.184.43 19970122025142 text/html 1847HTTP/1.0 200 OKDate: Wednesday, 22-Jan-97 02:51:33 GMTServer: WebSitePro/1.1f (S/N wpo-0deb)Allow-ranges: bytesContent-type: text/htmlLast-modified: Saturday, 28-Dec-96 06:38:19 GMTContent-length: 1630 The Drug Deficit Contents | Feedback | Search DRCNet Library | Schaffer Library Contents | Feedback | Search DRCNet Library | Schaffer Library WT02-B01-84IA087-000632-B013-349http://206.61.184.43:80/schaffer/support/Donations.htm 206.61.184.43 19970122090729 text/html 6886HTTP/1.0 200 OKDate: Wednesday, 22-Jan-97 09:07:23 GMTServer: WebSitePro/1.1f (S/N wpo-0deb)Allow-ranges: bytesContent-type: text/htmlLast-modified: Saturday, 28-Dec-96 05:10:43 GMTContent-length: 6669 Cash Donations Contents | Feedback | Search DRCNet Library | Schaffer Library How You Can Make Cash Donations to Support the SchafferOnline Library Introduction and Explanation Where the Contributions Go Snail Mail Contributions Contributions by 900 number Contributions by credit card (coming soon) Introduction and Explanation We are talking about money, so let's be frank.This library is free and open to the public without any chargewhatsoever, and it will remain so as long as I am able to manageit. But it does take more than a fair amount of time, labor, andmoney to make it happen. Cash contributions are alwaysappreciated and are a real help in getting the resources we needto build the library. I have received small contributions from timeto time but they do not match my own personal out-of-pocketexpenses by any means, and probably never will. While I willaccept contributions from anyone who wishes to give, there is noreasonable expectation that this effort will ever produce aprofit for me. I now have more than 50,000 pages of materialto scan, type in, or otherwise add to the library, much of itsent in by major researchers around the world. For the vastmajority of it, I will have to donate my own time to the cause,or persuade my wife to do it, taking time away from efforts whichmight have earned us a better income. Some of this information isjust as fascinating as the best of the pieces which are alreadyup there. You can make a general contribution to thelibrary as a whole. In this case, we will use the money towardthe projects which we currently feel are the top priority. You can make a specific contribution to aparticular project. You may select one of the works in progresson the Specific Contributions page, our you may write in your ownideas for what you would like to see done with the money. Where the Contributions Go Contributions made through this screen are madeto Clifford A. and Yvonne Schaffer as individuals and are nottax-deductible. There is no formal organization behind thiseffort, either profit or non-profit. It is provided andmaintained by individuals only. How do you know that we will use the money forthe stated purpose? Well, the best answer is that we have beendoing this for several years without any contributions, and wewill continue to do it regardless of whether you or anyone elsecontributes. You must have some faith that we, as individuals,will use your contribution for the stated purpose. If you don'thave faith in that, based on past performance, don't make acontribution. How to Contribute by 900 Number You can make a contribution by calling a 900 number and thecontribution will be billed to your phone bill. Call 1-900-443-3030 to donate $10.00 Call 1-900-950-9900 to donate $15.00 Call 1-900-988-9090 to donate $25.00 Call 1-900-950-0001 to donate $30.00 When the operator answers, give them System ID 2009421 The operator will give you a numeric code in return. Enter the code and your information in the form below, and click on the submit button. Thanks! Contribution Form Please note: All information is optional, except the code obtained from the 900 number. Code received from the 900 number: Name: E-mail Address: Street address: City: State: Zip code: Telephone: If you are in a foreign country and your address doesn't fit above, please enter it here. If you would like to fund a specific effort, please describe it here. Contents | Feedback | Search DRCNet Library | Schaffer Library WT02-B01-85IA087-000632-B035-108http://206.61.184.43:80/schaffer/Activist/whatnext.htm 206.61.184.43 19970122070331 text/html 19461HTTP/1.0 200 OKDate: Wednesday, 22-Jan-97 07:03:23 GMTServer: WebSitePro/1.1f (S/N wpo-0deb)Allow-ranges: bytesContent-type: text/htmlLast-modified: Saturday, 28-Dec-96 07:24:45 GMTContent-length: 19243 What's Next? for Drug Legalization What's Next? by Clifford A. Schaffer This is my view of what is the current most important step inpromoting drug policy reform. This includes some suggestions onhow you can help. WHAT IS THE MAIN PRIORITY AT THIS POINT? A few people have asked the basic question, What's next? Whatis the main priority at this point? A good question. In order to answer it correctly we have toback up and review the current state of affairs. WHERE AREWE WITH RESPECT TO THE GOALS? First, it is necessary to establish where we are with respectto our goals. Atlanta has come and gone. I don't think the drugwarriors got as much publicity as perhaps they wanted, and itlooks like a flash in the pan. No doubt they will try to usetheir resolution as proof of something when they are pressed in the debate. In their rathersimplistic view of the issue they have confused the main pointand will continue to lose debates as time goes on. As Drug CzarLee Brown has recently stated, their strategy will be to pretendthat the issue doesn't exist. They just don't want to hear aboutit. The bottom line is that Atlanta won't do much to change thelong term trend in public thinking, particularly if we areintelligent about what we do. The trend is going our way and willcontinue to go our way. Little by little, we are working our wayto a majority. THE HOOVERRESOLUTION? Alan asks if the main priority at this point should be topush the Hoover Resolution. In a sense, that should be the mainpriority, but we have to recognize the underlying issuesinvolved. The Hoover Resolution was built upon the recognition of thesingle biggest flaw behind the drug war -- ignorance. No onecould support these kinds of policies if they had even read theevidence, so I knew that every drug warrior could be defeated ifyou could just get to the evidence. A good knowledge of theevidence is enough to publicly destroy any of them. The Hoover Resolution has already been successful to acertain extent. The last Crime Bill provided for a commissionwhich is due to start work in 1996. They are now selecting peopleto sit on the commission, but I have no idea of their progress onselecting any members. There is still some question about whetherit will come off or, if it does, who will be on it or how deeplyit will delve into the issues. Regardless of the commission, we should be prepared with theinformation the commission should read, or that anyone shouldread on this issue. We should have such complete evidence andresearch on the issue that anyone who wants information on theissue will have to come to us. IS IT PROPER TO REFER TO IT AS THE HOOVER RESOLUTION? No, but I often do it anyway. SHOULD WE POST THE HOOVER RESOLUTION ON A FORM? Sure. As long as we follow all of the original rules of theHoover Resolution -- that is, it must be very clear what thepeople are agreeing to -- only what the Resolution states.Signatures must include name, title, mailing address, and theform should ask them if they would like to join any of thevarious national organizations. MEMBERSHIPSUBSCRIPTION PAGES We should have an independent membership page for each of theorganizations covered under our group. People should be allowedto subscribe on-line. We don't have to hassle the problems withcredit cards or anything yet, just let them enter their name andaddress and the organization can send them an envelope. WHY WILLTHE DRUG WAR FALL? The drug war will eventually fall for the same reason thatcommunism fell. That is, they are both repressive systems whichdepend upon hiding or ignoring knowledge iin pursuit of anideological goal. As such they are wildly impractical, and thatimpracticality becomes more apparent as more knowledge becomesavailable. The Soviet Union fell because, in order to enforcetheir restrictions on knowledge, they had to put photocopymachines under lock and key and require forms to be filled outevery time someone wanted to make a copy. You can imagine theeffect that would have on a modern competitive business. Theinvention of the personal computer was their complete downfall.It became apparent that they could not have a modern economy ifthey did not have person computers, fax machines, and the like.But, of course, that meant that everyone was a publisher. Ifeveryone is a publisher, sooner or later the truth is going toget out. Computers and the Internet will be the key elements whichbring down the drug war. Political systems based on ignorancewill come down because of the information which can be madeavailable to anyone through computers. That is also thefundamental idea behind the CD ROM -- widespread public educationof the facts. We will win our struggle as soon as the publicknows the facts. We have taken the first steps with the formalestablishment of our org. #1PRIORITY -- GET THE KNOWLEDGE ASSEMBLED Our Number One Priority at this point should be to locate allof the information on drug policy that we can find, convert it tocomputer format, and post it in a commonly accessed place on theweb. We should set up an interlinked network of web pagesaccessible from a single web page which serves as a directory.Behind these web pages should be all of the information we canget. Remember all the times that people on the net have askedquestions or argued about some aspect of the drug issue? No more.Any time anyone has a question, we should be able to pointdirectly to documents on-line which provide an immediate answer. WHAT KIND OF INFORMATION? Anything relevant to the subject. We have nothing at all tofear from the truth and you will notice that, on my web pages, Iwill include materials which are propaganda of the opposition.Ultimately, we gain the most from the broadest range ofinformation. We should scan, retrieve, enter by hand, or dowhatever we can to build the best library anyone has ever seen onthe subject. We have to make our web sites an absolute must-seefor any member of the media who wants to do anything on thesubject. (Please note that, even while the public as a whole maynot be on the net yet, the media is far more likely to beconnected to the net. This is an issue on which we can, ineffect, force their behavior. If our web pages have enoughinformation, they will be forced to come to us.) Think of it this way. In the course of these conversations wehave passed back and forth a lot of good solid information toeach other, such as the information put forth on hemp, or thebackgrounds of Voth and Nahas. That kind of information should beposted so it is available to anyone who wants it, any time theyneed it. The only real difference is that we should use a lessconversational style. That is, when we post the information tothe library, it should be in "encyclopedia style" A CENTRAL ENTRY POINT - The World's Best Library on DrugPolicy. Right now, if we want to tell the media about our growinglibrary of on-line information, we would have to give them thenames of a multitude of web sites and tell them to go poke aroundon their own. We need one main menu page to give them for thelibrary. We should establish a central entry point to all the websites of interest. This one home page would list all of the otherweb pages which have factual information of interest on thesubject. This will make it easy for us to give the media a singleaccess point where they can find all of the information. That isimportant in uniformly advertising it to the media around theworld. That central point should have an index (updated once a monthperhaps) which will point to each of the web sites and providesome sort of explanation as to what kind of materials are behindit. MAKE SURE THE MEDIA KNOWS WHERE TO GO FOR INFO Then we will have to make sure that ALL the media knows thatthey have to go to our page if they are going to discuss the drugissue. That will require a dedicated campaign to publish thelocation of our unified home page to all media sources. Our nextpriority will be to make sure that everyone in the media knowswhere to look. We will each have to contact our local newssources and make sure they know. It should be mentioned as astandard reference in every letter to the editor, for example. Weshould mention our unified home page everywhere we go. Print iton your letterhead and business cards. TASKS TO BE DONE Top Itemsto be Put on the Web This is a list, somewhat incomplete as yet, of the top itemswe intend to put on the web pages as soon as we can. We askeveryone to help us by contributing this information inelectronic form. If you have it, you can e-mail it toschaffer@smartlink.net. And thanks! If all you have is a paper copy, we would appreciate thattoo. You can send stuff to Dave Borden at Drug Policy Foundation,4455 Connecticut Ave., N.W., Suite B-500, Washington, DC20008-2302. You can snail-mail stuff to me at: Cliff Schaffer, P.O.Box 1430, Canyon Country, CA 91386-1430 1. Information for Dave Bordens "Tour of the War onDrugs". Use your imagination here, but if you were going togive someone a tour of the War on Drugs, what would you include?It should have lots of interesting facts, graphics, documents,etc. 2. A video file which contains a good quality copy of"Hemp for Victory". We would like to put in onlinewhere it can be distributed to the world. If you already have acomputer and a VCR, the cost of the video capture board iscurrently running around $500 to $700. Or maybe you know someonewho has one . . . 3. The full text of any of the reference sources listed inthe Biggest Studies of DrugPolicy. We much prefer the electronic format but if all youhave is a good paper copy, we will try to work with it. 4. The full text of the Congressional Record for the portionsrelevant to both the Harrison Narcotics Act of 1914 and theMarijuana Tax Act of 1937. 5. Charts, pictures, etc., which show the current statisticsfor all of the issues related to drug policy. SCANNING We have a huge task ahead of us. We must convert tens ofthousands of pages of information to computer format. Most of theinformation, such as the major studies of drug policy, never wasin computer format and some of the documents are quite large. Thetask will probably take man years of scanning effort to beproperly accomplished. The only way we will get it done (with ourlimited financial resources) is if everyone does a little bit. Istrongly recommend that you get a scanner as soon as possible.You don't need much, a simple gray scale scanner with OCR will dothe trick. Shop around and you can install a minimum page-feedscanner in an existing computer system, with OCR for about $250.A good quality flat-bed color scanner with a page feed optioncurrently runs about $1,000. I have found from my own experiencethat the handheld scanners are not adequate to the task. Does anyone know where we can get scanners cheaply (free) todistribute to volunteers who will commit to using them? GETTINGTHE WORD OUT TO THE MEDIA We will need volunteers who will help us get the word out tothe lawmakers and the media when we are ready to launch. Anyonecan help here, if they have a telephone, a stamp, or an e-mailaddress. FORMATTINGAND ORGANIZING We will also need people to specialize in the librarianfunction. That is, we must have people who are willing to spendthe time to: Organize the data so it has a logical structure and is easyto find. Establish links from references in one document to the actualtext of the cited documents. Format good looking web pages according to a standard format We will need standards for how the web pages will beconstructed and their overall look. (Please understand, it is notthat I want to limit your creativity with web pages, it is justthat we want to present to the public the look of a uniform,organized library.) I recommend that anyone who is interested inworking on this end of the task should buy a copy of TeachYourself Web Publishing With HTML In A Week, by Laura Lemay fromSams Publishing. I just got a copy and found it quite helpful. READINGAND SUMMARIZING There will be a lot of information on line. We will needpeople to read through volumes of information and prepareaccurate summaries on a chapter by chapter basis. PROGRAMMING Someone will have to program the membership forms and otherstuff required by this little venture. WHERE TOGO TO GET THE DATA 1. Information from other on-line services. We mustaccumulate all of the information in a place we control andorganize. 2. Government sources. A lot of the government agencies arenow publishing information in computer format, including CD-ROM.We should make it a point to get all of this information we canand bring it together in a logical organization which makes iteasy for people to find. 3. Historical records. A good project for anyone would be togo to the library and browse through the newspapers of anywherefrom 1860 to the present and get copies of all the articles theycan find relating to drugs. 4. Private collections of documents. I have already contacteda number of prominent people to ask them if we can get theirpersonal records which relate to drug policy. We want to developa depth of information which cannot be challenged and the privaterecords of individuals involved in the drug war is a good way todo it. 5. NIDA research. The National Instiute on Drug Abuse haspublished volumes of data on all sorts of issues. We should startwith the most interesting stuff. 6. The Congressional Record. We need to get on-line theentire text of the Congressional Record relating to all of ourcurrent drug laws. Most important-- we must get the text of theoriginal proceedings behind these laws. Harry Anslinger's wordsshould be posted in a place where all the world can read them. 7. Current Media. Scan and/or summarize articles from yourlocal newspaper. Include the full citations of the name of thenewspaper, the headline of the article and the date it waspublished. Also include a summary, length as appropriate, of themajor points made in the article. If we can get permission toreprint, we should do so. If not, we will publish a summary ofthe points made in the article, but retain the scanned text in aprivate library for backup. 8. Videos and movies. We should convert things such as Hempfor Victory to computer format. This can be done with a computer,a VCR, and a video capture board (now down to as low as $179.00) WEB PAGESTANDARDS I suggest the following as a preliminary suggestion for webpage standards. More complete standards, including a template,should be developed by a committee working on the formatting andorganizing team. 1. All web pages should include both the name of the currentpage plus the name of the central home page. This will make surethat anyone who prints out the information will know where itcame from. The name of the central home page should also beincluded as a header in all text files on the net. 2. All menus should contain links back to your own home pageas well as the central home page. 3. All menu pages should include the title of the document,and a description of the author and the contents of the work. 4. All web pages under your own home page should have aconsistent layout. The layout should be simple and withoutexcessive graphics, so it doesn't take a month to download them. COPYRIGHTS Under current copyright law we cannot post anything which iscopyrighted without the permission of the copyright owner. Hereis how to get around this restriction and still have a completeon-line library. 1) Any material produced by any government agency, or thetexts of official statements by public officials is in the publicdomain and may be posted without any problems. 2) The current copyright law is that copyrights are effectivefor the life of the creator plus fifty years. The old law wasthat copyrights were valid for 28 years with a renewal of 28years. What this means is (with some exceptions) materialspublished before about 1940 have probably fallen into the publicdomain. I have a feeling that, if some people or organizations were asked, they would grant us permission to post their materials, or at least excerpts from the materials. If we cannot get permission, we will post our own written summaries of the materials -- reviews of the essential points made by the document. CliffSchaffer's Home Page WT02-B01-86IA086-000615-B003-169http://206.61.184.43:80/schaffer/library/graphs/28.htm 206.61.184.43 19970122025338 text/html 1895HTTP/1.0 200 OKDate: Wednesday, 22-Jan-97 02:53:30 GMTServer: WebSitePro/1.1f (S/N wpo-0deb)Allow-ranges: bytesContent-type: text/htmlLast-modified: Saturday, 28-Dec-96 06:37:56 GMTContent-length: 1678 Relative Addictive Properties of Six PsychoactiveSubstances Contents | Feedback | Search DRCNet Library | Schaffer Library Contents | Feedback | Search DRCNet Library | Schaffer Library WT02-B01-87IA086-000615-B002-303http://206.61.184.43:80/schaffer/Library/graphs/07.htm 206.61.184.43 19970122025004 text/html 1930HTTP/1.0 200 OKDate: Wednesday, 22-Jan-97 02:49:50 GMTServer: WebSitePro/1.1f (S/N wpo-0deb)Allow-ranges: bytesContent-type: text/htmlLast-modified: Saturday, 28-Dec-96 06:38:39 GMTContent-length: 1713 Habitual Use Potential Contents | Feedback | Search DRCNet Library | Schaffer Library | Major Studies Contents | Feedback | Search DRCNet Library | Schaffer Library | Major StudiesWT02-B01-88IA087-000632-B020-73http://206.61.184.43:80/schaffer/library/graphs/24.htm 206.61.184.43 19970122092850 text/html 1864HTTP/1.0 200 OKDate: Wednesday, 22-Jan-97 09:28:34 GMTServer: WebSitePro/1.1f (S/N wpo-0deb)Allow-ranges: bytesContent-type: text/htmlLast-modified: Saturday, 28-Dec-96 06:38:08 GMTContent-length: 1647 Average sentence length in months Contents | Feedback | Search DRCNet Library | Schaffer Library Contents | Feedback | Search DRCNet Library | Schaffer Library WT02-B01-89IA087-000632-B019-259http://206.61.184.43:80/schaffer/library/graphs/18.htm 206.61.184.43 19970122092713 text/html 1847HTTP/1.0 200 OKDate: Wednesday, 22-Jan-97 09:27:05 GMTServer: WebSitePro/1.1f (S/N wpo-0deb)Allow-ranges: bytesContent-type: text/htmlLast-modified: Saturday, 28-Dec-96 06:38:19 GMTContent-length: 1630 The Drug Deficit Contents | Feedback | Search DRCNet Library | Schaffer Library Contents | Feedback | Search DRCNet Library | Schaffer Library WT02-B01-90IA087-000632-B019-191http://206.61.184.43:80/schaffer/library/graphs/12.htm 206.61.184.43 19970122092643 text/html 1889HTTP/1.0 200 OKDate: Wednesday, 22-Jan-97 09:26:36 GMTServer: WebSitePro/1.1f (S/N wpo-0deb)Allow-ranges: bytesContent-type: text/htmlLast-modified: Saturday, 28-Dec-96 06:38:28 GMTContent-length: 1672 Homicide Motives - Reasons for Murder in the United States Contents | Feedback | Search DRCNet Library | Schaffer Library Contents | Feedback | Search DRCNet Library | Schaffer Library WT02-B01-91IA087-000632-B020-292http://206.61.184.43:80/schaffer/library/graphs/33.htm 206.61.184.43 19970122093103 text/html 2810HTTP/1.0 200 OKDate: Wednesday, 22-Jan-97 09:30:39 GMTServer: WebSitePro/1.1f (S/N wpo-0deb)Allow-ranges: bytesContent-type: text/htmlLast-modified: Saturday, 28-Dec-96 06:37:41 GMTContent-length: 2593 Lifetime Substance Use and Abuse of Drugs Among AmericanAdults Contents | Feedback | Search DRCNet Library | Schaffer Library By Gordon E. Kenney, Ph.D. Licensed Psychologist The Universityof Memphis Memphis, Tennessee, USA The attached graph presents use and abuse (includingdependence) rates for American adults in 1985. Use rates weretaken from National (USA) Institute on Drug Abuse (NIDA) 1985national household survey, and abuse/dependence rates were takenfrom the American Psychiatric Association's (APA) Diagnostic andStatistical Manual of Mental Disorders, 4th Edition (1994), whichcited community studies in the USA conducted between 1981 and1985. "Abuse" involves problematic use of a givensubstance, whereas "dependence" involves morepathological use which substantially affects social,occupational, and/or educational functioning. The graph lumpsabuse and dependence together meaning general problematic use,which is labelled simply "abuse." Contents | Feedback | Search DRCNet Library | Schaffer Library WT02-B01-92IA086-000615-B003-247http://206.61.184.43:80/schaffer/Library/graphs/32.htm 206.61.184.43 19970122025509 text/html 3566HTTP/1.0 200 OKDate: Wednesday, 22-Jan-97 02:54:37 GMTServer: WebSitePro/1.1f (S/N wpo-0deb)Allow-ranges: bytesContent-type: text/htmlLast-modified: Saturday, 28-Dec-96 06:37:44 GMTContent-length: 3349 Arrests and Lifetime Substance Use and Abuse of DrugsAmong American Adults Contents | Feedback | Search DRCNet Library | Schaffer Library By Gordon E. Kenney, Ph.D. Licensed Psychologist The Universityof Memphis Memphis, Tennessee, USA The Office of National Drug Control Policy (ONDCP), home ofthe "Drug Czar" (or is it Tsar?), has been charged witheradicating illicit drug use since 1982. The ONDCP's budgetincreased over 600% between 1982 and 1992, and now well exceeds$13 billion. The attached graph compares arrests and lifetime substance useand abuse (including dependence) rates pertaining to alcohol andillict drugs in the United States in an effort to evaluate the"impact" the ONDCP has had on illicit drug use andabuse. The following information concerns 1985 data from theNational Institute on Drug Abuse (NIDA), the American PsychiatricAssociation, and the Federal Bureau of Investigation (FBI). Theyear 1985 was chosen because it is the latest year for whichthere are solid national estimates of drug and alcohol abuse. The data indicate that many more Americans used alcohol thanillicit drugs in 1985. Among alcohol users, about 14% wereabusers (or were otherwise dependent on it), whereas illicit drugabusers (or dependents) comprised about 17% of illicit drugusers. This illicit drug abuse rate may even be inflated, becauserates cited by the American Psychiatric Association wereaggregated for use in the graph below which did not account forconcurrent abuse of multiple drugs. About 1% of alcoholusers/abusers were arrested for drunkenness or DUI/DWI offenses,whereas about 0.5% (i.e., one-half of 1%) of illicit drugusers/abusers were arrested for possession of illicit drugs. Contents | Feedback | Search DRCNet Library | Schaffer Library WT02-B01-93IA086-000615-B003-85http://206.61.184.43:80/schaffer/Library/graphs/23.htm 206.61.184.43 19970122025249 text/html 1854HTTP/1.0 200 OKDate: Wednesday, 22-Jan-97 02:52:43 GMTServer: WebSitePro/1.1f (S/N wpo-0deb)Allow-ranges: bytesContent-type: text/htmlLast-modified: Saturday, 28-Dec-96 06:38:10 GMTContent-length: 1637 Value of Asset Seizures Contents | Feedback | Search DRCNet Library | Schaffer Library Contents | Feedback | Search DRCNet Library | Schaffer Library WT02-B01-94IA087-000632-B019-215http://206.61.184.43:80/schaffer/library/graphs/14.htm 206.61.184.43 19970122092653 text/html 1874HTTP/1.0 200 OKDate: Wednesday, 22-Jan-97 09:26:42 GMTServer: WebSitePro/1.1f (S/N wpo-0deb)Allow-ranges: bytesContent-type: text/htmlLast-modified: Saturday, 28-Dec-96 06:38:25 GMTContent-length: 1657 US War Casualties - War Deaths through 1991 Contents | Feedback | Search DRCNet Library | Schaffer Library Contents | Feedback | Search DRCNet Library | Schaffer Library WT02-B01-95IA086-000615-B003-267http://206.61.184.43:80/schaffer/Library/graphs/33.htm 206.61.184.43 19970122025547 text/html 2810HTTP/1.0 200 OKDate: Wednesday, 22-Jan-97 02:55:38 GMTServer: WebSitePro/1.1f (S/N wpo-0deb)Allow-ranges: bytesContent-type: text/htmlLast-modified: Saturday, 28-Dec-96 06:37:41 GMTContent-length: 2593 Lifetime Substance Use and Abuse of Drugs Among AmericanAdults Contents | Feedback | Search DRCNet Library | Schaffer Library By Gordon E. Kenney, Ph.D. Licensed Psychologist The Universityof Memphis Memphis, Tennessee, USA The attached graph presents use and abuse (includingdependence) rates for American adults in 1985. Use rates weretaken from National (USA) Institute on Drug Abuse (NIDA) 1985national household survey, and abuse/dependence rates were takenfrom the American Psychiatric Association's (APA) Diagnostic andStatistical Manual of Mental Disorders, 4th Edition (1994), whichcited community studies in the USA conducted between 1981 and1985. "Abuse" involves problematic use of a givensubstance, whereas "dependence" involves morepathological use which substantially affects social,occupational, and/or educational functioning. The graph lumpsabuse and dependence together meaning general problematic use,which is labelled simply "abuse." Contents | Feedback | Search DRCNet Library | Schaffer Library WT02-B01-96IA087-000632-B019-59http://206.61.184.43:80/schaffer/library/graphs/05.htm 206.61.184.43 19970122092528 text/html 1848HTTP/1.0 200 OKDate: Wednesday, 22-Jan-97 09:25:21 GMTServer: WebSitePro/1.1f (S/N wpo-0deb)Allow-ranges: bytesContent-type: text/htmlLast-modified: Saturday, 28-Dec-96 06:38:45 GMTContent-length: 1631 Substance abuse related deaths - 2 Contents | Feedback | Search DRCNet Library | Schaffer Library Contents | Feedback | Search DRCNet Library | Schaffer Library WT02-B01-97IA086-000615-B002-353http://206.61.184.43:80/schaffer/Library/graphs/11.htm 206.61.184.43 19970122025040 text/html 1919HTTP/1.0 200 OKDate: Wednesday, 22-Jan-97 02:50:34 GMTServer: WebSitePro/1.1f (S/N wpo-0deb)Allow-ranges: bytesContent-type: text/htmlLast-modified: Saturday, 28-Dec-96 06:38:31 GMTContent-length: 1702 Federal and State Prisoners - Inmates sentenced to amaximum of a year or more Contents | Feedback | Search DRCNet Library | Schaffer Library Contents | Feedback | Search DRCNet Library | Schaffer Library WT02-B01-98IA087-000632-B020-267http://206.61.184.43:80/schaffer/library/graphs/32.htm 206.61.184.43 19970122093031 text/html 3566HTTP/1.0 200 OKDate: Wednesday, 22-Jan-97 09:30:23 GMTServer: WebSitePro/1.1f (S/N wpo-0deb)Allow-ranges: bytesContent-type: text/htmlLast-modified: Saturday, 28-Dec-96 06:37:44 GMTContent-length: 3349 Arrests and Lifetime Substance Use and Abuse of DrugsAmong American Adults Contents | Feedback | Search DRCNet Library | Schaffer Library By Gordon E. Kenney, Ph.D. Licensed Psychologist The Universityof Memphis Memphis, Tennessee, USA The Office of National Drug Control Policy (ONDCP), home ofthe "Drug Czar" (or is it Tsar?), has been charged witheradicating illicit drug use since 1982. The ONDCP's budgetincreased over 600% between 1982 and 1992, and now well exceeds$13 billion. The attached graph compares arrests and lifetime substance useand abuse (including dependence) rates pertaining to alcohol andillict drugs in the United States in an effort to evaluate the"impact" the ONDCP has had on illicit drug use andabuse. The following information concerns 1985 data from theNational Institute on Drug Abuse (NIDA), the American PsychiatricAssociation, and the Federal Bureau of Investigation (FBI). Theyear 1985 was chosen because it is the latest year for whichthere are solid national estimates of drug and alcohol abuse. The data indicate that many more Americans used alcohol thanillicit drugs in 1985. Among alcohol users, about 14% wereabusers (or were otherwise dependent on it), whereas illicit drugabusers (or dependents) comprised about 17% of illicit drugusers. This illicit drug abuse rate may even be inflated, becauserates cited by the American Psychiatric Association wereaggregated for use in the graph below which did not account forconcurrent abuse of multiple drugs. About 1% of alcoholusers/abusers were arrested for drunkenness or DUI/DWI offenses,whereas about 0.5% (i.e., one-half of 1%) of illicit drugusers/abusers were arrested for possession of illicit drugs. Contents | Feedback | Search DRCNet Library | Schaffer Library WT02-B01-99IA086-000615-B003-3http://206.61.184.43:80/schaffer/Library/graphs/14.htm 206.61.184.43 19970122025121 text/html 1874HTTP/1.0 200 OKDate: Wednesday, 22-Jan-97 02:50:56 GMTServer: WebSitePro/1.1f (S/N wpo-0deb)Allow-ranges: bytesContent-type: text/htmlLast-modified: Saturday, 28-Dec-96 06:38:25 GMTContent-length: 1657 US War Casualties - War Deaths through 1991 Contents | Feedback | Search DRCNet Library | Schaffer Library Contents | Feedback | Search DRCNet Library | Schaffer Library WT02-B01-100IA086-000615-B002-253http://206.61.184.43:80/schaffer/Library/graphs/04.htm 206.61.184.43 19970122024910 text/html 1844HTTP/1.0 200 OKDate: Wednesday, 22-Jan-97 02:49:02 GMTServer: WebSitePro/1.1f (S/N wpo-0deb)Allow-ranges: bytesContent-type: text/htmlLast-modified: Saturday, 28-Dec-96 06:38:47 GMTContent-length: 1627 Substance abuse related deaths Contents | Feedback | Search DRCNet Library | Schaffer Library Contents | Feedback | Search DRCNet Library | Schaffer Library WT02-B01-101IA086-000615-B003-180http://206.61.184.43:80/schaffer/library/graphs/29.htm 206.61.184.43 19970122025349 text/html 1865HTTP/1.0 200 OKDate: Wednesday, 22-Jan-97 02:53:41 GMTServer: WebSitePro/1.1f (S/N wpo-0deb)Allow-ranges: bytesContent-type: text/htmlLast-modified: Saturday, 28-Dec-96 06:37:53 GMTContent-length: 1648 Homicides and Prisoners in Custody Contents | Feedback | Search DRCNet Library | Schaffer Library Contents | Feedback | Search DRCNet Library | Schaffer Library WT02-B01-102IA087-000632-B019-169http://206.61.184.43:80/schaffer/library/graphs/11.htm 206.61.184.43 19970122092634 text/html 1919HTTP/1.0 200 OKDate: Wednesday, 22-Jan-97 09:26:21 GMTServer: WebSitePro/1.1f (S/N wpo-0deb)Allow-ranges: bytesContent-type: text/htmlLast-modified: Saturday, 28-Dec-96 06:38:31 GMTContent-length: 1702 Federal and State Prisoners - Inmates sentenced to amaximum of a year or more Contents | Feedback | Search DRCNet Library | Schaffer Library Contents | Feedback | Search DRCNet Library | Schaffer Library WT02-B01-103IA087-000632-B019-45http://206.61.184.43:80/schaffer/library/graphs/04.htm 206.61.184.43 19970122092520 text/html 1844HTTP/1.0 200 OKDate: Wednesday, 22-Jan-97 09:25:10 GMTServer: WebSitePro/1.1f (S/N wpo-0deb)Allow-ranges: bytesContent-type: text/htmlLast-modified: Saturday, 28-Dec-96 06:38:47 GMTContent-length: 1627 Substance abuse related deaths Contents | Feedback | Search DRCNet Library | Schaffer Library Contents | Feedback | Search DRCNet Library | Schaffer Library WT02-B01-104IA086-000615-B003-51http://206.61.184.43:80/schaffer/Library/graphs/20.htm 206.61.184.43 19970122025150 text/html 1856HTTP/1.0 200 OKDate: Wednesday, 22-Jan-97 02:51:45 GMTServer: WebSitePro/1.1f (S/N wpo-0deb)Allow-ranges: bytesContent-type: text/htmlLast-modified: Saturday, 28-Dec-96 06:38:16 GMTContent-length: 1639 Federal Drug Abuse Budget Contents | Feedback | Search DRCNet Library | Schaffer Library Contents | Feedback | Search DRCNet Library | Schaffer Library WT02-B01-105IA087-000632-B020-249http://206.61.184.43:80/schaffer/library/graphs/31.htm 206.61.184.43 19970122093024 text/html 1877HTTP/1.0 200 OKDate: Wednesday, 22-Jan-97 09:30:14 GMTServer: WebSitePro/1.1f (S/N wpo-0deb)Allow-ranges: bytesContent-type: text/htmlLast-modified: Saturday, 28-Dec-96 06:37:47 GMTContent-length: 1660 Estimated Arrests for Drug Offenses 1983-1992 Contents | Feedback | Search DRCNet Library | Schaffer Library Contents | Feedback | Search DRCNet Library | Schaffer Library WT02-B01-106IA086-000615-B002-268http://206.61.184.43:80/schaffer/Library/graphs/05.htm 206.61.184.43 19970122024918 text/html 1848HTTP/1.0 200 OKDate: Wednesday, 22-Jan-97 02:49:12 GMTServer: WebSitePro/1.1f (S/N wpo-0deb)Allow-ranges: bytesContent-type: text/htmlLast-modified: Saturday, 28-Dec-96 06:38:45 GMTContent-length: 1631 Substance abuse related deaths - 2 Contents | Feedback | Search DRCNet Library | Schaffer Library Contents | Feedback | Search DRCNet Library | Schaffer Library WT02-B01-107IA086-000615-B003-101http://206.61.184.43:80/schaffer/Library/graphs/24.htm 206.61.184.43 19970122025258 text/html 1864HTTP/1.0 200 OKDate: Wednesday, 22-Jan-97 02:52:52 GMTServer: WebSitePro/1.1f (S/N wpo-0deb)Allow-ranges: bytesContent-type: text/htmlLast-modified: Saturday, 28-Dec-96 06:38:08 GMTContent-length: 1647 Average sentence length in months Contents | Feedback | Search DRCNet Library | Schaffer Library Contents | Feedback | Search DRCNet Library | Schaffer Library WT02-B01-108IA086-000615-B003-198http://206.61.184.43:80/schaffer/library/graphs/30.htm 206.61.184.43 19970122025359 text/html 1886HTTP/1.0 200 OKDate: Wednesday, 22-Jan-97 02:53:53 GMTServer: WebSitePro/1.1f (S/N wpo-0deb)Allow-ranges: bytesContent-type: text/htmlLast-modified: Saturday, 28-Dec-96 06:37:50 GMTContent-length: 1669 Sentenced Prisoners in State and Federal Institutions Contents | Feedback | Search DRCNet Library | Schaffer Library Contents | Feedback | Search DRCNet Library | Schaffer Library WT02-B01-109IA087-000632-B036-160http://206.61.184.43:80/schaffer/Activist/junkemal.htm 206.61.184.43 19970122070702 text/html 3438HTTP/1.0 200 OKDate: Wednesday, 22-Jan-97 07:06:52 GMTServer: WebSitePro/1.1f (S/N wpo-0deb)Allow-ranges: bytesContent-type: text/htmlLast-modified: Saturday, 28-Dec-96 07:25:28 GMTContent-length: 3221 How To Reduce Junk E-Mail How To Reduce Junk E-Mail From: Ryan Rossman <rossm_ry@catseq.catlin.edu> The 3 keys to reducing "junk" email. Accurate Subject headings. If you send it to the whole list, make sure it applies to the whole list. Be substantial, ask yourself am I contributing to the list or detracting? Subject Lines: One way to make it easier to get to the meaty information youwant is to have *accurate* subject lines. If the subject line ofyour post says Re: Proposed Strategies and you are talking aboutsomething completely different, or are branching off from thisdiscussion create a new subject heading. Example: Instead of just Re: Proposed Strategies which doesn't reallytell anyone what the content of the message is about. Try... Discussion of CD Tactics (was Re: Proposed Strategies) This is very helpful, in discovering and only reading theposts you want to read. Personal Posts: Short, one or two line posts that only make a personalstatement torwards one or two people should be done in private.The main goal is to respect other members of the group enough soas to not post something that they are just going to have delete. There are two ways to avoid problems with being personal. If all you really want to do is make a short 1 or 2 line personal rseponse to someone don't send it to the entire list just send it to that person. If you are making personal comments make sure that there is also something substantial that is pertinent to everyone included in the post. Basically if it doesn't have something that applies to thewhole list, don't post it to the whole list. Please don't hestiate to be controversial or disagree withothers, this is called freedom of speech and its why a revolutionwas waged, but do NOT use drctalk-l for excessive personalbanter. If it has substance with a little banter, I don't think we have a problem.Meaning that you can say nice "Amens!" and "Way togo!" **IF** you also include something a little bit moremeaningful. If there is no substance and a lot of banter youprobably shouldn't have sent it to the whole list. This includesthe 1 or 2 line personal notes. If we still have a problem with "junk" posts andthe traffic volume is still too high there are more stringentmeasures that can be imposed. CliffSchaffer's Home Page WT02-B01-110IA086-000615-B003-72http://206.61.184.43:80/schaffer/Library/graphs/22.htm 206.61.184.43 19970122025237 text/html 1848HTTP/1.0 200 OKDate: Wednesday, 22-Jan-97 02:52:21 GMTServer: WebSitePro/1.1f (S/N wpo-0deb)Allow-ranges: bytesContent-type: text/htmlLast-modified: Saturday, 28-Dec-96 06:38:13 GMTContent-length: 1631 Property Seizures Contents | Feedback | Search DRCNet Library | Schaffer Library Contents | Feedback | Search DRCNet Library | Schaffer Library WT02-B01-111IA087-000632-B019-285http://206.61.184.43:80/schaffer/library/graphs/20.htm 206.61.184.43 19970122092725 text/html 1856HTTP/1.0 200 OKDate: Wednesday, 22-Jan-97 09:27:15 GMTServer: WebSitePro/1.1f (S/N wpo-0deb)Allow-ranges: bytesContent-type: text/htmlLast-modified: Saturday, 28-Dec-96 06:38:16 GMTContent-length: 1639 Federal Drug Abuse Budget Contents | Feedback | Search DRCNet Library | Schaffer Library Contents | Feedback | Search DRCNet Library | Schaffer Library WT02-B01-112IA086-000615-B003-218http://206.61.184.43:80/schaffer/Library/graphs/31.htm 206.61.184.43 19970122025415 text/html 1877HTTP/1.0 200 OKDate: Wednesday, 22-Jan-97 02:54:07 GMTServer: WebSitePro/1.1f (S/N wpo-0deb)Allow-ranges: bytesContent-type: text/htmlLast-modified: Saturday, 28-Dec-96 06:37:47 GMTContent-length: 1660 Estimated Arrests for Drug Offenses 1983-1992 Contents | Feedback | Search DRCNet Library | Schaffer Library Contents | Feedback | Search DRCNet Library | Schaffer Library WT02-B01-113IA086-000615-B002-284http://206.61.184.43:80/schaffer/Library/graphs/06.htm 206.61.184.43 19970122024930 text/html 1848HTTP/1.0 200 OKDate: Wednesday, 22-Jan-97 02:49:21 GMTServer: WebSitePro/1.1f (S/N wpo-0deb)Allow-ranges: bytesContent-type: text/htmlLast-modified: Saturday, 28-Dec-96 06:38:42 GMTContent-length: 1631 Substance abuse related deaths - 3 Contents | Feedback | Search DRCNet Library | Schaffer Library Contents | Feedback | Search DRCNet Library | Schaffer Library WT02-B01-114IA087-000632-B020-41http://206.61.184.43:80/schaffer/library/graphs/23.htm 206.61.184.43 19970122092822 text/html 1854HTTP/1.0 200 OKDate: Wednesday, 22-Jan-97 09:28:13 GMTServer: WebSitePro/1.1f (S/N wpo-0deb)Allow-ranges: bytesContent-type: text/htmlLast-modified: Saturday, 28-Dec-96 06:38:10 GMTContent-length: 1637 Value of Asset Seizures Contents | Feedback | Search DRCNet Library | Schaffer Library Contents | Feedback | Search DRCNet Library | Schaffer Library WT02-B01-115IA087-000632-B019-314http://206.61.184.43:80/schaffer/library/graphs/22.htm 206.61.184.43 19970122092737 text/html 1848HTTP/1.0 200 OKDate: Wednesday, 22-Jan-97 09:27:25 GMTServer: WebSitePro/1.1f (S/N wpo-0deb)Allow-ranges: bytesContent-type: text/htmlLast-modified: Saturday, 28-Dec-96 06:38:13 GMTContent-length: 1631 Property Seizures Contents | Feedback | Search DRCNet Library | Schaffer Library Contents | Feedback | Search DRCNet Library | Schaffer Library WT02-B01-116IA086-000615-B003-149http://206.61.184.43:80/schaffer/library/graphs/27.htm 206.61.184.43 19970122025321 text/html 1886HTTP/1.0 200 OKDate: Wednesday, 22-Jan-97 02:53:16 GMTServer: WebSitePro/1.1f (S/N wpo-0deb)Allow-ranges: bytesContent-type: text/htmlLast-modified: Saturday, 28-Dec-96 06:37:59 GMTContent-length: 1669 Distribution of All Drug Arrests Since 1941 by Decade Contents | Feedback | Search DRCNet Library | Schaffer Library Contents | Feedback | Search DRCNet Library | Schaffer Library WT02-B01-117IA087-000632-B019-85http://206.61.184.43:80/schaffer/library/graphs/06.htm 206.61.184.43 19970122092541 text/html 1848HTTP/1.0 200 OKDate: Wednesday, 22-Jan-97 09:25:32 GMTServer: WebSitePro/1.1f (S/N wpo-0deb)Allow-ranges: bytesContent-type: text/htmlLast-modified: Saturday, 28-Dec-96 06:38:42 GMTContent-length: 1631 Substance abuse related deaths - 3 Contents | Feedback | Search DRCNet Library | Schaffer Library Contents | Feedback | Search DRCNet Library | Schaffer Library WT02-B01-118IA086-000619-B008-247http://206.61.184.43:80/schaffer/DEBATE/MYTHS/myths4.htm 206.61.184.43 19970122034826 text/html 22944HTTP/1.0 200 OKDate: Wednesday, 22-Jan-97 03:48:17 GMTServer: WebSitePro/1.1f (S/N wpo-0deb)Allow-ranges: bytesContent-type: text/htmlLast-modified: Saturday, 28-Dec-96 07:22:14 GMTContent-length: 22726 The Experience of Foreign Countries and Drug Legalization Contents | Feedback | Search DRCNet Library | Schaffer Library | The Drug Legalization Debate Chapter Three: The Experience of Foreign Countries and DrugLegalization Discussion I. Their Argument Proponents of legalization suggest that the experiences ofcountries such as Great Britain, the Netherlands, and Switzerlandprove the efficacy of legalizing or decriminalizing various typesof illegal drugs such as cocaine, heroin, and marijuana. Theymaintain that because such drugs are legal, these countries havefewer addicts and less drug-related crime. II. Our Argument The statements of the legalizers here are empirically untrue.As we discuss each country in turn, it will be shown thatlegalization did not work in any of them. A. Great Britain With the report of a government commission known as the BrainCommittee of 1964, England instituted a policy whereby doctorscould prescribe heroin so long as they followed certain treatmentcriteria.47 Previously in England, doctors could prescribe heroinmuch like any other opiate (such as morphine). This allowed a fewunscrupulous doctors to sell ungodly amounts of heroin to membersof the black market.48 Consequently, it was believed that ifheroin were offered at medical clinics according to stringentrules and regulations, addicts would come to these clinics toseek treatment and eventually would overcome their habit. As of 1983, however, England began to phase out these programsof clinically supplied heroin in favor of methadone treatment.49Why? First, according to the reputable British physician journal Lancet,the number of addicts increased 100% between 1970 and 1980.50 Adisproportionate number of these new addicts were between theages of sixteen and seventeen.51 Second, only twenty percent ofall of the addicts in England belonged to the clinicalprograms.52 At first blush, this fact seems strange - why wouldaddicts choose not to participate in a program wherein they getfree methadone? The answer probably lies in the fact thatmethadone does not produce the high that heroin does. Also,addicts probably did not care for the mandatory treatment andrehabilitation facets of the clinical programs. Whatever thereason, by 1985 England had 80,000 heroin addicts, the vastmajority of whom wen not in treatment.53 A third reason why England began to abolish its clinicalheroin program was the fact that not only were there few people,in them, but the programs themselves did not work. According tothe British Medical Journal, more addicts left the programbecause of criminal convictions than because of treatment.54Fourth, even with the clinical programs, heroin addicts had adeath rate twenty-six times the average population. Finally, evenwhen the programs were in operation, Scotland Yard had toincrease its narcotics division 100% in order to cope with theincreased crime rate.56 To summarize, the British experience with decriminalizedheroin in the clinical context was a dismal failure. When expertsfrom British Columbia were debating whether to create a similarprogram, they made the following conclusions that are soimportant as to deserve to be quoted at length: While some success is claimed in terms of reducing theincidence of young users, the following findings have also beennoted: 1) The British approach has failed to attract a majority ofaddicts; 2) Many registered addicts continue to turn to illicit sourcesof drugs; 3) Many registered addicts do not decrease their dosage overtime; 4) Many registered addicts continue to be involved in criminalactivity; 5) Many registered addicts are chronically unemployed or donot earn enough to look after themselves; 6) The death rate of registered addicts is much higher thanthat of the general population and may be higher than that ofNorth American addicts; 7) Since 1960, there has been a dramatic increase in theEnglish addict population; 8) The black market for heroin continues to thrive; 9) Law enforcement appears to remain a necessary, costly andcomplex control measure. In view of the above, it is felt that the application of theBritish approach to British Columbia would present seriousdangers.57 B. The Netherlands Proponents of legalization almost certainly would citeAmsterdam as the drug Mecca of the Western world. Anyone may gointo the restaurants in this city and order marijuana and hashishfrom a menu; further, heroin and cocaine have been decriminalizedfor all practical purposes. The police simply leave the usersalone. Consequently, health officials estimate that Amsterdam has7,000 addicts, 20% of whom are foreigners.58 These addicts areresponsible for 80% of all property crime in the city, thusnecessitating that Amsterdam maintain a police presence fargreater than those of cities of comparable size in the UnitedStates.59 The Dutch have not raised one dollar in tax revenue from drugsales, and drug violators account for 50 percent of the Dutchprison population, a higher proportion than in the UnitedStates.60 The Netherlands is the most crime-prone nation inEurope and most drug addicts live on state welfare payments andby committing crimes.61 Nationwide, the number of reported crimesincreased to 1.3 million in 1992 from. 812,000 in 1981.62 Facedwith public disgust at home over soaring drug related crime andpressure from other European Community countries to strengthendrug laws, Dutch authorities are implementing an aggressiveprogram to reduce drug-linked crimes and disturbances and shownew teeth in combatting illegal drug sales.63 Eberhard van derLaan, leader Of the Social Democrats in the Amsterdam CityCouncil says, "People are absolutely fed up with all thetroubles caused by drug addicts - car windows broken, noise,whole streets almost given up to the drug problem."64Legalization advocates claim that marijuana use in Netherlandshas not increased since the laws were liberalized, but the numberof Amsterdam drug cafes rose from 30 to over 300 in one decade.They also fail to note that daily marijuana use by U.S. youth hasdeclined by 75 percent.65 C. Switzerland Much like Amsterdam, Switzerland until recently followed apolicy of decriminalization. Indeed, a city park in the town ofZurich for many years was allowed to be a haven for drug users -police simply would ignore the problem by claiming that it wasbetter to have all the addicts in one place rather than havingthem roam throughout the entire city.66 Unsurprisingly, inFebruary of 1992 Switzerland ended this experiment withdecriminalization after experiencing an unacceptable increase inuse, violence, crime and health costs and consequences.67Specifically, the number of addicts residing at the park (calledPlatzspitz) jumped from a few hundred in 1987 to over 20,000, byearly 1992.68 Approximately 20% of these addicts were foreignerswho came to Zurich to take advantage of the city's lax druglaws.69 In deciding to close the park, city officials cited theincreased incidence of crime and prostitution--as Andres Oehler,a municipal spokesperson stated, "it was felt that thesituation had got out of control in every sense."70 D. Spain Since 1983 in Spain, it has been legal to use, but not sell,cocaine and heroin. Recently, however, Spanish officials have begun a crack-down on drug pushers dueto a dramatic increase in the addiction rate.71 Unsurprisingly,Spain and Italy, which also legalized use of cocaine and heroin,have the highest rates of both drug use and overdose of allEuropean countries.72 E. China Lest we forget the lessons of history, consider that in thelate 1800's, opium was legal in China. By 1900, ninety millionChinese were addicted to the drug, and it took fifty years ofrepressive police measures and rehabilitation to correct theproblem.73 Today, opium and other addictive drugs are illegal.74 F. Japan In the 1950's, Japan was faced with an epidemic of amphetamineuse that created half a million addicts. Through socializationand policies aimed at both reducing supply and demand, thenumber of addicts was decreased to a few thousand within fouryears.75 A heroin epidemic involving thousands of addicts wasdealt with successfully in the 1960's using the same measures. 76 G. Other countries Throughout recent history, numerous other countries haveattempted legalizing or decriminalizing drugs, all meeting withthe same harmful results. In Egypt in the 1920's, an unrestrictedsupply of cocaine and heroin created an epidemic that eventuallyresulted in the strict prosecution of all addicts.77 In Thailandand Iran, countries that traditionally have had cheap andunrestricted sources of narcotics, the addiction rates have beenand continue to be high.78 Finally, the Republic of Singapore hadto resort to strict law enforcement and mandatory rehabilitationin order to overcome a heroin epidemic.79 Given the experiences of countries such as Great Britain,Switzerland, The Netherlands, China, Japan, Spain, Egypt, Iran,and Thailand, it is little wonder why countries thattraditionally have had lenient drug laws are all moving in thedirection of illegalization. Undoubtedly, the danger that druglegalization presents was foremost on the minds of the numerouscountries - the United States included - that signed the SingleConvention on Narcotic Drugs of 1961 and the Convention onPsychotropic Substances of 1971. And such danger also is why theInternational Narcotics Control Board for the United Nationsconcluded in 1992 that "legalization advocates have not yetpresented a sufficiently comprehensive, coherent or viablealternative to the present system of international drug abusecontrol."80 47 John S. Russell and Andre McNicoll, "The BritishExperience with Narcotic Dependency," Province of BritishColumbia Ministry of Health, Alcohol, and Drug Commission, April1978. 48 Robert E. Peterson, "Stop Legalization of IllegalDrugs," Drug Awareness Information Newsletter, July 1988. 49 Peggy Mann, "Reasons to Oppose Legalizing IllegalDrugs," Drug Awareness Information Newsletter, September1988. 50 Letter from John C. Lawn to Joseph E. DiGenova, U.S.Department of Justice, Drug Enforcement Administration, June 3,1988, see also Christoph Borkenstein, "A Few Aspects ofBritish Drug Policies - an outside view," Forensic ScienceInternational, 1993. 51 Peggy Mann, "Reasons to Oppose Legalizing IllegalDrugs," Drug Awareness Information Newsletter, September 1988. 52 John S. Russell and Andre McNicoll, "The BritishExperience with Narcotic Dependency," Province of BritishColumbia Ministry of Health, Alcohol and Drug Commission, April1978 (update by D.L. Winterton). 53 Gabriel G. Nahas, "The Decline of DruggedNations," Wall Street Journal, July 11, 1988. 54 Letter from John C. Lawn to Joseph E. DiGenova, U.S.Department of Justice, Drug Enforcement Administration, June 3,1988. 55 Id. 56 "Arguments Against Legalizing Drugs," Drug AbuseUpdate, September 1988. 57 John S. Russell and Andre McNicoll, "The BritishExperience with Narcotic Dependency," Province of BritishColumbia Ministry of Health, Alcohol and Drug Commission, April1978. 58 Ramon Bracomontes, "Marijuana is as easy to buy as icecream," El Paso Times, July 24, 1988. 59 Id. 60 Robert E. Peterson, "Legalization: The MythExposed" in Searching for Alternatives: Drug ControlPolicy in the United States, Hoover Institution Press, 1991. 61 Id. 62 "Netherlands Soft Policy on Drugs May Harden as PublicComplains About Junkie Criminals," Wall Street Journal,March 11, 1994. 63 Id. 64 Id. 65 Robert E. Peterson, "Legalization: The MythExposed" in Searching for Alternatives: Drug Control Policy in the United States, HooverInstitution Press, 1991. 66 Nel Solomon, "Findings on Needle Park: Switzerland'sSocial Experiment with Legalizing Drugs," Report to GovernorSchaefer, Drug and Alcohol Abuse Commission (Maryland). 67 Roger Cohen, "Amid Growing Crime, Zurich Closes a ParkIt Reserved for Drug Addicts," New York Times, February 11,1992. 68 Id. 69 Id. 70 Id. 71 The Economist, April 18, 1987. 72 Gabriel G. Nahas, "A Battle Won, a Stalemated War, andA New Strategy," (position paper). 73 Gabriel Nahas, "The Decline of Drugged Nations,"Wall Street Journal, July 11, 1988. 74 Id. 75 Id. 76 Id. 77 Id. 78 David T. Courtwright, "Should We Legalize Drugs?History Answers," American Heritage, February/March 1993. 79 Gabriel G. Nahas, "A Battle Won, a Stalemated War, andA New Strategy," (position paper), p. 4. 80 "Report of the International Control Board for1992," International Narcotics Control Board of the UnitedNations, 1992, Chapter Three Summary Sheet: The Experience of ForeignCountries and Drug Legalization Ifthey say... Experience in Great Britain shows that you can successfullydecriminalize heroin so long as it is done in a clinicallyadministered government program. Thenyou say... The addiction rates for heroin in Great Britain increased 100%in ten years, and many of the new addicts were children betweenthe ages of sixteen and seventeen. [Letter from John Lawn toJoseph E. DiGenova, U.S. Dept. of Justice, Drug EnforcementAdministration, June 3, 1988 (citing British medical journal Lancet);Peggy Mann, "Reasons to Oppose Legalizing IllegalDrugs," Drug Awareness Information Newsletter, September1988.] Only 20% of the addicts in Great Britain joined the clinicalprogram offered by the government. [John S. Russell and AndreMcNicoll, "The British Experience With NarcoticDependency," Province of British Columbia Ministry ofHealth, Alcohol and Drug Commission, April 1978]. More addicts left the British program because of criminalconvictions than because of rehabilitation. [Letter of John Lawn,citation above (citing statement of the British MedicalJournal)] . Heroin addicts in Britain had mortality rates 26 times higherthan that of the average population. [Letter of John Lawn,citation above (citing statement of article published in TheNew Republic)]. Scotland Yard had to increase its narcotics squad 100% inorder to combat the crime caused by the heroin addicts.["Arguments Against Legalizing Drugs," Drug AbuseUpdate, September 1988]. Ifthey say... Experience in Netherlands shows that you can effectivelylegalize drugs without any problems. Thenyou say... The Amsterdam health officials state that the 7,000 addicts inthe city are responsible for 80% of the property crime. (RamonBracamontes, "Marijuana is as easy to buy as icecream," El Paso Times, July 24, 1988]. Because of its drug problem, Amsterdam is required to have apolice force much greater than those of U.S. cities of similarpopulation. [Ramon Bracamontes, citation above]. The Netherlands is the most crime-prone nation in Europe andmost drug addicts live on state welfare payments and bycommitting crimes. [Robert E. Peterson, "Legalization: TheMyth Exposed" in "Searching for Alternatives: DrugControl Policy in the United States," Hoover InstitutionPress, 1991]. Amsterdam is rethinking its liberal drug policies because ofthe social ills that result there from. [Robert E. Peterson,"Stop Legalization of Illegal Drugs," Drug AwarenessInformation Newsletter, July 1988]. Ifthey say... The Swiss decriminalized drugs without any adverseconsequences. Thenyou say... As of February 1992, Switzerland officially rejected itspolicy of decriminalization. [Roger Cohen, "Amid GrowingCrime, Zurich Closes a Park It Reserved for Drug Addicts,"New York Times, February 11, 1992]. Allowing a city park to be used as a "druglegalized" area of Zurich, the number of addicts escalatedfrom a few hundred to over 20,000 within several years. [RogerCohen, citation above]. Swiss officials now admit that their policy oflegalization-decriminalization served to increase crime,especially property crimes and prostitution. [Roger Cohen,citation above]. Ifthey say... Spain successfully legalized both cocaine and heroin. Thenyou say... Spain, and Italy, the two European countries that legalizeduse of both cocaine and heroin, have the highest rates of bothaddiction and overdose in all of Europe. [Gabriel G. Nahas,"A Battle Won, a Stalemated War and A New Strategy,"(position paper)]. Spain recently has begun a crack-down on drug pushers in thehopes of decreasing addiction and crime. [Robert E. Peterson,"Stop Legalization, of Illegal Drugs," Drug AwarenessInformation Newsletter, July 1988]. Ifthey say... Historically, countries that have legalized or decriminalizeddrugs have not been harmed. Thenyou say... When opium was legal in China at the turn of the century,there were 90 million addicts, and it took China fifty years toeventually solve the problem. [Gabriel G. Nahas, "TheDecline of Drugged Nations," The Wall Street Journal, July11, 1988]. In the 1950's Japan had an epidemic of amphetamine addictionthat it solved within four years by both police enforcement andrehabilitation. [Gabriel G. Nahas, citation above]. When Egypt allowed unrestricted trade of cocaine and heroin inthe 1920's, an epidemic of addiction resulted. [Gabriel G. Nahas,citation above]. In Iran and Thailand, countries where drugs are readilyavailable, the prevalence of addiction has been and continues tobe exceptionally high. [David T. Courtwright, "Should WeLegalize Drugs? History Answers," American Heritage,February/March 1993]. Ifthey say... The international community condones legalized drugs. Thenyou say... Both the Single Convention on Narcotic Drugs of 1961 and theConvention on Psychotropic Substances of 1971 (both signed by theU.S.) insist that drugs should not be legalized. ["Issuesand Comments to respond to Legalization of Illegal Drugs,"Drug Enforcement Administration, May 1988]. The International Narcotics Control Board of the UnitedNations concluded that "legalization advocates have not yetpresented a sufficiently comprehensive, coherent or viablealternative to the present system of international drug abusecontrol." ["Report of the International Control Boardfor 1992," United Nations Publication]. Contents | Feedback | Search DRCNet Library | Schaffer Library | The Drug Legalization Debate WT02-B01-119IA086-000619-B008-343http://206.61.184.43:80/schaffer/DEBATE/MYTHS/myths8.htm 206.61.184.43 19970122034908 text/html 26218HTTP/1.0 200 OKDate: Wednesday, 22-Jan-97 03:48:59 GMTServer: WebSitePro/1.1f (S/N wpo-0deb)Allow-ranges: bytesContent-type: text/htmlLast-modified: Saturday, 28-Dec-96 07:21:52 GMTContent-length: 26000 Medical Uses of Presently Illegal Drugs Contents | Feedback | Search DRCNet Library | Schaffer Library | The Drug Legalization Debate Myths and Misconceptions about Drug Legalization: US Dept. ofJustice Chapter Seven: Medical Uses of Presently Illegal Drugs DISCUSSION I. Their Argument Proponents of legalization suggest that even if drugs such ascocaine, marijuana, and heroin are not fully legalized, theyshould be made more available as forms of medical treatment. Forexample, legalizers suggest that heroin should be used much inthe same way as is morphine presently and that marijuana shouldbe used in treating glaucoma and the side-effects ofchemotherapy. II. Our Argument In order to fully analyze the debate surrounding the medicaluses of heroin and marijuana, each drug should be discussed inturn. 1. Heroin Heroin is an opiate, as are drugs such as morphine. Legalizerssuggest that because morphine does not always succeed inrelieving the pain of, for example, cancer patients, the onlylogical step is to try heroin. This is factually incorrect. In order to understand why this argument is flawed, one mustknow how heroin and morphine differ from one another. As Drs.Robert McCarthy and Michael Montagne explain, "Kaiko, et al.found that although heroin is more potent - and achieves peakpain control and mood elevation effects faster, both pain controland mood elevation are more prolonged with morphine. "116That is, heroin gives you a quicker "high," butmorphine provides longer-lasting effects. Furthermore, we havemany other opioids available under present pharmaceutical laws.As Professor Arthur G. Lipman explains, [s]ome advocates of heroin legalization argue that it shouldbe available as an alternative opioid because some patientsrespond better to one opioid than another. That is true. However,we already have a variety of opioids commercially available inthis country. If a patient does not respond to morphine asexpected, it would be more logical to use a chemically differentopioid (e.g., hydromorphone, methadone) than a morphine product[such as heroin]. Therefore, the argument for heroin is notlogical. 117 Not only is Professor Lipman's argument medically sound, butit makes common sense. Heroin and morphine have similar chemicalstructures. If morphine does not work for a given patient, itmakes more sense to try an opioid with a different chemicalconstruct than to give them a drug very similar to the one thatis not working. These two facts----that heroin does not produce as constantand prolonged a treatment as does morphine, and that many otheropioids presently exist that can do the job better than heroin inthe event that morphine does not work - help to explain why thevast majority of medical society members do not favor the use ofheroin as a form of therapeutic treatment. The British doctorswho initially suggested the viability of therapeutic herointreatment long ago reversed their position.118 And althoughMaurice Bectel, President of the American PharmaceuticalAssociation, admits that problems do exist in the treatment ofcancer pain, these problems stem largely from the fact that"physicians fail to prescribe proper dosages of existingmedications, not because of the lack of availability ofheroin."119 Indeed, as Professor Lipman correctly notes,"[i]f the energy devoted to legalizing heroin wereredirected toward better use of available opioids, patients wouldbenefit.120 But not only is allowing the therapeutic use of heroinunnecessary, it also could create other problems. For example,increased medical use of heroin increases the risk of"diversion"-- that the patients would sell their heroinon the black market.121 Also, if pharmacies routinely stocked asupply of heroin, it would increase the risk of burglaries. Thisfact gives one special concern when one notes that fully 50% ofburglaries against pharmacies are committed with the intention ofstealing controlled substances.122 In short, Lipman concludes that "[m]isinformation aboutheroin has clouded the issue, but there is valid, published scientific evidence that unequivocallyrefutes the argument that heroin should be legalized."123 116 Robert L. McCarthy and Michael Montagne, "Theargument for therapeutic use of heroin in pain management,"American Journal of Hospital Pharmacists, May 1993. 117 Arthur G. Lipman, "The argument against therapeuticuse of heroin in pain management," American Journal of Hospital Pharmacists, May 1993. 118 Id. 119 Robert L. McCarthy and Michael Montagne, "Theargument for therapeutic use of heroin in pain management,"American Journal of Hospital Pharmacists, May 1993. 120 Arthur G. Lipman, "The argument againsttherapeutic use of heroin in pain management," AmericanJournal of Hospital Pharmacists, May 1993. 121 Id. 122 Id. 123 Id. 2. Marijuana a. Treatment for glaucoma Glaucoma is a disease in which the fluid pressure within theeyeball (known as the intraocular pressure) increases and therebydamages the optic nerve, potentially causing blindness.Legalizers advance the claim that marijuana can decrease theintraocular pressure and thereby prevent blindness. Let's look atthis claim. First, the studies that the legalizers cite for support oftheir propositions assume the use of THC itself rather thanmarijuana.125 Thus while one may claim that THC decreasesintraocular pressure, it is not technically correct to claim thatmarijuana does as well. Second, even if marijuana does decrease intraocular pressure,it does so only at high dosages - in order to get the benefits,you have to stay stoned all day. Doctor Keith Green suggests thatin order to decrease intraocular pressure, one would have tosmoke the equivalent of six joints a day.126 Michael Van Buskirk,Director of Glaucoma Services and Chairman of the Department ofOphthalmology at Devers Eye Institute agrees, stating that"[a]lcohol also produces a profound reduction in . . .intraocular pressure. 'Me recommendation to use marijuana isexactly analogous to the recommendation to ingest alcohol andmaintain a state of drunkenness to treat glaucoma."127 Third, even if marijuana successfully combats one symptom ofglaucoma - intraocular pressure - it does so at the expense ofexacerbating another symptom. For while marijuana may decreaseintraocular pressure, it also decreases blood pressure (and thusblood flow) to the eye. Carl Kupfer, director of the National EyeInstitute, explains: For the optic nerve to be properly nourished, there, must bean adequate amount of blood flowing to that nerve at all times,so that if we have a drug that both lowers intraocular pressureas well as blood pressure, we may be interfering with the supplyof blood to the optic nerve, and therefore even though thepressure in the eye may decrease, such a patient will not beprotected against losing visual function from the glaucomaprocess.128 Thus, marijuana at best alleviates one problem of glaucomawhile increasing the risk of another. And in order to evenaccomplish this ambivalent goal, one must stay stoned the entireday. It is no surprise, then, that experts such as Doctor Greenconclude that "marijuana. . . has little potential future asa glaucoma medication."129 b. Treatment for chemotherapy Proponents also suggest that marijuana is useful to combat theside-effects of chemotherapy such as nausea and vomiting. Tosupport their position, they cite a study conducted by MarkKleiman which found that 40% of cancer specialists hadrecommended marijuana to relieve chemotherapy nausea. 130 First, the Kleiman study is flawed statistically andmethodologically. 57% of the doctors that Kleiman sentquestionnaires to did not even bother to return them. Also,Kleiman does not document the number of questionnaires that werereturned unanswered. Further, Kleiman does not document thenumber of questionnaires that expressed no opinion as to thetherapeutic use of marijuana. Once all of these factors areconsidered, Kleiman's "40%" acceptance rate would be nomore than 15%, and, according to Dr. Richard Schwartz, ClinicalProfessor of Pediatrics at Georgetown University School ofMedicine, is "probably much less."131 Second, the nation's top cancer experts reject marijuana forchemotherapy treatment. As David Ettinger, professor of oncologyat the Johns Hopkins University School of Medicine notes,"There is no indication that marijuana is effective intreating nausea and vomiting resulting from radiation treatmentor other causes. No legitimate studies have been conducted whichmake such conclusions."132 Doctor John Laszlo, VicePresident of Research for the American Cancer Society agrees thatthere is insufficient evidence to suggest that marijuana is auseful chemotherapy treatment.133 Third, the National Cancer Institute itself notes that"other antiemetic agents such as ondansetron,metoclopramine, droperidol, etc. have been shown to be moreuseful than marijuana-related compounds as first linetherapy."134 Thus, while there is no evidence to prove marijuana's use inchemotherapy, there are numerous alternative drugs that obviatethe need to even pursue research on the subject. c. Treatment for AIDS Proponents of legalized drugs next suggest that marijuana isuseful in treating AIDS both because it relieves pain and becauseit stimulates appetite. Unfortunately, marijuana would actuallyexacerbate the health risks associated with AIDS. First, studiesconducted at the Virginia Medical College suggest that the THC inmarijuana damages the immune system, making the patient moresusceptible to colds, viruses, and influenza while at the sametime increasing the severity of any illnesses that the patienthas.135 Clearly, the last thing that a patient with AIDS needs isto have his or her immune system weakened. Second, the marijuanasmoke itself is damaging to the AIDS patients. As Dr. SoniaBuist, Professor of Medicine at Oregon Health Sciences Universityexplains, "I cannot support the use of marijuana to treatpatients with this condition [AIDS]. Furthermore, I wouldmaintain that its use is contraindicated because marijuana smokeis extremely irritating to the airways and may add additionalpulmonary problems in these very susceptibleindividuals."136 d. Treatment for multiple sclerosis Proponents of legalization finally argue that marijuana isuseful to stop the spasms caused by multiple sclerosis. Expertson MS absolutely reject this proposition. In fact, the scientificopinion may be summed up by Dr. Donald Silberberg, Chair of theDepartment of Neurology at the University of Pennsylvania Schoolof Medicine and Chief of the Neurology Service at the Hospital ofPennsylvania, when he states that I have not found any legitimate medical or scientific workswhich show that marijuana... is medically effective in treatingmultiple sclerosis or spasticity.... The long-term treatment ofthe symptoms of multiple sclerosis through the use of marijuanacould be devastating. . . . The use of (marijuana), especiallyfor long-term treatment ... would be worse than the originaldisease itself." Having proved that marijuana is not effective in the treatmentof glaucoma, the treatment of chemotherapy side-effects, thetreatment of AIDS, or the treatment of MS, we should discuss theevidence that suggests that marijuana is harmful to one's health.Recall the material presented in Chapter One [Addiction Rates]that suggested that marijuana caused numerous health problems.Let us expand upon the inquiry. First, Swedish researchers foundthat people who smoked pot fifty or more times were six times aslikely to develop schizophrenia. The study specifically foundthat marijuana increased the incidence of schizophrenia not onlyin those patients who were predisposed to the illness, but alsoin those who were not.138 Second, physicians in 1986 beganreporting cases of lung, head, neck, tongue, and respiratorytract cancer in patients aged 17 to 39.139 Third, maternal use ofmarijuana increases the risk of childhood leukemia by 1,000%.140Fourth, marijuana exposure produces abnormalities similar tothe Fetal Alcohol Syndrome but at five times the rate of alcohol.141 Thus, not only is marijuana not a good medical treatment, butit also causes schizophrenia, cancer, leukemia, and childhoodabnormalities. Consequently, it is unsurprising to learn that"marijuana has been rejected as medicine by the AmericanMedical Association, the National Multiple Sclerosis Society, theAmerican Glaucoma Society, the American Academy of Ophthalmologyand the American Cancer Society. Not one American healthassociation accepts marijuana as medicine."142 124 Purnell and Gregg (1975); Perez-Reyes et al.(1976); Merritt et al. (1980); Green and Roth (1982); Jay andGreen (1983). 125 Marijuana Scheduling Petition; Denial of Petition;Remand; 21 CFR Part 1308 [Docket No. 86-22), 1986. 126 Id. 127 Sandra Bennett, "Therapeutic Marijuana: Fact orFiction," Drug Awareness Information Newsletter, July 1992. 128 Cannabis and Society, Chpt. 5, p. 453 (citing CarlKupfer). 129 Marijuana Scheduling Petition; Denial of Petition; Remand;21 CFR Part 1308 (Docket No. 86-22], 1986. 130 "Study. 40% of doctors favor some use of pot,"Press & Sun-Bulletin, May 1, 1991. 131 Sandra S. Bennett, "Therapeutic Marijuana: Fact orFiction," Drug Awareness Information Newsletter, July 1992. l32 Marijuana Scheduling Petition; Denial of Petition; Remand;21 CFR Part 1308 [Docket No. 86-22], 1986. 133 Id. 134 Janet D. Lapey, "Marijuana As Medicine Refuted by NIHScientists," Drug Watch, August 1992. 135 Guy A. Cabral, "Marijuana and Virus Infections,"Southeast Regional Center for Drug-Free Schools and CommunitiesNewsletter. See also Guy A. Cabral, "Marijuana DecreasesMacrophage Antiviral and Antitumor Activities," Advances inthe Biosciences Vol. 80, 1991. 136 Sandra S. Bennett, "Therapeutic Marijuana: Fact orFiction," Drug Watch, July 1992. 137 Marijuana Scheduling Petition- Denial of Petition; Remand;21 CFR Part 1308 [Docket No. 86-22],1986. 138 Marsha Keith Schuchard, "Marijuana: An EnvironmentalPollutant," Publication of the National Parent's Resource Institute for Drug Education. 139 Id. 140 Id. 141 Id. 142 Marijuana Scheduling Petition; Denial of Petition; Remand;21 CFR Part 1308 [Docket No. 86-22], 1986. Chapter Seven Summary Sheet: Medical Uses of PresentlyIllegal Drugs Ifthey say... We should allow for therapeutic use of heroin. Thenyou say... Morphine provides longer-lasting, more consistent pain reliefthan does heroin. [Robert L. McCarthy and Michael Montagne,"The argument for therapeutic use of heroin in painmanagement," American Journal of Hospital Pharmacists, May1993]. If morphine does not work for a given patient, you should notuse- heroin, which is chemically very similar to morphine, butinstead should use a different opioid such as methadone. [ArthurG. Lipman, "The argument against therapeutic use of heroinin pain management," American Journal of HospitalPharmacists, May 1993]. The British doctors who initially advocated the therapeuticuse of heroin long ago reversed their position. [Lipman, citationabove]. The American Pharmaceutical Association admits that there areproblems in pain management, but that they are due to thetendency of doctors to fail to prescribe sufficient dosages ofpresently available opioids, not because of the unavailability ofheroin. [Lipman, citation above]. Allowing the therapeutic use of heroin increases the risk ofdiversion-i.e. that patients will sell their drugs on the blackmarket rather than using it themselves. (Lipman, citation above], Allowing pharmacies to stock heroin likely would 'increase therisk of robbery, especially when one considers that 50% of allpharmacy burglaries are committed to steal controlled substances.[Lipman, citation above]. Ifthey say... Marijuana should be used to treat glaucoma. Thenyou say... The studies which assert that marijuana helps to decreaseintraocular pressure were conducted with THC, not with marijuanaper se. [Marijuana Scheduling Petition; Denial of Petition;Remand; 21 CFR Part 1308 (Docket No. 86-22), 1986]. In order to see a significant decrease in intraocularpressure, you would have to smoke so much marijuana that youwould be stoned all day. [Scheduling Petition, citation above]. In fact, alcohol also decreases intraocular pressure. But aswith marijuana, you would have to consume so much that you wouldbe drunk all day. [Sandra S. Bennett, "TherapeuticMarijuana: Fact or Fiction," Drug Watch, July 1992]. Although marijuana may reduce one symptom of glaucoma(intraocular pressure), it also exacerbates another problem.Specifically, marijuana decreases blood pressure and hence. bloodsupply to the optic nerve- Because the optic nerve no longerreceives an adequate blood supply, it can be just as damaging toeyesight as the high intraocular pressure itself. [Bennett,citation above (citing Michael Van Buskirk, Director of GlaucomaServices and Chair of the Department of Ophthalmology at Devers Eye Institute)]. According to Doctor Keith Green, who serves or has served onthe boards of eight prestigious eye journals, "Marijuana ...has little potential future as a glaucoma medication."[Marijuana Scheduling Petition; Denial of Petition; Remand; 21CFR Part 1308 (Docket No. 86-22), 1986]. Ifthey say... Marijuana should be used for therapeutic treatment of theside- effects of chemotherapy such as nausea and vomiting. Thenyou say... The study that the legalizers will probably cite-the oneconducted by Mark Kleiman, which says that 40% of doctorsquestioned supported the therapeutic use of marijuana for cancerpatients--is methodologically flawed. Specifically, its returnrate (number of questionnaires returned), was only 42%, whichraises the strong potential of response bias. Also, Kleiman did notinform the reader how many of the people who did return thequestionnaire did in fact answer the questions. As one expert inbio-statistics concluded, "The report seems simple andcareless. - This is mere propaganda, and will be seen as such bythe informed reader." [Robert E. Peterson, "StudentExercise for Marijuana Activist Group Given National MediaAttention to Influence Court Case," Drug PreventionNewsletter, June 1991). As David Ettinger, professor of oncology at the Johns HopkinsUniversity School of Medicine notes, "There is no indicationthat Marijuana is effective in treating nausea and vomitingresulting from radiation treatment or other causes."[Marijuana Scheduling Petition; Denial, of Petition; Remand; 21CFR Part 1308 (Docket No. 86-22), 1986]. The National Cancer Institute concluded that other drugs suchas ondansetron, metoclopramine, droperidol, etc. are more usefulfor treating chemotherapy than is marijuana. [Janet Lapey,"Marijuana As Medicine Refuted by NIH Scientists," DrugWatch, August 1992]. Ifthey say... Marijuana is a useful treatment for AIDS patients. Thenyou say... Studies show that marijuana actually damages one's immunesystem and makes one more susceptible to colds, viruses, andinfluenza. [Guy A. Cabral, Marijuana and Virus Infections,Southeast Regional Center for Drug-Free Schools and CommunitiesNewsletter]. Marijuana actually increases the health risk to AIDS patientsbecause the smoke causes pulmonary problems. [Sandra S. Bennett,"Therapeutic Marijuana: Fact or Fiction, "Drug Watch,July 1992]. Ifthey say... Marijuana is a useful treatment for MS(multiple sclerosispatients). Thenyou say... According to Doctor Donald H. Silberberg, Chair of theDepartment of Neurology at the University of Pennsylvania, thereis no evidence that marijuana helps MS, and, in fact, it likely would be very harmful to the patient. [Marijuana SchedulingPetition; Denial of Petition; Remand; 21 CFR Part 1308 (DocketNo. 86-22), 1986]. Ifthey say... Marijuana on the whole is a good medicine. Thenyou say... According to Swedish researchers, use of marijuana increasesthe incidence of schizophrenia six-fold for long-term users.[Marsha Keith Schuchard, "Marijuana: An EnvironmentalPollutant" Publication of the National Parent's ResourceInstitute for Drug Education, Inc.]. Use of marijuana increases the threat of lung cancer, throatcancer, tongue cancer, and head cancer. [Schuchard, citationabove]. Use of marijuana by pregnant mothers increases the risk thattheir child will develop leukemia by 1000%. [Schuchard, citationabove]. Use of marijuana increases the risk of abnormalities similarto those caused by Fetal Alcohol Syndrome by 500%. [Schuchard,citation above]. (See also Chapter One, Addiction Rates). Ifthey say... The medical community condones the therapeutic use ofmarijuana. Thenyou say... Marijuana as medicine has been rejected by MedicalAssociation, the National Multiple Sclerosis Society, theAmerican Glaucoma Society, the American Academy of Ophthalmology,and the American Cancer Society. Not one American healthassociation accepts marijuana as medicine. [Marijuana SchedulingPetition; Denial of Petition; Remand, 21 CFR Part 1308 (DocketNo. 86-22), 1986]. Contents | Feedback | Search DRCNet Library | Schaffer Library | The Drug Legalization Debate WT02-B01-120IA086-000619-B008-204http://206.61.184.43:80/schaffer/DEBATE/MYTHS/myths2.htm 206.61.184.43 19970122034802 text/html 20655HTTP/1.0 200 OKDate: Wednesday, 22-Jan-97 03:47:53 GMTServer: WebSitePro/1.1f (S/N wpo-0deb)Allow-ranges: bytesContent-type: text/htmlLast-modified: Saturday, 28-Dec-96 07:22:32 GMTContent-length: 20437 Addiction Rates And Drug Legalization Contents | Feedback | Search DRCNet Library | Schaffer Library | The Drug Legalization Debate Drug Legalization: Myths and Misconceptions - US Dept. ofJustice Chapter One: Addiction Rates And Drug Legalization DISCUSSION I. Their Argument Proponents of drug legalization argue that legalizing drugswould decrease addiction rates for two reasons. First, theymaintain, people use drugs because they are illegal - thatis, people get a thrill breaking a social taboo. Legalize drugsand the incentive to take them will go away. Second, proponentsof legalization argue that if drugs were legalized, we couldspend the money that we presently spend on the criminal justicesystem on treatment of addicts.2 II. Our Argument Before addressing the particular merits of the legalizationdebate, it is useful to describe just what is an addiction.Addictions are either physical or psychological. Physicaladdiction occurs when the body becomes dependent upon chemicalsor drugs not normally found in the human body and requires suchchemicals in order to sustain basic bodily functions. Take, forinstance, cocaine addiction. Cocaine alters the means by whichbrain cells communicate with one another. Usually, nerve cells(neurons) send signals to one another through chemicalneurotransmitters such as dopamine. Dopamine flows from oneneuron to the other, delivers its message, and returns to theoriginal neuron. Cocaine, however, blocks the dopamine fromreturning to the first cell, and the first cell just keeps firingaway. This explains why cocaine produces such feelings ofpleasure; for lack of a better description, cocaine locks all ofthe user's neurons into an "On" position. The problemoccurs when all of the cocaine has been metabolized by the body.As Professor James Q. Wilson explains, "[w]hen theexaggerated high produced by cocaine-influenced dopamine finallyends, the brain cells may (in ways that are still a matter ofdispute) suffer from an extreme lack of dopamine, thereby makingthe individual unable to experience any pleasure at all."3This is a very simplified model, of course, and different drugsaffect the body in different ways, but a simple fact remains -physical addiction is biochemical in nature and is independent ofsocial, political, or psychological causes. There is another type of addiction, however, that beingpsychological addiction. Unlike physical addiction, whichbasically is a medical condition, psychological addiction occurswhen the individual user feels or is of the opinion that drugsare necessary for his or her life. This is not to suggest thatpsychological addiction is easily dismissed; indeed it can have aprofound influence on how addicts live their lives. Suchespecially is the case when addicts live in a culture thatcontinually reinforces the desirability or necessity of drug use. Let us examine addiction specific to two drugs: cocaine andmarijuana. Although rough, estimates suggest that there arebetween 650,000 and 2.4 million cocaine addicts in the UnitedStates.4 "Cocaine is a much more addictive drug thanalcohol. If cocaine were legally available the number of cocaineabusers would probably rise to...perhaps 20-25million."5Mitchell Rosenthal, President of the Phoenix Housedrug-rehabilitation program states that cheap available drugswould increase addiction; only 10% of drinkers become hooked,while an estimated 75% of regular drug (crack) users could becomeaddicts.6 Scientific studies agree, noting that when givenunlimited access to cocaine, laboratory animals will consumeincreasingly greater amounts until they die.7 That cocaine isharmful to one's health likely will come as a surprise to no one.Dr. Frank H. Gawin, director of stimulant abuse, treatment andresearch at Yale University concludes that cocaine causesdepression, paranoia, and "violent psychoticbehavior."8 What is worse, there is presently no effective,permanent treatment for cocaine addiction.9 Almost everyone would agree that cocaine is a dangerous,addictive drug, but many would be surprised to find that the sameis true of marijuana. Although it is very difficult to determinethe precise number of marijuana users and addicts in the UnitedStates, one fact is clear: marijuana has become much more potentover the last twenty years. Cannabis delta 9tetrahydrocannabinol, commonly known as "THC," is theactive ingredient in marijuana and other cannabis such ashashish. The THC content in marijuana during the days ofWoodstock was something less than 1%. In 1974, the average THCcontent of illicit marijuana was 0. 36% and by 1984 had increasedto 4.40%.10 In 1992 in Alaska, marijuana was discovered that hada THC content of 29.86%.11 Now stop and think about that for aminute. Today's marijuana may be between thirty to sixty times aspotent as were the joints of the 1960's. This observation gives one pause when we realize that THC isboth dangerous and habit-forming. Marinol, a prescription drugthat is very occasionally used in the treatment of nauseaassociated with chemotherapy, is chemically synthesized THC. Mostpeople are familiar with the information sheets that come withprescription drugs - the pieces of paper that detail theindications and usage of the drug in question, its potentialside-effects, its chemical composition, etc. The informationsheet that comes with Marinol states verbatim, "MARINOL ishighly abusable and can produce both physical and psychologicaldependence .... Patients receiving MARINOL should be closelyobserved."12 The company that produces Marinol goes on toexplain that its THC may cause "changes in mood ...decrements in cognitive performance and memory, a decreasedability to control drives and impulses [and] . . . a full-blownpicture of psychosis (psychotic organic brain syndrome) may occurin patients receiving doses within the lower portion of thetherapeutic range."13 Such warnings should not surprise the scientists who have formany years maintained that the THC contained in marijuana isdangerous. First, in the late 1960's Dr. Robert Heath, thenchairman of the Department of Psychiatry and Neurology at TulaneMedical School, found that marijuana affects brain waves anddestroys brain cells.14 Second, a study conducted by Dr. EthelSassenrath at the University of California at Davis between 1974and 1978 found that THC increased the rate of fetal loss (inutero, fetal death) in monkeys by over 300%, while at the sametime decreasing the birth weights in those babies born alive.15Third, a study by Dr. Susan Dalterio, at the University of Texasfound that marijuana decreased testosterone and impaired sexualdevelopment in male mice.16 Finally, a study by Dr. Albert Munsonfound that injections of THC suppressed the immune systems ofmice and made them 96 times more susceptible to the herpesvirus.17 Dr. Charles R. Schuster, former Director of the NationalInstitute on Drug Abuse said, "The fact that there are over77,000 admissions a year to treatment programs for marijuana useand that annually almost 8,000 persons require emergency hospitalcare for marijuana use is sufficient evidence of the drugsdangerousness"18 Clearly, drugs such as cocaine and marijuana are, bothaddictive and dangerous. The legalizers likely would admit this,but counter by saying that if we legalized them we would haveless of a problem. This is untrue. Recall from above that legalizers claim that people use andbecome addicted to drugs because of the excitement of breakingthe law - it is the fact that drugs are illegal that causespeople to try them. The data disagree. Robert E. Peterson, FormerDeputy Attorney General of Pennsylvania notes, "70% of highschool students in New Jersey and about 60% of the students inCalifornia said that fear of getting in trouble with the lawconstituted a major reason not to use drugs."19 The legalizers' argument that we should legalize drugs andspend the money we now spend on criminal prosecution on treatmentand rehabilitation also fails. Both proponents and opponents oflegalization are in agreement that legalization almost certainlywould decrease the price of drugs as they became more available.However, basic economic theory states that as the price of acommodity declines, demand for the commodity will increase. Butwhereas the reverse usually also is true (increase price anddemand decreases), it is not so with addictive substances. Thatis, drop the price of a gram of cocaine by 50%, and you will seean increase in use as demand for the product increases. Increasethe price of cocaine by 50%, and you will not see an equaldecrease in demand because addicts will pay the price to sustaintheir addictions. In technical economic terms, the demand foraddictive drugs is elastic with respect to price declines, butinelastic with respect to price increases. Expert opinion supports this hypothesis. Dr. Herbert D. Kleberof the Center on Addiction and Substance Abuse, ColumbiaUniversity, suggests that legalization of cocaine would result ina five- to six-fold increase in cocaine use.20 Dr. Robert DuPont,former director of the National Institute of Drug Abuse agrees,stating that legalization would increase the number of users ofcocaine and marijuana to between fifty and sixty million, and thenumber of heroin users to around ten million.21 Dr. DuPontconcludes that when one takes into account the health effects ofcocaine, heroin, and marijuana, legalization could result inbetween 100,000 and 500,000 drug induced deaths each year.22Further, you cannot legalize cocaine and control the crackepidemic, for users could easily turn the former into the latter. History also supports the fact that legalization wouldincrease addiction rates. When opium was legal in the UnitedStates at the turn of the century, we had proportionately betweentwo and three times the number of addicts than we do presently.23Furthermore, Dr. Richard Schwartz, Professor of Pediatrics atGeorgetown University School of Medicine, notes that Alaska andOregon, the states that traditionally have had the most lenientdrug laws, also have the highest marijuana addiction rates in theUnited States double the national average.24 Finally, foreign countries that have relaxed drug laws haveseen an increase in addiction rates [see Chapter Three]. In short, cocaine, heroin, and marijuana are dangerous andhighly addictive substances. Scholarly opinion, historicalevidence, and common sense suggest that if these drugs arelegalized, then the rates of addiction will skyrocket, leading tomisery and death. 2 See Chapters Two and Four for additional discussion ofwhether legalizing drugs would indeed allow us to shift resourcesfrom criminal prosecution to treatment and rehabilitation. 3 James Q. Wilson, "Against the Legalization ofDrugs," Commentary, February 1990. 4 David T. Courtwright, "Should We Legalize Drugs?History Answers," American Heritage, February/March 1993. 5 Herbert D. Kleber, "Our Current Approach to Drug Abuse- Progress, Problems, Proposals," The New England Journal ofMedicine, February 1994. 6 George Church, "Thinking the Unthinkable," Time,May 30, 1988. 7 Peter Kerr, "The Unspeakable is Debated: Should Drugsbe Legalized?" New York Times, May 15, 1988. 8 Id. 9 John W. Ladenburg, "Should We Legalize Drugs?"Policy Statement of the Pierce County Prosecuting Attorney. 10 "Quarterly Report #10 Potency MonitoringProject," Research Institute of Pharmaceutical Sciences,University of Mississippi, 1984. 11 "1992 Domestic Cannabis Eradication/SuppressionProgram", Drug Enforcement Administration, U.S. Dept. ofJustice, December, 1992. 12 Information Sheet for Marinol, Published by RoxaneLaboratories, Inc., Revised August 1989. 13 Id. 14 Robert G. Health, "Cannabis Sativa: Effects on BrainFunction," Biological Psychiatry, Vol. 15, No. 5, 1980. 15 Government's Supplemental Sentencing Memorandum Re: HealthEffects of Marijuana, U.S. v. Greyshock, United States DistrictCourt for the District of Hawaii, 1988. 16 Id. 17 Id. 18 Alaskans for Drug-Free Youth Newsletter, Winter 1993/94 19 Robert E. Peterson, "Stop Legalization of IllegalDrugs," Drug Awareness Information Newsletter, July 1988. 20 David Corcoran, "Legalizing Drugs: FailuresSpur Debate," New York Times, November 27, 1989. 21 Morton M. Kondracke, "Don't Legalize Drugs," TheNew Republic, June 27,1988. 22 Id. 23 Ethan A. Nadelmann, "Should We Legalize Drugs? HistoryAnswers," American Heritage, February/March 1993. 24 Richard Schwartz, "Sabotage and the War onDrugs," Drug Awareness Information Newsletter. Chapter One Summary Sheet: Addiction Rates and DrugLegalization Ifthey say... It is the fact that drugs are illegal that makes people wantto use them. Thenyou say... Studies conducted on senior high students in California andNew Jersey prove that the illegality of drugs discourages theiruse. [Robert E. Peterson, "Stop Legalization of IllegalDrugs," Drug Awareness Information Newsletter, July 1988]. Ifthey say... Cocaine is not addictive. Thenyou say... Cocaine is a much more addictive drug than alcohol. [HerbertD. Kleber, "Our Current Approach to Drug Abuse - Progress,Problems, Proposals," The New England Journal of Medicine,February 1994] Cheap available drugs would increase addiction; only 10% ofdrinkers become hooked, while an estimated 75% of regular drug(crack) users could become addicts. [George Church,"Thinking the Unthinkable," Time, May 30,1988.] In laboratory tests, animals will consume increasing dosagesof cocaine until they die. [Peter Kerr, "The Unspeakable IsDebated: Should Drugs be Legalized?" New York Times, May15,1988.] Presently in the United States there are between 650,000 and2.4 million cocaine addicts. [David T. Courtwright, "ShouldWe Legalize Drugs? History Answers," American Heritage,February/March 1993]. Ifthey say... Marijuana is not addictive. Thenyou say... THC, the active ingredient in marijuana, encourages bothphysical and psychological dependence and is highly abusable.[Information Sheet for MARINOL (synthetic THC), RoxaneLaboratories, Revised 1989]. 77,000 persons each year are admitted to treatment programsfor marijuana use. [Dr. Charles R, Schuster, Alaskans forDrug-Free Youth Newsletter, Winter 1993/94]. Ifthey say... Marijuana is not harmful. Thenyou say... Marijuana in the 1960's had a THC content of less than 1%.Today, the THC content is as high as 29.86%. [1992 DomesticCannabis Eradication/Suppression Program, Drug EnforcementAdministration, U.S. Dept. of Justice, December 1992 and"Quarterly Report #10 Potency Monitoring Project,"Research Institute of Pharmaceutical Sciences, University ofMississippi, 1984]. THC causes mood changes, loss of memory, psychosis, impairmentof coordination and perception, and complicates pregnancy.[Information Sheet for MARINOL (synthetic THC), RoxaneLaboratories, Revised 1989]. Marijuana causes increased risk of schizophrenia, disturbsbrain wave patterns and erodes brain cells, impairs the immunesystem, and complicates pregnancy. [Government's SupplementalSentencing Memorandum Re: Health Effects of Marijuana, U.S. v.Greyshock, U.S. District Court for the District of Hawaii, 1988]. Annually, almost 8,000 persons require emergency hospital carefor marijuana use. [Dr. Charles R. Schuster, citation above]. Ifthey say... Legalization will not increase the rate of addiction. Thenyou say... According to basic economic principles, increasingavailability and decreasing price will increase the demand for acommodity. Dr. Herbert Kleber of Columbia University suggests thatlegalizing cocaine would increase use five to six fold. (DavidCorcoran, "Legalizing Drugs: Failures Spur Debate," NewYork Times, November 27, 1989]. Dr. Robert DuPont holds that if drugs were legal, we wouldhave 50 to 60 million regular users of cocaine and marijuana and10 million users of heroin. [Morton M. Kondracke, "Don'tLegalize Drugs," The New Republic, June 27,1988]. When opium was legal in the U.S. at the turn of the century,the addiction rate was proportionately two to three times what itis now. [Ethan A. Nadelmann, "Should We Legalize Drugs?History Answers," American Heritage, February/March 1993]. Alaska and Oregon, which have the most permissive drug laws,have the highest rates of addiction - double the nationalaverage. [Richard Schwartz, "Sabotage and the War onDrugs," Drug Awareness Information Newsletter]. Contents | Feedback | Search DRCNet Library | Schaffer Library | The Drug Legalization Debate WT02-B01-121IA086-000619-B008-220http://206.61.184.43:80/schaffer/DEBATE/MYTHS/myths3.htm 206.61.184.43 19970122034813 text/html 21073HTTP/1.0 200 OKDate: Wednesday, 22-Jan-97 03:48:06 GMTServer: WebSitePro/1.1f (S/N wpo-0deb)Allow-ranges: bytesContent-type: text/htmlLast-modified: Saturday, 28-Dec-96 07:22:22 GMTContent-length: 20855 Crime and Drug Legalization Contents | Feedback | Search DRCNet Library | Schaffer Library | The Drug Legalization Debate Drug Legalization: Myths and Misconceptions Chapter Two: Crime and Drug Legalization Discussion I. Their Argument Proponents of legalization advance two theories as to howlegalization will decrease crime in the United States, and bothare dependent on the assumption that legalization will reduce thecost of drugs to the user. First, because users will not have tospend as much to support their drug habits, fewer will need tocommit crimes such as robbery and burglary to obtain drug money.Second, because the cost of drugs will decrease, so will the drugsellers' profits. Because drugs will no longer be a profitablebusiness, and because addicts will be able to obtain their drugsfrom legal sources, the current black market suppliers of drugs -gangs, foreign cartels, organized criminals, etc.-will fade away. II. Our Argument Before addressing these theories, it is useful to distinguishbetween three types of drug-related crime. As Professor James Q.Wilson notes [t]he illegality of drugs increases crime, partly because someusers turn to crime to pay for their habits, partly because someusers are stimulated by certain drugs (such as crack or PCP) toact more violently or ruthlessly than they otherwise would, andpartly because criminal organizations seeking to control drugsupplies use force to manage their markets.25 For ease of discussion, this author will refer to the crimecaused by people to pay for their habits as"purchase-related," the crime caused by people whileunder the influence of drugs as "drug-induced," and thecrime caused by organized criminal suppliers of drugs as"black market crime." Let us discuss each in turn. A. Purchase-related crime As stated above, legalizers assume that as legalized drugsbecome less expensive, addicts will no longer have to commitcrimes in order to fund their habits. One immediate difficultywith this analysis is that drugs already are exceptionallyinexpensive. For example, a hit of crack costs about five dollarson the streets of Seattle and about three dollars in other majormetropolitan areas.27 Granted, the pharmaceutical cost of cocainesufficient to make a hit of crack is roughly twenty-five cents.28But to the extent that a legal crack supplier likely would haveto meet government regulations or would have to internalize thecosts of taxes placed upon the legalized drug, some analystsquestion whether it is possible to reduce the currentstreet-price of drugs.29 Nonetheless, let us assume that legal drug suppliers couldundersell the black market by offering cocaine for approximatelyfifty cents a dose. What would happen? As discussed at length in Chapter One, addiction rates wouldskyrocket. This fact is almost indisputable, and even theLibertarian supporters of drug legalization admit that "lowprices would encourage use."30 History is very clear on thispoint as well---once cocaine began being marketed in the highpotency/low cost form of crack, addiction rates did increase.31And when addiction rates increase, so does purchase-relatedcrime. As Elliott Currie explains, "[h]igher levels of druguse do go hand in hand with increased crime, especiallyproperty crime."32 So in reality, legalizing drugs would not decreasepurchase-related crime, but would actually increase it.Three reasons explain why this is so. First, if you decrease theprice of an addictive substance, addicts merely will buy more ofthe less expensive product.33 Second, it is not as ifaddicts steal money only to pay for drugs; likely, they stealmoney to meet living expenses such as food, rent, etc. WilliamBennett notes that "[m]aking drugs legal would just be a wayof subsidizing [addicts] habit. They would continue to rob andsteal to pay for food, for clothes, for entertainment."34 Ofcourse, since there are more addicts, there would be more peoplecommitting purchase-related crimes. Third, one must recall thatpurchase-related crime is not directly related to the cost of thedrug, but instead is indirectly related: the prices of drugsaffect the addiction rate, which in turn affects thepurchase-related crime rate. This point perhaps is subtle, butalso is important. Addicts will pay almost any price for drugs.Thus the question becomes not "What is the price ofdrugs," but instead "How many addicts are there?"Because legalized drugs increase addiction rates,purchase-related crime necessarily increases. B. Drug-induced crime As with purchase-related crime, the price of drugs is notdirectly relevant in determining the amount of drug-inducedcrime, except to the extent that the price affects the number ofaddicts. Undoubtedly, drug-induced crime is a significantproblem, One conservative estimate based upon the Bureau ofJustice Statistics study suggests that with regard to local jailinmates, 15.4% of such inmates tested positive for illegal drugsand an additional 12.1 % tested positive for a combination ofillegal drugs and alcohol.35 Another study conducted by theNational Institute of Justice in 1986 found that for twelve majormetropolitan areas, 70% of inmates tested positive for illegaldrugs.36 The N.I.J. study concluded that "[these offendersdid not commit crimes simply to feed their habits. Drugs changedtheir behavior, enabled and encouraged them to act violently andirrationally."37 Again, these results are unsurprising. Drugs such as crackencourage hyperactive violence.38 If you legalize such drugs andthe addiction rate increases, you will have more people walkingaround more often under its influence. It simply is untenable tosuggest that policies such as legalization that increaseaddiction rates could do anything but increase the frequency ofdrug-induced crime. C. Black market crime As mentioned above, legalizers suggest that if you allow drugsto be sold legally, it would drive out the black market, for thelatter only thrives when people cannot obtain goods throughnormal, legal channels. Such analysis seems attractive at first,but a closer look at the facts will prove that it is bothsimplistic and incorrect. So long as there are any restrictions as to what drugs were tobe legalized, who would be able to buy them, what quantities andpotencies were available, etc., a black market would fill theneed. For example, if the legalizers would limit the sale ofdrugs to those people over twenty-one, then the black marketwould target children. This argument is made by David T.Courtwright, who finds potential black markets for "thoseunder twenty-one, or for public-safety officers, or transportworkers, or military personnel, or pregnant women, or prisoners,or probationers, or parolees, or psychotics. . . . "39 Inorder truly to defeat the black market, one not only would haveto allow anyone to buy drugs, but also would have to make allforms of drugs available. William Rasberry explains that"[i]f marijuana and perhaps heroin are legalized, but notcrack cocaine and violence-inducing PCP, the effect on the crimeassociated with drug trafficking would be minimal." Few, ifany, legalizers would be willing completely to legalize all drugsfor all people - but if they refuse to do so, they cannotjustifiably claim to have made a significant impact on blackmarket crime. Another problem with the legalizers' argument is that many ofthem advocate a policy whereby legalized drugs are taxed in orderto raise revenue for other social programs. But again, if youlegalize drugs and tax them, you will have a black market thatcan sell the same drugs less expensively. The same is true if youstamp a tariff on imported drugs, and history shows this to becorrect. Recall that until the early twentieth century, opiatesand other drugs were legal in the United States. Much of theopium consumed by U.S. citizens was imported from China, and" enlightened lawmakers decided to place a tariff on thedrug as a means of raising revenue. For example, between 1866 and1914, the duty on crude opium was 33%; on ready-to-smoke opium itwas 97%.41 Although these tariffs did produce income, they alsocreated a smuggler's paradise that organized crime syndicatessuch as the Chinese tongs quickly filled. Criminals would smuggleopium into the country, not pay the tariff, and make a higherprofit margin on their goods. Interestingly enough, at the peakof the opium tariffs twice as much opium was smuggled into theU.S. as went through legal channels.42 Thus, history proves thatif you place a tariff on imported drugs - be they legal orillegal - black markets will continue to flourish unabated. Let's return to the simple taxation of drugs produced withinthe United States. Again, the equation is simple - tax equalsblack market - and again, history proves it to be true. Taketobacco for instance. Here is a legal commodity that potentiallycan be taxed by both the federal government and any of the stategovernments.43 Unsurprisingly, some states historically have hadhigher cigarette taxes than others. In 1975, smokers in NorthCarolina would pay thirty-six cents a pack whereas New Yorkershad to pay fifty-four cents.44 Organized syndicates tookadvantage of the situation, buying cigarettes in North Carolinaand selling them in New York for a profit-indeed at one point 50%of all the cigarettes sold in New York City were bootleggedproducts controlled by criminal organizations.45 Thus, proponentsof legalized drugs will never be able to stop the black market,because the federal government, even if it wanted to, could notstop state governments from taxing the drugs at different levels. Finally, with regard to the entire black market theories ofthe legalizers, we have to remember the simple fact thatorganized crime is composed of criminals. Query what the Cali orthe Medellin Cartel would do if they discovered that theircocaine was being under priced by a legal manufacturer (let's saya pharmaceutical company like Upjohn). What is the chance thatthe Colombians would say "Oh well, we just cannot compete inthe market. Let's close up shop and take real jobs."Unlikely. Instead, currently entrenched crime syndicates woulduse violence to ensure their place in the market.46 In the aboveexample, the Cali cartel might destroy Upjohn's laboratories. Orit might murder everyone who sits on their Board of Directors. Orit might take the less glamorous, but certainly more traditional,strategy of telling addicts that if they don't buy their cocainefrom the cartel, they will be killed. In short, the belief thatif we legalize drugs then organized crime will run away with itstail between its legs ignores grim reality. In conclusion, drugs produce three types of crime:purchase-related crime, drug-induced crime, and black marketcrime. To the extent that legalizing drugs would make themcheaper - a point on which all sides of the debate agree - itwould create many new addicts and the incidence ofpurchase-related crime and drug-induced crime would increase.Furthermore, if there were any regulations or taxes of anysort placed upon the legalized drugs, U.S. history provesthat the black market crime would continue. Thus, legalizingdrugs not only does not decrease criminal behavior, it almostcertainly would spur its increase. 25 James Q. Wilson, "Against the Legalization ofDrugs," Commentary, February 1990. 26 Statement of John W. Ladenburg (Pierce County ProsecutingAttorney), "Should We Legalize Drugs?" 27 Robert E. Peterson, "Stop Legalization ofIllegal Drugs," Drug Awareness Information Newsletter, July1988. 28 Mark A.R. Kleirnan, "Legalization: A SimplisticSolution to a Complex Problem" Issues in Science andTechnology, Summer 1990. 29 "No Magic Bullet - A Look at Drug Legalization,"U.S. Department of Justice, Drug Enforcement Administration,Demand Reduction Section. 30 Timothy Radonich, "Controlling drugs throughregulation," Northwest Libertarian (newsletter), September1990. 31 William Bennett, "Mopping up after the legalizers:What the 'intellectual' chorus fails to tell you," TheWashington Times, December 15, 1989. 32 Elliott Currie, "Towards a Policy on Drugs,"Dissent, Winter 1993. 33 Robert E. Peterson, "Stop Legalization of IllegalDrugs," Drug Awareness Information Newsletter, July 1988. 34 William Bennett, "Mopping up after the legalizers-What the 'intellectual' chorus fails to tell you," TheWashington Times, December 15, 1989. 35 U.S. Department of Justice, Office of Justice Programs,Bureau of Justice Statistics, "Fact Sheet: Drug Data Summary," Drugs & Crime Data,November 1992. 36 Peter B. Bensinger, "Arguments Against LegalizingDrugs," Drug Abuse Update, September 1988. 37 Id. 38 James Q. Wilson, "Against the Legalization ofDrugs," Commentary, February 1990. 39 David T. Courtwright, "Should We Legalize Drugs?History Answers," American Heritage, February/March 1993. 40 William Rasberry, "Legalizing Drugs: Let's GetSpecific," The Washington Post, November 1, 1989. 41 David T. Courtwright, "Should We LegalizeDrugs? History Answers," American Heritage, February/March1993. 42 Id. 43 Also note that the federal government cannotconstitutionally prohibit a state from taxing a given commodity. 44 David T. Courtwright, "Should We Legalize Drugs?History Answers," American Heritage, February/March 1993. 45 Id. 46 Christopher Collins and Susan Collins, "WhatSavings?" The Sun, March 20, 1990. Chapter Two Summary Sheet: Crime and Drug Legalization Ifthey say... If drugs were legalized, addicts would no longer have tocommit crimes to pay for their habit. Thenyou say... Drugs are already so cheap that legalization might not drivethe price down any further. Thus, addicts would still have tosteal. ["No Magic Bullet: A Look at Drug Legalization,"U.S. Dept. of Justice, D.E.A. Demand Reduction Section Positionpaper]. But assuming that legalization would cut the price of drugs,low prices encourage use and addiction. [Timothy Radonich,"Controlling drugs through regulation," NorthwestLibertarian, September 1990.] As addiction rates increased, crime, especially propertyCrime, would increase. [Elliott Currie, "Towards a Policy onDrugs," Dissent, Winter 1993]. As the prices of drugs decrease, addicts will buy more; thus,they will still steal in order to spend the same amount on drugs.[Robert E. Peterson, "Stop Legalization of IllegalDrugs," Drug Awareness Information Newsletter, July 1988]. Addicts would still steal in order to afford food, clothes,entertainment, etc. [William Bennett, "Mopping up after thelegalizers: What the 'intellectual' chorus fails to tellyou," The Washington Times, December 15, 1989]. Ifthey say... If drugs were legalized, drug- induced crime would decrease. Thenyou say... Drug use encourages irrational and criminal behavior. Studiesindicate that as many as 70% of inmates were on illegal drugswhen arrested. [U.S. Dept. of Justice, Office of JusticePrograms, Bureau of Justice Statistics, 'Tact Sheet: Drug DataSummary," Drugs & Crime Data. November 1992;Peter Bensinger, "Arguments Against Legalizing Drugs,"Drug Abuse Update, September 1988]. Recent U.S. experience with crack cocaine clearly proves thatas drugs become cheaper, violent crime increases. [WilliamBennett, "Mopping up after the legalizers: What the'intellectual' chorus fails to tell you," The WashingtonTimes, December 15, 1989]. As legalization of drugs increases the addiction rate [seeChapter One], then we would have more people under the influenceof drugs more often. Ifthey say... Legalizing drugs would end the crime caused by black marketsand organized syndicates. Thenyou say... If there are any restrictions placed upon who may use legaldrugs, such as minors, pregnant women, police, militarypersonnel, pilots, prisoners, parolees, or psychotics, a blackmarket would rise up to fill the niche. (David T.Courtwright,"Should We Legalize Drugs? HistoryAnswers," American Heritage, February/March 1993]. In order to begin to stop the black market, you would have tolegalize crack and PCP. [William Rasberry, "LegalizingDrugs: Let's Get Specific," The Washington Post, November 1,1989]. U.S. history proves that if you attempt to levy tariffs onimported legal drugs, a black market will result due tosmuggling. Such was the case in the early twentieth century whenChinese crime syndicates smuggled opium into the U.S. so as toavoid tariffs. [David T. Courtwright, "Should We LegalizeDrugs? History Answers," American Heritage, February/March1993]. If you tax the legal drugs at all, a black market will result.This is proven by U.S. history, where organized crime wouldsmuggle cigarettes from states with low tobacco taxes into thosewith high tobacco taxes, thus making a profit [Courtwright,citation above]. Organized crime would use violence against legal suppliers inorder to ensure its market share. Criminals would not play by therules. [Christopher Collins and Susan Collins, "WhatSavings?" The Sun, March 20,1990]. Contents | Feedback | Search DRCNet Library | Schaffer Library | The Drug Legalization Debate WT02-B01-122IA086-000619-B008-297http://206.61.184.43:80/schaffer/DEBATE/MYTHS/myths6.htm 206.61.184.43 19970122034848 text/html 13829HTTP/1.0 200 OKDate: Wednesday, 22-Jan-97 03:48:41 GMTServer: WebSitePro/1.1f (S/N wpo-0deb)Allow-ranges: bytesContent-type: text/htmlLast-modified: Saturday, 28-Dec-96 07:22:01 GMTContent-length: 13611 The Lessons of Prohibition and Drug Legalization Contents | Feedback | Search DRCNet Library | Schaffer Library | The Drug Legalization Debate Chapter Five: The Lessons of Prohibition and DrugLegalization DISCUSSION I. Their Argument Proponents of legalization suggest that the United Statesexperience with alcohol prohibition in the 1920's provides ampleproof of the problems that result when the government attempts tomake a popular substance illegal. Legalizers point to ostensibleincreases in organized crime such as that associated with AlCapone in order to make their point. Basically, they say, it isbetter to legalize, tax and regulate than simply to declare drugsillegal. II. Our Argument The legalizers' arguments here are deeply flawed and merit twoprimary responses: first, the circumstances surroundingProhibition are so different than those of today's world that itpractically is impossible to use its history as a means ofanalyzing present-day policy; second, Prohibition was in factsuccessful and did not create the negative consequences that thelegalizers say it did. But to the first point. David Teasley, an analyst with theCongressional Research Service of the Library of Congress,undertook an in-depth analysis in 1992 entitled, "Druglegalization and the 'lessons' of Prohibition." Teasleyultimately concluded that [A] comprehensive analogy between Prohibition and the moderndrug problem is problematic in at least two major ways. First,between the two eras there are significant differences that tendto undermine the prolegalization analogy. Second, many argumentsof the prolegalizers are weakened by their reliance upon a widelyheld set of popular beliefs about Prohibition rather than uponrecent historical evidence. Such attempts to create this analogybased upon these popular beliefs about Prohibition serve only toconfuse the debate over legalization of illicit drugs.97 Let us examine the differences that Teasley (and others) citebetween the era of Prohibition and the era in which we now live. First, during prohibition the government sought to restrictthe consumption of alcohol although it lacked the moral consensusof the nation. That is, even during Prohibition, most people wereaccepting of alcohol.98 Such is not the case today, for the vastmajority of citizens do feel that illicit drugs should remainillegal [see Chapter Eleven]. Thus, Prohibition went against thenational consensus whereas illegalization of drugs does not. Second, the laws of Prohibition themselves were different thanthose dealing with illicit drugs today. During Prohibition, itwas not illegal to drink alcohol, it was only illegal to sell it.Today, however, it is both illegal to sell and to use illicitdrugs. Consequently, today's laws can target the users whilethose of the Prohibition era could not.99 Third, during the Prohibition era several states did notsupport the federal laws. This fact created tension between thestate and federal governments and hampered effective prosecutionof alcohol distributors. Today, 48 states have signed the UniformControlled Substances Act, and all are in effective agreementwith the federal government in matters of drug policy - astate/federal consensus exists that was not present duringProhibition.100 Fourth, criminal penalties are much more severe today than inthe 1920's. For example, the first-offense bootlegger faced amaximum fine of $ 1,000 or six months in prison. Today, afirst-offense trafficker of cocaine or heroin (of less than 100grams) faces fines up to $1 million and imprisonment for up to 20years.101 Fifth, during Prohibition the United States was a"dry" nation within a "wet" internationalcommunity. Just as the Prohibition policies were counter to themoral consensus within the U.S., they were also at odds with thatof the international community (which explains why so muchalcohol was imported from Canada). But as discussed in ChapterThree, the international community is resolute when it comes todrug policy; in December of 1988 over 80 countries signed theConvention Against Illicit Traffic in Narcotic Drugs andPsychotropic Substances.102 Sixth and finally, the administrativestructure of the government agencies designed to carry out theProhibition laws was narrow, unstable, and filled with politicalappointees. Today's national drug strategy involves over a dozenfederal agencies coordinated by the Office of National DrugControl Policy. In short, the governmental bodies that prosecutetoday's drug violators are much larger, have much betterresources, and are much more professional than their Prohibitioncounterparts.103 Thus, it is factually incorrect for the legalizers toanalogize our history with Prohibition to today's drug policies.They simply do not have that much in common. But should thelegalizers choose to make such an analogy, they also should bemade aware of the fact that Prohibition was on balance asuccessful program. First, use of alcohol decreased significantly duringProhibition.104 This decrease in turn lead to a marked decreasein the incidence of cirrhosis of the liver.105 Also,alcohol-related arrests decreased 50%. 106 Finally, the suiciderate also decreased by 50%.107 A second reason why Prohibition was a successful program isdue to the fact that it did not -- contrary to popular myth --cause an increase in the crime rate. It is true that there was anincrease in the homicide rate during Prohibition, but this is notthe same as an increase in the overall crime rate. Furthermore,the increase in homicide occurred predominantly in theAfrican-American community, and African-Americans at that timewere not the people responsible for alcohol trafficking.108 Thedrama of Elliot Ness and Al Capone largely was just that, dramasensationalized by the media of the time. In short, it is doubtful that one legitimately may analogizeProhibition with our current efforts to control drugs. There aretoo many differences in the laws, the political establishment,the moral consensus, and the international community to make suchanalogizing worthwhile. Nonetheless, the fact remains thatProhibition accomplished many of its goals, improved the healthof the entire nation, and did not cause a significant increase inthe crime rate. Mark Kleinman, who has proposed legalizingmarijuana109 notes, the U.S. experience with Prohibition is thebest evidence to support the continued illegalization of illicitdrugs.110 97 David L. Teasley, "Drug legalization and the 'lessons'of Prohibition," Contemporary Drug Problems, Spring 1992. 98 Robert E. Peterson, "Stop Legalization of IllegalDrugs," Drug Awareness Information Newsletter, July 1988. 99 David L. Teasley, "Drug legalization and the 'lessons'of Prohibition," Contemporary Drug Problems, Spring 1992. 100 Id. 101 Id. 102 Id. 103 Id. 104 Id. 105 Charles Krauthammer, "Legalize? No,Deglamorize," The Washington Post, May 20,1988. 106 Robert L. DuPont, "The Case Against LegalizingDrugs," Drug Awareness Information Newsletter. 107 Robert Stutman, "Reasons Not to Legalize Drugs,"Drug Awareness Information Newsletter. 108 David L. Teasley, "Drug legalization and the'lessons' of Prohibition," Contemporary Drug Problems,Spring 1992. 109 Mark A.R. Kleiman and Aaron J. Saiger, "DrugLegalization: The Importance of Asking the Right Question,"Hofstra Law Review Vol. 18, 1990. 110 Letter from John C. Lawn to Joseph E. DiGenova, DrugEnforcement Administration, June 3, 1988. Chapter Five Summary Sheet: The Lessons of Prohibition andDrug Legalization Ifthey say... The lessons of Prohibition can be used to analyze the presentpolicies, prohibition in illicit drugs. Thenyou say... Whereas there was not a moral consensus for Prohibition U.S.citizens overwhelmingly are in favor of the the continuedillegalization of illicit drugs. [Robert E. Peterson, "StopLegalization of Illegal Drugs;" Drug Awareness InformationNewsletter, July 1988]. During Prohibition, only the sale, and not the use, of alcoholwas illegal. Today, both sale and use of illicit drugs areillegal. Consequently, present drug policies can target userswhereas Prohibition laws could not. [David L. Teasley, "Druglegalization and the 'lessons' of Prohibition," ContemporaryDrug Problems, Spring 1992]. During Prohibition, there was much tension between federal andstate alcohol policy. Today, 48 states have signed the UniformControlled Substances Act, and the federal and state governmentswork in concert. [David Teasley, citation above]. During Prohibition, criminal sanctions were not extreme - afirst-time bootlegger could receive a $1,000 fine or six monthsin prison. Today, fines for first-time cocaine or herointrafficking are up to $1 million and prison sentences go as highas 20 years. [David Teasley, citation above). During Prohibition, the U.S. was a "dry" country ina "wet" international community. Today, almost allcountries are in agreement that drugs should be illegal, aswitnessed by the fact that 80 countries signed the 1988Convention Against Illicit Traffic in Narcotic Drugs andPsychotropic Substances. [David Teasley, citation above]. The political administration responsible for enforcingProhibition was small, underfunded, and unprofessional. Incontrast, the current drug control program is run by over a dozenagencies coordinated by the Office of National Drug ControlPolicy. [David Teasley, citation above]. Ifthey say... Prohibition caused more harm than good. Thenyou say... During Prohibition, alcohol use declined significantly [DavidTeasley, citation above]. During Prohibition, incidence of cirrhosis of the liverdecreased by 35%. [Charles Krauthammer, "Legalize? No,Deglamorize," The Washington Post, May 20, 1988]. During Prohibition, the suicide rate decreased 50%. [RobertStutman, "Reasons Not to Legalize Drugs," DrugAwareness Information Newsletter]. During Prohibition, the incidence of alcohol-related arrestsalso declined by 50% [Robert L. DuPont, "The Case AgainstLegalizing Drugs," Drug Awareness Information Newsletter]. Contrary to popular opinion, the crime rate did not markedlyincrease during prohibition. What did increase was the homiciderate (not the same as the overall crime rate) amongAfrican-Americans. And African-Americans had little to do withalcohol trafficking. [David Teasley, citation above]. Mark Kleiman admits that the U.S. experience with Prohibitionis one of the strongest arguments in favor of the continuedillegalization of illicit drugs. [Letter from John C. Lawn toJoseph E. DiGenova, Drug Enforcement Administration, June 3,1988]. Contents | Feedback | Search DRCNet Library | Schaffer Library | The Drug Legalization Debate WT02-B01-123IA087-000627-B028-11http://206.61.184.43:80/olsen/MEDICAL/IOWA/survey94.html 206.61.184.43 19970122055351 text/html 4377HTTP/1.0 200 OKDate: Wednesday, 22-Jan-97 05:53:35 GMTServer: WebSitePro/1.1f (S/N wpo-0deb)Allow-ranges: bytesContent-type: text/htmlLast-modified: Sunday, 01-Dec-96 17:54:00 GMTContent-length: 4162 1994 Iowa Legislative Survey 1994 Iowa Legislative Survey Last December, we sent a medical marijuana survey to all 150 members of the newly elected Iowa Legislature, asking for support for a resolution calling upon the federal government to make marijuana medically available by a doctor's prescription, and asking that the medical necessity defense be enacted into Iowa law. Two Iowa Senators, Merlin Bartz (Republican, Grafton) and Elaine Szymoniak (Democrat, Des Moines), have agreed to draft legislation for us and have assigned interns to work on our suggestions. We're extremely optimistic that at the least we will get a public hearing on our proposals in the Iowa Senate this year. It would be extremely helpful if you'd sit down right now and write a letter to one or more of our supporters in the Iowa Senate expressing your support. You can write to them at the Iowa Statehouse, Des Moines, Iowa 50319, or at their home addresses (listed below). Here are the responses we've received so far from our legislative survey:                                      1994 Iowa SenateFIRST NAME  LAST NAME   ADDRESS                 CITY           ZIP   P  YES   NOT   NONAME        NAME                                                              SURE4  John     Kibbie      RR 1, Box 139A          Emmetsburg     50536 D  XXX5  Mary Lou Freeman     311 W. Lakeshore Drive  Storm Lake     50588 R  XXX8  Berl     Priebe      2106 100th Avenue       Algona         50511 D  XXX9  Stewart  Iverson     3020 Dows-Williams Road Dows           50071 R        XXX10 Merlin   Bartz       RR 1, Box 17            Grafton        50440 R  XXX11 John     Jensen      331 120th Street        Plainfield     50666 R        XXX13 Jim      Lind        720 Prospect Boulevard  Waterloo       50701 R  XXX25 Robert   Dvorsky     515 6th Avenue          Coralville     52241 D        XXX33 William  Palmer      460 Hawthorn Circle     Des Moines     50317 D  XXX36 Elaine   Szymoniak   2116 44th St.           Des Moines     50310 D  XXX                            1994 Iowa House of RepresentativesFIRST         LAST       ADDRESS                 CITY           ZIP   P YES   NOT   NONAME          NAME                                                            SURE4  Ralph      Klemme     RR 4, Box 107           Le Mars        51031 R             XXX6  Richard    Vande Hoef 1833 100th Avenue       Harris         51345 R       XXX13 Michael    Cormack    245 Avenue N West       Fort Dodge     50501 R       YYY24 Donald     Hanson     3511 Monticello Ave.    Waterloo       50701 R             XXX26 Patricia   Harper     3336 Santa Maria Dr.    Waterloo       50702 D XXX27 Joseph     Kremer     1217 250th Street       Jesup          50648 R       XXX37 Clyde      Bradley    835 Blackhawk Lane      Camanche       52730 R       YYY56 Jerry      Welter     RR 1, Box 224           Monticello     52310 R XXX59 Phil       Tyrrell    222 N. Mill             North English  52316 R       XXX69 John       Connors    1316 East 22nd Street   Des Moines     50317 D       YYY70 Ed         Fallon     1321 8th Street         Des Moines     50314 D XXX76 Steven     Churchill  6140 Nottingham         Johnston       50131 R             XXX77 David      Lord       1250 K Circle           Perry          50220 R             XXX84 Brent      Siegrist   714 Grace Street        Council Bluffs 51503 R       XXX88 Horace     Daggett    400 N. Bureau           Creston        50801 R             XXX89 Brian      Coon       540 Ninth               Carlisle       50047 R             XXX95 Harold     Van Maanen 410 Liberty Street      Pella          50219 R             XXX98 Philip     Wise       503 Grand Avenue        Keokuk         52632 D             XXX "YYY" in the "not sure" column signifies that the respondent is leaning toward a "yes" vote. Iowans for Medical Marijuana  P.O. Box 4091  Des Moines, IA 50333  515-262-6957WT02-B01-124IA087-000627-B028-31http://206.61.184.43:80/olsen/MEDICAL/IOWA/result95.html 206.61.184.43 19970122055412 text/html 8947HTTP/1.0 200 OKDate: Wednesday, 22-Jan-97 05:54:06 GMTServer: WebSitePro/1.1f (S/N wpo-0deb)Allow-ranges: bytesContent-type: text/htmlLast-modified: Sunday, 01-Dec-96 17:54:15 GMTContent-length: 8732 1995 Iowa Legislative Survey Iowans for Medical Marijuana POST OFFICE BOX 4091  DES MOINES, IOWA 50333  515-262-6957 Press Release:                                      Contact:   Carl OlsenNovember 23, 1995                                              515-262-6957 Iowa Legislative Survey Results      Iowans for Medical Marijuana sent a Legislative Questionnaire to each of the 100 members of the Iowa House of Representatives and to each of the 50 members of the Iowa Senate.  Our questionnaire asked: "Will you lend your support in demanding that the Federal Government allow Iowans with legitimate medical needs to use marijuana for medical purposes?"  We received 43 replies from the Iowa House of Representatives (43%), and 16 replies from the Iowa Senate (32%).  10 of those responding in the Iowa House of Representatives were in favor of our proposal, 21 of those responding were unsure, and 13 of those responding were opposed.  10 of those responding in the Iowa Senate were in favor of our proposal, 5 were unsure, and 2 were opposed.  The results seem to better than last year.  Last year, 3 of those responding in the Iowa House of Representatives were in favor of our proposal, 7 were unsure, and 8 were opposed, while 7 of those responding in the Iowa Senate were in favor, 3 were unsure, and none were opposed.  The response to the survey was much better this year than last year.     Carl Olsen, coordinator for Iowans for Medical Marijuana, said, "We're doing a good job of educating the Legislature about the medical benefits of marijuana.  Many of them were unaware of the present conflict between state and federal law."  Since 1979, Iowa law has allowed prescription of marijuana.  Federal law has never allowed prescription of marijuana, but the federal government had been supplying marijuana to patients on a selective basis under a program of compassionate care.  In 1992 the federal government decided to stop accepting new applications for its compassionate care marijuana program.  Only eight Americans remain on the federal program and two of them live in Iowa.  Olsen said, "Health care should be a basic fundamental right for everyone, not just the eight people who now receive federally grown marijuana.  It's time the federal government stopped playing games with people's lives and allowed doctors to prescribe marijuana to all patients who need it."     A federal bill, H.R. 2618, similar to Iowa's medical marijuana law, Iowa Code  124.206(7)(a), was introduced in the U.S. House of Representatives on Monday, November 13, 1995. 1994 & 1995 Iowa House of Representatives    FIRST    LAST       ADDRESS                  CITY           ZIP   P  YES  NOT  NO   NAME     NAME                                                             SURE 1 Ronald   Nutt       3711 Cheyenne Blvd.      Sioux City     51104 R       XXX 4 Ralph    Klemme     RR 4, Box 107            Le Mars        51031 R            XXX 5 Kenneth  Veenstra   216 Arizona Ave., SW     Orange City    51041 R       XXX 6 Richard  Vande Hoef 1833 100th Avenue        Harris         51345 R       XXX 9 Dan      Huseman    6144 Y Avenue            Aurelia        51005 R       XXX10 Russell  Eddie      1101 Pierce Drive        Storm Lake     50588 R  XXX13 Michael  Cormack    447 2nd St., N.W.        Fort Dodge     50501 R       XXX14 Norman   Mundie     RR 4, Box 78             Fort Dodge     50501 D       XXX17 Russell  Teig       3581 Little Wall Lake Rd Jewell         50130 R            XXX18 Steve    Sukup      2258 240th Street        Dougherty      50433 R            XXX19 Gary     Blodgett   1050 Meadow Lake Dr.     Mason City     50401 R       XXX22 Bob      Brunkhorst 419 3rd Avenue, SW       Waverly        50677 R            XXX24 Donald   Hanson     3511 Monticello Ave.     Waterloo       50701 R            XXX25 Don      Shoultz    295 Kenilworth Road      Waterloo       50701 D       XXX26 Patricia Harper     3336 Santa Maria Dr.     Waterloo       50702 D  XXX27 Joseph   Kremer     1217 250th Street        Jesup          50648 R       XXX36 Pat      Murphy     1770 Hale Street         Dubuque        52001 D  XXX37 Clyde    Bradley    835 Blackhawk Lane       Comanche       52730 R  XXX  199439 Dan      Boddicker  1052 195th Street        Tipton         52772 R  XXX49 Dick     Myers      9 Woodland Heights, NE   Iowa City      52240 D  XXX50 Lynn     Schulte    208 3rd Avenue South     Mt. Vernon     52314 R       XXX52 Ron      Corbett    1517 D Avenue, NE        Cedar Rapids   52402 R            XXX55 Chuck    Larson     3355 Riverpointe Cir. NE Cedar Rapids   52411 R            XXX56 Jerry    Welter     RR 1, Box 224            Monticello     52310 R  199459 Phil     Tyrrell    222 N. Mill              North English  52316 R       199464 Beverly  Nelson     3107 Fieldcrest Court    Marshalltown   50158 R  XXX69 John     Connors    1316 East 22nd Street    Des Moines     50317 D       XXX70 Ed       Fallon     1321 8th Street          Des Moines     50314 D  VVV75 Janet    Metcalf    12954 N.W. 29th Drive    Des Moines     50325 R  XXX76 Steven   Churchill  6140 Nottingham          Johnston       50131 R            199477 David    Lord       1250 K Circle            Perry          50220 R            XXX78 Dwight   Dinkla     221 South 12th Street    Guthrie Center 50115 R       XXX80 Jim      Drees      RR 2, Box 111            Manning        51455 D       XXX81 Jack     Drake      52462 Juniper Road       Lewis          51544 R       YYY84 Brent    Siegrist   714 Grace Street         Council Bluffs 51503 R       XXX85 Hubert   Houser     34697 Beechnut Road      Carson         51525 R       XXX88 Horace   Daggett    400 N. Bureau            Creston        50801 R  VVV       199489 Brian    Coon       540 Ninth                Carlisle       50047 R            199490 David    Schrader   RR 2                     Monroe         50170 D       XXX91 Richard  Arnold     Route 2, Box 149         Russell        50238 R       XXX94 Jerry    Main       1107 West Gear           Fairfield      52556 R       XXX95 Harold   Van Maanen 410 Liberty Street       Pella          50219 R            XXX98 Philip   Wise       503 Grand Avenue         Keokuk         52632 D            XXX "YYY" in a column indicates that the respondent is leaning toward a yes vote. "VVV" in a column indicates that the respondent gave only a verbal response. "1994" in a column indicates that the respondent gave a different response last year. 1994 & 1995 Iowa Senate    FIRST    LAST       ADDRESS                  CITY           ZIP   P  YES  NOT  NO  NAME     NAME                                                             SURE 3 Wilmer   Rensink    3828 Hickory Avenue      Sioux Center   51250 R  XXX 4 John     Kibbie     RR 1, Box 139A           Emmetsburg     50536 D  1994 5 Mary Lou Freeman    311 W. Lakeshore Drive   Storm Lake     50588 R  XXX 8 Berl     Priebe     2106 100th Avenue        Algona         50511 D  1994 9 Stewart  Iverson    3020 Dows-Williams Road  Dows           50071 R       1994 XXX10 Merlin   Bartz      RR 1, Box 17             Grafton        50440 R  XXX11 John     Jensen     1331 120th Street        Plainfield     50666 R       199413 Jim      Lind       230 E. Ridgeway Ave.     Waterloo       50702 R  XXX15 Allen    Borlaug    P.O. Box 333             Protivin       52163 R       XXX16 Lyle     Zieman     401 Wilson, P.O. Box 368 Postville      52162 R  XXX21 Maggie   Tinsman    3541 E. Kimberly Rd.     Bettendorf     52807 R            XXX25 Robert   Dvorsky    515 6th Avenue           Coralville     52241 D       XXX33 William  Palmer     460 Hawthorn Circle      Des Moines     50317 D  199435 Dick     Dearden    3113 Kinsey              Des Moines     50317 D  XXX36 Elaine   Szymoniak  2116 44th St.            Des Moines     50310 D  XXX45 Bill     Fink       379 S-23 Highway         Carlisle       50047 D  XXX "YYY" in a column indicates that the respondent is leaning toward a yes vote. "VVV" in a column indicates that the respondent gave only a verbal response. "1994" in a column indicates that the respondent gave a different response last year.WT02-B01-125IA086-000619-B008-274http://206.61.184.43:80/schaffer/DEBATE/MYTHS/myths5.htm 206.61.184.43 19970122034837 text/html 13636HTTP/1.0 200 OKDate: Wednesday, 22-Jan-97 03:48:29 GMTServer: WebSitePro/1.1f (S/N wpo-0deb)Allow-ranges: bytesContent-type: text/htmlLast-modified: Saturday, 28-Dec-96 07:22:07 GMTContent-length: 13418 The Economics of Drug Legalization Contents | Feedback | Search DRCNet Library | Schaffer Library | The Drug Legalization Debate Myths and Misconceptions of Drug Legalization: US Dept. ofJustice Chapter Four: The Economics of Drug Legalization Discussion 1. Their Argument Proponents of legalization suggest that their policy will savesociety money for several reasons. First, we will not have to paypolice to enforce the present criminal-justice approach to drugusage. Second, we will be able to tax legal drugs, therebyraising revenue. II. Our Argument It should be stated initially that most people misconceive theamount of resources expended under the status quo for drugcontrol. The FY 1994 federal budget allocates $7.51 billion fordrug control (supply reduction) which includes criminal justice,interdiction, international programs and intelligence.81 Stateand local governments spend even more, $12.6 billion a year.82Granted, this is a lot of money, but we should put these numbersin perspective. Americans spend about four billion dollars eachsummer for air conditioning.83 The citizens of Washington Statespend $1.4 billion each year on legal gambling alone.84 Thenational debt numbers in the trillions of dollars. One StealthBomber runs half a billion dollars. Indeed, only 1.4% of totalgovernment spending goes for law enforcement of all types, and anadditional 1.0% for prosecution and prisons.85 Out of this smallpercentage, 12% of spending for law enforcement was allocated todrug control activities, and about 25% of correctional (prison)spending was drug related.86 Only 1.5% of total state and localgovernment spending is attributed to drug control activities.87Thus, when taken in context, it is apparent that the costs ofcriminalized drugs nowhere approaches the financial obligationsof government programs such as national defense, Social Security,or Medicare. More important, if we legalized drugs on the assumption thatby taxing them we could raise large amounts of revenue, we wouldbe sadly mistaken. First, as discussed in Chapter Two, any suchtaxation scheme would perpetuate a criminal black market.Consequently, we would still have to spend money funding police,courts and the like to fight this problem. Second, if alcohol isany indication, we simply would not make that much money bytaxing drugs. The total revenue collected from alcohol taxes atthe federal, state, and local levels amounts to about $13.1billion a year," a paltry sum compared to the social costsassociated with alcohol consumption - something in theneighborhood of $100 billion." Third, how would we structurea tax scheme for drugs? If we wanted to correlate higher taxeswith higher risk behavior, logically we would tax the fifth jointmore than the first (inasmuch as the fifth joint probably is moredamaging to one's health). And wouldn't it cost money to createthe governmental bureaucracy that would handle this taxationpolicy? Thus, we do not spend that much on the drug war in comparisonto other governmental programs, and taxation of legalized drugswould not result in that much revenue. But by far the mostcompelling economic argument against the legalization of drugs isthe social costs associated with such a policy. First, treating drug addicts is enormously expensive. Takecrack babies as an example. In 1988, it cost $2.5 billion for theintensive care needed to keep the babies alive after birth.90 Butthat was just the beginning of the expenses. It is estimated thatit will cost $15 billion to prepare these children forkindergarten,91 and will then cost between $6 billion and $12billion for every year of special learning programs.92 Evenassuming the low-ball figure, the social costs of educating allof the crack babies born in 1988 - not all crack babies, mindyou, just those born that year - will run approximately $90billion by the time they graduate from high school. Now to theextent that legalization will increase the drug addiction ratesenormously [see Chapter One], legalization seems like a veryexpensive policy indeed. And who will foot the bill? Eithercommon citizens will through taxes for government aid programs,or through increased insurance premiums.93 But treatment costs are just the first way in which drugaddiction drains society. Already, drug addicts cost the countryroughly $33 billion dollars a year in lost productivity andjob-related accidents, according to a study conducted in 1987 bythe Research Triangle Institute of Research Triangle Park, NorthCarolina.94 If legalized, addiction rates would increase and thecost would rise to between $140 billion and $210 billion ayear.95 And who will pay for lost productivity and job-relatedaccidents? Consumers will, of course, in the final costs of theproduced goods. Finally we must consider human lives in the economic calculus.As drug abuse causes more job related accidents, more people willbe hurt or killed. Take, for example, the Conrail/Amtrak disasterof January 4, 1987. Because an engineer and a brakeman were highon marijuana, their train collided with another, killing sixteenpeople and injuring 175.96 So go back to the beginning. We spend approximately $20billion a year on drug control activities. If drugs werelegalized, we would see an increase in addiction rates.Consequently we would have more crack babies (the kind thatalready will cost the system $90 billion), decreased productivity(at a cost of between $140 billion and $210 billion), morejob-related accidents, and more dead people. And given thepotential black market effect, it is unlikely that we could raiseeven several billion dollars in tax revenue. From a purelyeconomic standpoint, legalization is not cost effective. 81 "National Drug Control Strategy: Reclaiming OurCommunities from Drugs and Violence," The White House, February 1994. 82 "State and Local Spending on Drug ControlActivities," Office of National Drug Control Policy, October1993. 83 John W. Ladenburg, "Should We Legalize Drugs?"Position Paper of the Pierce County Prosecuting Attorney. 84 Rachel A. Volberg, "Gambling and Problem Gambling inWashington State," Washington State Lottery, February 15,1993. 85 "Sourcebook of Criminal Justice Statistics,1986." Bureau of Justice Statistics, 1987. See also,"Report to the Nation on Crime and Justice," Bureau ofJustice Statistics, March 1988. 86 "State and Local Spending on Drug ControlActivities," Office of National Drug Control Policy, October1993. 87 Id. 88 Morton M. Kondracke, "Don't Legalize Drugs," TheNew Republic, June 27, 1988. 89 Robert E. Peterson, "Stop Legalization of IllegalDrugs," Drug Awareness Information Newsletter, July 1988. 90 A.M. Rosenthal, "How Much is a Baby Worth?" NewYork Times, December 15, 1989. 91 Id. 92 Id. 93 "No Magic Bullet: A Look at Drug Legalization,"U.S. Department of Justice, Drug Enforcement Administration, Demand Reduction Section. 94 Peter Kerr, "The Unspeakable Is Debated: Should DrugsBe Legalized?" New York Times, May 15,1988. 95 Morton M. Kondracke, "Don't Legalize Drugs," TheNew Republic, June 27, 1988. 96 Peggy Mann, "Reasons To Oppose Legalization ofDrugs," Drug Awareness Information Newsletter, September1988. Chapter Four Summary Sheet: The Economics of DrugLegalization Ifthey say... The drug control efforts are too expensive. Thenyou say... We spend approximately $20 billion annually on drug control.["State and Local Spending on Drug Control Activities,"Office of National, Drug Control Policy, October 1993]. Americans spend roughly $4 billion every summer on airconditioning. [John W. Wenburg, "Should We LegalizeDrugs?" Position Paper of the Pierce County ProsecutingAttorney]. Less than 3% of total government spending goes for police andprisons, and only 12% of police spending and 25% of correctionalspending is drug related. [Sourcebook of Criminal JusticeStatistics 1986, Bureau of Justice Statistics, 1987 and State andLocal Spending on Drug Control Activities, Office of NationalDrug Control Policy, October 1993]. Many programs such as national defense, Social Security, andMedicare cost much more than what we spend on efforts to controldrugs. Ifthey say... If we legalized drugs, we could raise much revenue throughtaxation. Thenyou say... If you try to tax legalized drugs, you will create a blackmarket. You will then have to allocate resources to the policeand the courts to combat this crime. (See Chapter Two]. This was tried with alcohol. It Failed. Federal, state, andlocal alcohol taxes combined raise approximately $13.1 billiondollars a year, but alcohol extracts over $ 100 billion a year insocial costs such as lost productivity and health costs. [MortonM. Kondracke, "Don't Legalize Drugs," The New Republic,June 27, 1988; Robert E. Peterson, "'Stop Legalization ofIllegal Drugs," Drug Awareness Information Newsletter, July1988]. Ifthey say... Legalizing drugs would save money. Thenyou say... Legalizing drugs would increase the addiction rate.[see Chapter One]. Addicts require treatment, and this is enormously expensive.For example, in 1988 we spent $2.5 billion for intensive care ofcrack babies. It will cost roughly $15 billion to prepare themfor kindergarten. Further, special learning programs will costbetween $6 billion and $12 billion a year for every year afterkindergarten. By the time they graduate from high school, thisyields a total of roughly $90 billion. [A.M. Rosenthal, "HowMuch Is a Baby Worth?" New York Times, December 15, 1989]. If we legalize drugs, it will cost society between $140billion and $210 billion a year in lost productivity andjob-related accidents. [Morton M. Kondracke, citation above]. If we legalize drugs, consumers will bear the ultimateresponsibility for the bill because of increases in insurancepremiums and higher costs of manufactured goods. ["No MagicBullet: A Look at Drug Legalization," Drug EnforcementAdministration Publication]. Legalizing drugs would increase the incidence of drug-relatedaccidents such as the Conrail/Amtrak train crash of January 1987in which 16 people were killed and 175 were injured. [Peggy .Mann, "Reasons to Oppose Legalizing Illegal Drugs,"September 1988]. Contents | Feedback | Search DRCNet Library | Schaffer Library | The Drug Legalization Debate WT02-B01-126IA086-000619-B009-23http://206.61.184.43:80/schaffer/DEBATE/MYTHS/myths9.htm 206.61.184.43 19970122034919 text/html 9409HTTP/1.0 200 OKDate: Wednesday, 22-Jan-97 03:49:14 GMTServer: WebSitePro/1.1f (S/N wpo-0deb)Allow-ranges: bytesContent-type: text/htmlLast-modified: Saturday, 28-Dec-96 07:21:44 GMTContent-length: 9192 Individual Rights and the Legalization of Drugs Contents | Feedback | Search DRCNet Library | Schaffer Library | The Drug Legalization Debate Myths and Misconceptions of Drug Legalization - US Dept. ofJustice Chapter Eight: Individual Rights and the Legalization ofDrugs DISCUSSION I. Their Argument Although proponents of legalization do not rely upon thisargument very much any more, a traditional response of thelegalizers was that "It's my body and I have a right to dowith it as I please so long as I'm the only one affected."This is called the Individual Autonomy argument. II. Our Argument The obvious flaw with the Individual Autonomy argument, andthe reason why it is not used much any more, is the simple factthat drug use does affect other people. Indeed, this entiremanual is in large part a collection of reasons and examples asto how drug use affects not only the individual, but alsoinnocent third-parties and society at large. But for the sake ofclarity, let us iterate and expand upon these points. First, drug use increases crime - and consequently harms otherpeople - in at least three different ways. For a discussion ofthis, please see Chapter Two. Second, drug use by pregnant women causes in utero damage tothe fetus. Children born of cocaine mothers have three times themortality rate and four times the low birth-weight as childrenborn of normal mothers.143 Similarly, "coke babies"tend to have emotional traits similar to those found in peoplewith antisocial personality disorders.144 Unfortunately, the samemothers who are most likely to damage their children in this wayare also the least likely to seek professional help andtreatment.145 Third, drug abuse closely correlates to child abuse. Forexample, in Philadelphia, cocaine is implicated in half of thecases in which parents beat their children to death, and in 80%of all abuse cases. 146 In the District of Columbia, 90% of thosereported for child abuse were substance abusers. 147 In 1984 theLegal Aid Society in New York City handled 3,3 10 abuse andneglect cases in the city. By 1989 it was handling more than24,000.148 What happened? Crack did, beginning in 1985. Sixtypercent of abuse and neglect cases involved drug allegations. 149The number of children wounded and killed by stray bullets intragic drive-by shootings pales in comparison to the impact ofcocaine in the over 1,200 child abuse murders in 1989.150 Butthese problems are not mere statistics - they are horror stories.In San Francisco, a woman who was freebasing cocaine gave birthto twins on her living room floor. She continued to freebase andlet her children die unattended. Fourth, drug use, like alcohol use, is responsible for a largepercentage of automobile accidents in the United States. InMaryland, 32% of car crash victims tested positive formarijuana.152 Fifth, drug use among pilots and train operators also leads toaccidents. Recall the Conrail disaster discussed in Chapter Four,wherein 16 people were killed and 175 were injured because thetrain operators were high on marijuana. Furthermore, a studyconducted by Stanford University found that 24 hours aftersmoking one joint, pilots could not safely land a plane.153 Sixth and finally, consider all of the economic and socialcosts associated with drug use in our society-costs that equate to tens of billions of dollars inlost productivity, higher taxes, and increased insurancepremiums. In short, few people use the Individual Autonomy argument anymore because it is painfully obvious that drug use affects not only the individual user,but also the user's family, innocent third parties, and societyas a whole. 143 Ken Auletta, "Six doses of reality are injected inthe argument for legal drugs," New York Daily News, December 17, 1989 (citing Dr. Karla Damus,director of research and epidemiology for the Bureau of MaternityServices). 144 Id. 145 James Q. Wilson, "Against the Legalization ofDrugs," Commentary, February 1990. 146 Robert E. Peterson, "Legalization: The MythExposed," in Searching for Alternatives: Control Policy in the United States, Hoover InstitutionPress, 1991 147 Id. 148 George Will, "The Children's Passage of Pain,"Washington Post, May 1, 1994. 149 Id. 150 Robert E. Peterson, "Legalization: The MythExposed," in Searching for Alternatives: Drug ControlPolicy in the United States, Hoover Institution Press, 1991 151 Arguments Against the Legalization of Drugs," DrugAbuse Update, September 1988. 152 Marsh Keith Schuchard, "Marijuana: An EnvironmentalPollutant," Publication of the National Parent's Resource Institute for Drug Education. 153 Rosanna Creighton & Jeffrey Kushner, "LegalizingDrugs is Not the Answer," Drug Awareness Information Newsletter. Chapter Eight Summary Sheet: Individual Rights and theLegalization of Drugs Ifthey say... I should be allowed to use drugs because I'm the only oneaffected. Thenyou say... Drug use causes increased crime. [see Chapter Two]. Drug use by pregnant mothers causes in utero damage to thefetus. Specifically, it increases the risk of mortalitythree-fold and the risk of low birth-weight four-fold. [KenAuletta, "Six doses of reality are injected in the argumentfor legal drugs," New York Daily News, December 17, 1989(citing Dr. Karla Dainus)]. Drug use causes child abuse. In Philadelphia, cocaine isimplicated in half of the cases in which parents beat theirchildren to death, and in 80% of all abuse cases. In the Districtof Columbia, 90% of those reported for child abuse were substanceabusers. [Robert E. Peterson, "Legalization: The MythExposed," in Searching for Alternatives: Drug ControlPolicy in the United States, Hoover Institution Press, 1991]. Drug use plays a large part in automobile accidents. InMaryland, 32% of car crash victims tested positive for marijuana.[Marsha Keith Schuchard, "Marijuana: An EnvironmentalPollutant," Publication of the National Parent's ResourceInstitute for Drug Education]. Drug use also causes pilots and train conductors to haveaccidents. Recall the Conrail disaster discussed in Chapter Four,in which 16 people died and 175 were injured. [see Chapter Four].Also, a study conducted by Stanford University showed that 24hours after smoking one joint, pilots could not safely land aplane. [Rosanna Creighton & Jeffrey Kushner, "LegalizingDrugs is Not the Answer," Drug Awareness InformationNewsletter]. Drug use costs society billions of dollars in lostproductivity, taxes, and higher insurance premiums. [see ChapterFour]. Contents | Feedback | Search DRCNet Library | Schaffer Library | The Drug Legalization Debate WT02-B01-127IA087-000627-B027-285http://206.61.184.43:80/olsen/MEDICAL/IOWA/dosecomp.html 206.61.184.43 19970122055311 text/html 2314HTTP/1.0 200 OKDate: Wednesday, 22-Jan-97 05:53:04 GMTServer: WebSitePro/1.1f (S/N wpo-0deb)Allow-ranges: bytesContent-type: text/htmlLast-modified: Sunday, 01-Dec-96 17:52:39 GMTContent-length: 2099 Dose of compassion The Pilot Editorial Dose of compassion This has been going on for too many years now. Local MS sufferer Barbara Douglass is again going to a rally at the capitol to plead for the legalized use of medicinal marijuana. Despite all of the study, all of the talk and all of the need, lawmakers are still dragging their feet on this issue. It seems both cruel and ridiculous. Doctors have prescribed marijuana for relief of the pain that accompanies several chronic conditions, including AIDS. Barbara Douglass can tell you what it has meant to her condition. Dont get us wrong. Marijuana is a drug. We are not calling for it to be legalized for recreational use, or treated as anything less than a potent drug. It should be controlled by doctors who can fully inform users of its benefits and limitations -- most definitely operation of a motor vehicle. It should be controlled by prescriptions, as are so many important drugs with much stronger effects on the body. And like other prescription drugs, the laws should stomp hard on those who obtain or use it illegally. We must get to that point where we can separate marijuana as a prescription medicine from the war on drugs, which we continue to support with all of our hearts. We can accept the former without giving an inch on the latter. Once again, they will rally this August on the steps of the capitol, while the people who work in there ignore the plea. How in the world can the federal government and state board of pharmacy examiners expressly approve of the use of medicinal marijuana for relief of Barbara Douglass condition, then deny it to others with the same condition or those similar in terms of chronic pain and debilitation? Maybe it is the politicians blocking this use who need a medicinal dose... Of compassion. The Pilot Editorial, Pilot Tribune (Storm Lake, Iowa), July 11, 1995. WT02-B01-128IA087-000627-B027-256http://206.61.184.43:80/olsen/MEDICAL/IOWA/politics.html 206.61.184.43 19970122055300 text/html 6444HTTP/1.0 200 OKDate: Wednesday, 22-Jan-97 05:52:54 GMTServer: WebSitePro/1.1f (S/N wpo-0deb)Allow-ranges: bytesContent-type: text/htmlLast-modified: Sunday, 01-Dec-96 17:54:31 GMTContent-length: 6229 Marijuana: Politics vs. medicine Marijuana: Politics vs. medicine By JANET RORHOLM Pilot Staff Writer It's been a taxing, uphill battle the entire way, but Barb Douglass and George McMahon refuse to give up. The two advocate the legalization of marijuana for medicinal purposes, so that those who need it and want it can get it. Just back from a two-day National Conference on Marijuana Use Prevention, Treatment and Research sponsored by the National Institute on Drug Abuse and the National Institutes of Health in Washington, D.C., the two were given some hope that their perseverance has not been in vain and hope remains that somewhere in the not too distant future, marijuana will once again be available for medicinal purposes. This Saturday they continue their battle in Des Moines as Iowan's for Medical Marijuana rally at noon on the West Steps of the Capitol Building to publicize their cause and try to get lawmakers' support. Marijuana, they claim, is a "miracle drug" and politics is getting in the way of medicine, causing needless suffering and mental anguish on the part of patients. Their opinion -- although neither are a doctor or scientist -- carries weight. Douglass, who lives in Lakeside, and McMahon, of Bode, are two of only eight medical patients in the United States who are legally prescribed marijuana. Every month, the two receive 300 marijuana cigarettes from the federal government as part of what is now a "21-year experiment" to evaluate the benefits for marijuana on specific illnesses. Douglass, who has been on the program since 1991, and McMahon, who has been on the program since 1990, are prescribed 10 cigarettes a day to help ease their pain. Douglass, who at one time was blind from multiple sclerosis, is now only legally blind and she credits marijuana for the partial restoration of her sight. The drug also acts as a relaxant for the spasticity that occurs in her legs due to MS. McMahon, who suffers from a neurological disorder called Nail Patella Syndrome causing muscle spasms and brittle bones, has had 20 operations to date and is in a constant state of pain. Marijuana not only eases that pain, it improved his condition, relaxing muscle spasms without the awful side effects that other legal prescription drugs induce, according to McMahon. While disappointed that the Washington, D.C. conference officially spoke towards the harmful effects of illegal drug use from state department heads and ways to keep juveniles and adults away from drug use, privately, Douglass and McMahon, who were invited to the conference, received solid support from the audience full of counselors, doctors and scientists. "It wasn't the scientific convention we thought it was going to be," Douglass said. However, support is growing for their cause and McMahon can feel it. Today, 36 states have passed laws that allow marijuana for medical use with Iowa being one of them. Debate among physicians about prescribing marijuana is getting louder in some circles although doctors still remain fearful about promoting it, afraid that there will be a mad dash to their door, according to McMahon. In June an article entitled "Marijuana as Medicine: A Plea for Reconsideration" was published by two doctors in the American Medical Association to add to the list of professionals supporting the drug for medical use. The article claims much of what marijuana patients have testified to -- marijuana has been found useful as an anticonvulsant, muscle relaxant in spastic disorders, as an appetite stimulant in the wasting syndrome of human immunodeficiency virus infection and is also useful for relieving phantom limb pain and menstrual cramps. It has also been helpful in treating glaucoma, nausea from chemotherapy in cancer patients, epilepsy, arthritis, MS and spinal fluid injuries. The problem, McMahon said, remains among law enforcement and the Drug Enforcement Administration, which adamantly opposes any legalization of marijuana. A bill is anticipated in Congress hopefully within this year or next to legalize marijuana use for medical purposes. McMahon and Douglass said they have been contacted by Barney Frank and Pat Buchanan for input on possible legislation for debate by lawmakers. "The problem we have now, is not telling senators to support us, privately, many of them already do, but to tell others. Their problem is they don't know who to talk to," McMahon said. Other organizations advocating the legalization of marijuana for recreational use are also muddying up the issue, McMahon claims. "They're doing their ever loving best to help us at the same time they promote their cause, but we're not worried about that. That's not what we stand for, that's not what we're after," he said. While McMahon and Douglass hope that one day all of those suffering from illnesses have access to marijuana, their immediate mission remains smaller and much more personal. Both would like to see their friend Ladd Huffman, a Vietnam veteran suffering from MS, and McMahon's daughter Linda, who also suffers from the same genetic disorder as her father, given permission to use marijuana for their illnesses. Huffman was already approved as a marijuana patient for the same program that McMahon and Douglass are in but the program was put on hold in 1992 and no one besides the eight already receiving marijuana were given the drug. Pilot Tribune (Storm Lake, Iowa), July 11, 1995. WT02-B01-129IA086-000619-B008-314http://206.61.184.43:80/schaffer/DEBATE/MYTHS/myths7.htm 206.61.184.43 19970122034856 text/html 9078HTTP/1.0 200 OKDate: Wednesday, 22-Jan-97 03:48:50 GMTServer: WebSitePro/1.1f (S/N wpo-0deb)Allow-ranges: bytesContent-type: text/htmlLast-modified: Saturday, 28-Dec-96 07:21:56 GMTContent-length: 8861 The Role of Alcohol and Tobacco in the Drug LegalizationDebate Contents | Feedback | Search DRCNet Library | Schaffer Library | The Drug Legalization Debate Chapter Six: The Role of Alcohol and Tobacco in the DrugLegalization Debate DISCUSSION I. Their Argument Proponents of drug legalization advance the argument that tothe extent alcohol and tobacco may be freely consumed, it ishypocritical to make other drugs such as marijuana and cocaineillegal. They cite the individual and social harm caused by bothtobacco and alcohol to support their argument. II. Our Argument Two responses immediately come to mind when addressing thelegalizers' argument. First, simply because we have as a societyhave chosen to legalize some dangerous substances does not leadto the conclusion that we should legalize all dangeroussubstances. Second, the legalizers' argument is logically flawed:When they compare the damage caused by alcohol and tobacco tothat caused by drugs such as cocaine and marijuana they arecomparing apples and oranges (or more specifically, legal toillegal drugs). Alcohol and tobacco are legal, and, according toour analysis in Chapter One [Addiction Rates], are used much morefrequently than illegal drugs. Because their use is greater, theamount of damage they cause will also be greater. But this is notto say that one "dose" of alcohol is inherently moredangerous than one "dose" of cocaine. As James Q.Wilson explains, predictions about the harms of cocaine thatassume its illegality tells us little about what damage cocainewould do if it were legal.111 Thus, the proper analysis is not tocompare damage caused by cocaine to that caused by alcohol underthe present system, but instead is to compare the harm likelycaused by legalized cocaine to that caused by alcohol. But let us look more closely at the legalizers' positionitself. 1. Tobacco. Certainly tobacco kills people.Nonetheless, it is disingenuous to say that as such it is a moredangerous substance than either cocaine or marijuana. For whileit may harm one's health, tobacco does not affect one'sintellectual processing or decision-making ability. As ProfessorWilson explains: Tobacco shortens one's life, cocaine debases it. Nicotinealters one's habits, cocaine alters one's soul. The heavy use ofcrack, unlike the heavy use of tobacco, corrodes those naturalsentiments of sympathy and duty that constitute our human natureand make possible our social life."' Think of it this way: Research fairly convincingly hasdemonstrated that cholesterol is bad for people, and in fact maybe responsible for a large amount of heart disease in the UnitedStates. In essence, cholesterol kills. But to take this premiseand then argue that because we allow people to eat red meat weshould also allow them to smoke crack is both unsophisticated andunpersuasive reasoning. Similarly, to argue that because we donot allow people to smoke crack we should not allow them to eatred meat also displays a rather monumental lack of common sense.And although cholesterol may kill you, it does not lead to thetypes of bizarre, destructive behavior that is associated withmost illegal drugs. 2. Alcohol. Alcohol is somewhat harder to justify, fornot only can it kill people but it does in fact alter one'sbehavior and may encourage antisocial and destructive activity.But again, this admission does not me-an that one must viewalcohol and cocaine as equivalent. First, a far greaterpercentage of people who use cocaine become addicted to thesubstance than do people who use alcohol. Recall that in ChapterOne, we discovered that the addiction rate for cocaine may be ashigh as 75%.113 Conversely, the addiction rate for alcohol isabout 10%.114 One is thus far more likely to becomeaddicted to cocaine than to alcohol. Second, the relapse rate(the percentage of people who quit the drug who later begin totake it again), is much higher for cocaine.115 In short, do not let proponents of legalization argue thatjust because tobacco and alcohol are legal, so too should becocaine and marijuana. First, just because we sanction somedangerous substances does not mean that we should allow all ofthem. Second, it is misleading to compare the damage caused bylegal drugs with that caused by illegal drugs -- instead weshould compare the risks of alcohol and tobacco with those of legalizedcocaine and marijuana. Likely we would find that the latterare much more dangerous than the former. Third, tobacco does not alter one's behavior and encourageviolent behavior as do many illegal drugs. Fourth, alcohol, whileadmittedly dangerous, is much less addictive than presentlyillegal drugs and also is easier to quit once addicted. Do notcompound problems simply because they are difficult to solve-keepillegal drugs illegal and at the same time try to discouragealcohol and tobacco use. 111 James Q. Wilson, "Against the Legalization ofDrugs," Commentary, February 1990. 112 Id. 113 George Church, "'Thinking the Unthinkable,"Time, May 30,1988. 114 id. 115 "Issues and Comments to respond toLegalization of Drugs," Office of Congressional and PublicAffairs Drug Enforcement Administration Publication, May 1988. Chapter Six Summary Sheet: The Role of Alcohol and Tobacco inthe Drug Legalization Debate Ifthey say... Since alcohol and tobacco are legal, marijuana and cocaineshould also be legal. Thenyou say... Just because some dangerous substances are legal does not meanthat all dangerous substances should also be legal. One cannot properly compare the harm associated with tobaccoand alcohol use with the harm associated with cocaine andmarijuana use, because you are comparing legal drugs with illegaldrugs. And as discussed in Chapter One, legalizing a drug makesit more dangerous. (See last paragraph, page 7). Although tobacco harms one's health, it does not alter one'smental processes, nor does it create bizarre, violent behavior.[James Q. Wilson, "Against the Legalization of Drugs,"Commentary, February 1990]. Although alcohol is harmful, it is much less addictive thancocaine: Studies suggest that alcohol has an addiction rate of10%, whereas cocaine has an addiction rate as high as 75%.[George Church. "Thinking the Unthinkable,"'Time, May 30, 1988]. Do not legalize drugs because alcohol and tobacco are harmful:keep illegal drugs illegal and try to decrease use of the others. Contents | Feedback | Search DRCNet Library | Schaffer Library | The Drug Legalization Debate WT02-B01-130IA086-000619-B009-52http://206.61.184.43:80/schaffer/DEBATE/MYTHS/myths10.htm 206.61.184.43 19970122034931 text/html 7114HTTP/1.0 200 OKDate: Wednesday, 22-Jan-97 03:49:22 GMTServer: WebSitePro/1.1f (S/N wpo-0deb)Allow-ranges: bytesContent-type: text/htmlLast-modified: Saturday, 28-Dec-96 07:22:54 GMTContent-length: 6897 Legal Issues Surrounding the Legalization of Drugs Contents | Feedback | Search DRCNet Library | Schaffer Library | The Drug Legalization Debate Myths and Misconceptions of Drug Legalization - US Dept. ofJustice Chapter Nine: Legal Issues Surrounding the Legalization ofDrugs DISCUSSION I. Their Argument This chapter deals not with an argument of the legalizers perse, but instead their implicit belief that legalizing drugs would not have a profound effect onother facets of law and public policy. II. Our Argument Basically, we have three concerns here. First, can drug use be used as a defense in criminal or civilproceedings? That is, can a person accused of a hit-and-run accident escape liability by notingto the court that he was on cocaine at the time? Second, what will be done with the Food and DrugAdministration (FDA)? As its name suggests, the FDA isresponsible for testing the safety of food and drugs in theUnited States. For example, the FDA banned the use of Red Dye #2a number of years ago because it caused cancer (this is why therewere no red M+M's in most of the 1980's - it was not until thecandy producer came up with a noncarcenogenic dye that theystarted making them again in the late 1980's). Similarly, the FDAbanned the use of the substance known as Laetrile when itdetermined that this supposed drug had absolutely nopharmacological effects. But if we allow the legal sale of drugssuch as cocaine, marijuana, heroin, and PCP - that unquestionablyare dangerous - how can we justify allowing the FDA to exercisequality control over any other type of drugs? To allow the saleand use of cocaine while still granting the FDA power toregulate, say, food additives such as saccharine is like banningslingshots but allowing people to carry automatic assault rifles.So if we legalize the sale and use of clearly dangerous drugs, itseems that to be logically consistent we would have to close downthe FDA and let everyone have access to every type of drug. Andgiven legalized drugs it also seems hypocritical to have any typeof quality control on food additives or food products moregenerally. A third and final concern is the legal liability of thecompanies that would manufacture and sell the newly legalizedcocaine, marijuana, heroin, and PCP. This is a very importantargument, and in order to fully understand its magnitude we mustmention what are known as "Dram Shop" laws. If not inname, we are all familiar with what a Dram Shop law is - it is alaw that says that if bartenders continue to serve alcohol topeople that they know are already drunk, and that drunk personlater goes out and commits a crime such as drunk driving, thenthe bartender or the bar can be held responsible. So the questionremains: would producers and sellers of legalized drugs beresponsible for the actions of the people who ingest them? If theproducers and sellers would not be liable, we have aserious ethical problem inasmuch as they could destroy peoples'lives with impunity in the name of profit and not be held morallyaccountable. But if the producers and sellers would be liable --that is, a Dram Shop type of law would apply to them --we wouldprobably have very few companies willing to market and selldrugs. Put differently, if a given drug company knew that itcould be hit with a ten million dollar lawsuit when one of itsclients goes and kills someone (or damages property, etc.), isthat company likely to stay in business? Not likely. The companylikely would decide that the costs of doing business outweigh thepotential benefits and thus would close down shop. For proof ofthis point ask yourself the following: How many companies arethere in the U.S. today that manufacture and sell asbestosinsulation? Answer: probably none. In short, there are many legal and political issues that wouldhave to be dealt with if we legalized drugs, and nowhere in the legalizers' literature have theycome up with adequate answers to these problems. Chapter Nine Summary Sheet: Legal Issues Surrounding theLegalization of Drugs Theysay... We can legalize drugs without any legal difficulties. Thenyou say... If we legalize drugs, will drug use be able to be used as adefense in criminal and civil trials? If we legalize drugs, would not we logically have to closedown the Food and Drug Administration and dispense with all lawsregulating the safety and quality of drugs, food additives andfood products? If we legalize drugs, would manufacturers and sellers beliable for the actions of the people whom they sell drugs to? Ifnot, isn't there an ethical problem here? If so, can werealistically expect anyone to enter the drug business? Contents | Feedback | Search DRCNet Library | Schaffer Library | The Drug Legalization Debate WT02-B01-131IA086-000619-B009-74http://206.61.184.43:80/schaffer/DEBATE/MYTHS/myths11.htm 206.61.184.43 19970122034956 text/html 5497HTTP/1.0 200 OKDate: Wednesday, 22-Jan-97 03:49:34 GMTServer: WebSitePro/1.1f (S/N wpo-0deb)Allow-ranges: bytesContent-type: text/htmlLast-modified: Saturday, 28-Dec-96 07:22:50 GMTContent-length: 5280 Environmental Issues and the Legalization of Drugs Contents | Feedback | Search DRCNet Library | Schaffer Library | The Drug Legalization Debate Myths and Misconceptions of Drug Legalization: US Dept. ofJustice Chapter Ten: Environmental Issues and the Legalization ofDrugs DISCUSSION I. Their Argument Some extremists in the drug legalization debate suggest thatwe should legalize hemp - the plant from which we get marijuana -because hemp could be used as fiber to make clothing,alternatives to lumber, paper products, and the like. II. Our Argument Some of the arguments of the legalizers are at least plausible(plausible, but wrong). This is not one of them. The argumentthat we should grow hemp for fiber is completely absurd. First,if hemp is such a good all-purpose fiber, why isn't any countryin the world seriously growing it? Second, there was a time inthe U.S. when it was legal to grow hemp (before 1937), and no onedid. By 1937, so few people chose to grow hemp that it wasn'teven mentioned in Department of Agriculture or Department ofCommerce reports.154 If it is such a good idea, why didn't anyonedo it when they could have? Finally, assume (although this assumption is contradicted byhistory) that hemp could provide all of the environmentalbenefits that the legalizers claim. These benefits would stillhave to be weighed against the costs of allowing farmers to growthousands, if not millions, of acres of marijuana. It would beimpossible to have a policy that allowed the legal sale of hempfor fiber but not for smoking, for one simply could not enforceit. (By comparison, think of how plausible a policy would be thatsaid farmers could grow wheat to make bread but not to makebiscuits). Thus, in order to get the supposed benefits of"hemp as fiber," you would also have to allow people touse it as marijuana. But when we recall all of the harmsassociated with marijuana use - medical problems, lostproductivity, increased accidents, increased crime, etc. - wefind that even granting the supposed benefits of"hemp as fiber," these benefits are still outweighed bythe negative consequences of such a policy. Thus, the "hemp as fiber" argument is disproved byboth history and the fact that no other countries are seriouslyconsidering it as an option. But even granting the legalizersarguments here, the costs of such a policy still would clearlyoutweigh the benefits. 154 For proof of this fact the reader is invited to scan anyAgriculture or Commerce reports from 1916 to 1937. Chapter Ten Summary Sheet: Environmental Issues and theLegalization of Drugs Itthey say... We should grow hemp and use it as fiber, thus achievingenvironmental benefits. Thenyou say... When farmers could do this in the early twentieth century inthe U.S., no one did. [Reports of the Departments of Agricultureand Commerce, 1916-1937.] If it is such a good idea, why aren't any other countries inthe world doing it now? Even if we granted the supposed benefits of "hemp asfiber," (which we should not), the costs of such a programwould still clearly outweigh the benefits. Contents | Feedback | Search DRCNet Library | Schaffer Library | The Drug Legalization Debate WT02-B01-132IA086-000619-B008-179http://206.61.184.43:80/schaffer/DEBATE/MYTHS/myths1a.htm 206.61.184.43 19970122034743 text/html 5987HTTP/1.0 200 OKDate: Wednesday, 22-Jan-97 03:47:20 GMTServer: WebSitePro/1.1f (S/N wpo-0deb)Allow-ranges: bytesContent-type: text/htmlLast-modified: Saturday, 28-Dec-96 07:21:40 GMTContent-length: 5770 Untitled Introduction Purpose The purpose of this manual is twofold: first, to analyze thearguments employed by proponents of drug legalization ordecriminalization;1 and second, to provide arguments necessary todefeat these positions. Structure This manual is divided into chapters, each chapter addressinga different argument used by the "legalizers." Forexample, Chapter One addresses the argument that legalizing drugswould reduce the addiction rate; Chapter Two addresses the impactthat legalizing drugs would have on the crime rate. Furthermore,each chapter is divided into two parts. The first part, termedthe "Discussion" section, briefly states thelegalizers' arguments and then provides an in-depth analysis ofhow to defeat them. The second part of each chapter is termed the "SummarySheet" section. The Summary Sheet section is designed forpeople who for whatever reason do not have time to read theDiscussion section - for example, those people who actually areinvolved in a debate at that moment. The Summary Sheet section isdivided into two columns, the first titled "If TheySay," and the second called "Then You Say." TheSummary Sheet section basically iterates the factual highlightsof the Discussion section in a format that is easy to "justpick up and use." In both the Discussion and the SummarySheet sections, relevant facts will be footnoted or otherwisecited. This is so that if anyone asks you where you got yourinformation, you will be able to tell them immediately. Appendix One suggests a structured format for an actualpublic debate. Following these rules will prevent the debate fromdisintegrating into a shouting match and a forum for"speeches" from the audience. Finally, an extensive bibliography is provided for yourconvenience should you choose to pursue additional reading. 1 For purposes of this manual, "legalization" meansa policy whereby selling and using drugs is legal."Decriminalization" means a policy whereby penaltiesfor breaking the drug laws are lessened and/or the drug laws arerestricted in scope. See Ralph A. Weisheit and Katherine Johnson,"'Exploring the Dimensions of Support for Decriminalizationof Drugs," Journal of Drug Issues, Winter 1992. That is, ifheroin were legalized, it would be legal to sell or use it. Ifheroin were decriminalized, it technically would be illegal touse it, but (for instance) the penalty for its use would be a $10fine. Another example of decriminalization would be allowing theuse of heroin as a common pain killer in hospitals. Introductory Pointers Before getting to the substance of the legalization debateitself, here are three suggestions for use when debating thelegalizers. 1. Right to expect benefits. As with anypolicy, you have a right to demand that the legalizers prove thatthe benefits of their proposal outweigh its costs. 2. Right to specificity. As with any policy,you have a right to demand that the legalizers provide a specificproposal which to debate. One cannot talk about policy in theabstract. For example, let's say that you were debating whetherthe federal government should cut spending - you have to havesome idea of what is to be cut, how much is to be cut, when it isgoing to be cut, etc. With regard to the legalization debate, youshould ask your opponent these questions at the beginning ofthe debate: What drugs are we talking about? Are they advocating legalization or decriminalization? Are there limitations on who can use these drugs - what about children, pregnant women, prison inmates, police, members of the military, people who drive buses or fly planes, etc.? Are there limitations on the quantity or potency of drugs that the individual can use? Would an unlimited supply of drugs be made available to the habitual users or drug addicts? Who will create, market, and sell the drugs? How much will the drugs cost? Will the drugs be taxed, and if so, at what rate? Will drug addiction be able to be used as a defense in civil or criminal trials? Make sure that your opponent answers these questions early!After all, it is only fair that you know what you are debatingbefore you begin the debate. 3. Right to sources of information. You have a rightto ask the legalizers the source of their data. By the sametoken, they have the right to ask the same of you (and that's whythis manual is complete with footnotes). Bearing these pointers in mind, we begin with an analysis oflegalization and addiction rates. CliffSchaffer's Home Page WT02-B01-133IA086-000619-B009-99http://206.61.184.43:80/schaffer/DEBATE/MYTHS/myths12.htm 206.61.184.43 19970122035009 text/html 14275HTTP/1.0 200 OKDate: Wednesday, 22-Jan-97 03:50:02 GMTServer: WebSitePro/1.1f (S/N wpo-0deb)Allow-ranges: bytesContent-type: text/htmlLast-modified: Saturday, 28-Dec-96 07:22:46 GMTContent-length: 14057 Hopelessness, Drug Control, and Potential Solutions Contents | Feedback | Search DRCNet Library | Schaffer Library | The Drug Legalization Debate Myths and Misconceptions of Drug Legalization: US Dept. ofJustice Chapter Eleven: "Anything Is Better Than What We AreDoing Now" Hopelessness, Drug Control and PotentialSolutions DISCUSSION I. Their Argument The final argument of the legalizers is one of hopelessness -the status quo obviously is not working because we are spendinglots of money on the problem, and it is not yet solved.Therefore, any policy is preferable to the present one. II. Our Argument Such cynicism is understandable - drugs are a pervasiveproblem in our culture. But legalization is not the answer, andin order to prove this we should look at two points: first, thatthe problem is getting better, and second, that many other viablesolutions besides legalization exist. 1. The Problem is Getting Better A mere purview of the facts proves that our problems withdrugs are not as bad as they used to be. For example, in 1979 thepercentage of 12 to 17-yr. olds who said they had used anyillicit drug in the past month was 17.6%. In 1992, it was down to6.1%. Similarly, the percentages for ages 18-25 yrs. dropped from37. 1 % to 13.0%. 155 Cocaine use is also down. In 1982 thepercentage of 18-25 yr. olds reporting past month use of cocainewas 6.8 %. In 1992 the figure had dropped to 1.8%.156Unfortunately, the 1993 data show a bottoming out and reversal ofthis trend, which has been linked to a softening attitude aboutthe dangers of drug use.157 Not only is drug use down, but public opinion has crystallizedinto a "no drug tolerance" position. One Gallup pollreported that over 80% of Americans said legalizing drugs was abad idea.158 A large majority said they feared legalization wouldlead to increases in addiction, drug overdoses, drug-relatedcrime and drug use in schools. 159 Furthermore, a study conductedin 1990 showed that 89% of the population would be willing to pay highertaxes to support the War on Drugs. 160 And as discussed above,children and adolescents have become less tolerant of drug use.As a letter to the New York Times on May 7, 1988, written by aclass of 14 and 15 yr. olds explained, "America is in a'moral rut' and ... drug abuse is one of the maincauses."161 Thus, not only is drug use declining, but public opinion growsincreasingly hostile to any such behavior. No wonder so fewpeople favor legalization these days. 2. Alternative Solutions These facts are not to suggest, however, that we should becomecomplacent in our efforts. Drug use continues to be a severesocial problem, and we should always be on the lookout forinnovative policies. Here are just a few ideas. First, we should continue our reliance on strong legalsanctions to deter drug use. That is, keeping drugs illegal doesdecrease their use. As one commentator noted, 70% of high schoolstudents in New Jersey and 60% of those in California said thatfear of getting in trouble with the law was a primary reason not to use drugs.162 Not only do legalsanctions keep people from trying drugs in the first instance, but they also help to get people off themlater. A study conducted by Douglas Anglin of UCLA noted that the potential success rate oftreatment programs depends largely on how long the patientremains with the program. The longer you stay, the better yourchances of recovery. And Anglin also found that people who entertreatment under legal compulsion (i.e., a court order) stay inthe program longer.163 Thus, legal sanctions eventually correlate to treatmentsuccess rate. Second, we should continue to decrease social tolerance fordrug use at all levels of society and at all levels of drug use.As former DEA Administrator Jack Lawn said, "Here's what itmeans in shirt sleeve English. [The] public is telling the druguser, 'What you're doing is not just your business. It's criminaland it's unacceptable. Get help and get treatment if you need it,or face the consequences. We don't want to be hard-hearted, butthis problem exists only because you and people like you keep italive. The rest of us don't want to put up with itanymore'". 164 Third, we should use education to encourage people not to usedrugs. Educating the youth is one of society's most importantresponsibilities, and nowhere is the need for education greaterthan to teach children about the dangers of drug use.165 Suchpolicies are working with regard to smoking, for as Kurt Schmokeadmits, "[t]he number of people smoking continues to fallbecause of a concerted public education campaign about the healtheffects of smoking."" Fourth, we should encourage private enterprise to adoptworkplace rules restricting drug use. By implementing policiessuch as drug testing, businesses can greatly reduce drug usewhile at the same time increasing their productivity. Forexample, Hoffman Construction of Portland, Oregon, implementeddrug policies and decreased workers' compensation claims by 17%.Indeed, by year three, Hoffman had reduced its workers'compensation costs by almost 90%.167 Perhaps the governmentcould use tax credits to encourage businesses to promote drugpolicies. Fifth, it is possible that the growing health-consciousness inthe United States today (favoring more exercise, lesscholesterol, less alcohol and smoking, etc.) will go a long wayin and of itself to decrease drug use.168 Finally, we may be able to turn to science for help. Somescholars are proposing the use of biotechnology to eradicate drugcrops while at the same time planting more socially useful plants(wheat, soybeans, corn, etc.). 169 In the final analysis of the legalization debate we mustremember that drug abuse is a long-term problem: it took China over fifty years to kick its opiumaddiction.170 And granted, drug use still takes far too large a toll on the United States. But when weconsider the decreasing tolerance for, and use of, drugs in ourcountry, as well as the numerous alternatives we are pursuing andhave yet to pursue, it seems clear that legalization of drugs isnot the answer. 155 "Preliminary Estimates from the 1992 NationalHousehold Survey on Drug Abuse," U.S. Department of Health and Human Services, June 1993. 156 Id. 157 "Monitoring the Future Study - 1993," Universityof Michigan Institute for Social Research, Jan 27, 1994. (Alsoknown as the High School Senior Survey) 158 David Zucchino, "A Push to Make Drugs Illegal,"Philadelphia Inquirer, July 5, 1992. 159 Id. 160 Ralph A. Weisheit and Katherine Johnson, "Exploringthe Dimensions of Support for Decriminalizing Drugs,"Journal of Drug Issues, Winter 1992. 161 Robert Peterson, "Stop Legalization of IllegalDrugs," Drug Awareness Information Newsletter, July 1988. 162 Id. 163 James Q. Wilson, "Against the Legalization ofDrugs," Commentary, February 1990. 164 Jack Lawn, "Time to Focus on the User", DrugEnforcement Administration, 1990. 165 "National Drug Control Strategy: Reclaiming OurCommunities from Drugs and Violence," The White House, February 1994. 166 Kurt L. Schmoke, "Decriminalizing Drugs: It JustMight Work-And Nothing Else Does," The Washington Post, May 15, 1988. 167 "Position Paper in Opposition to the Legalization ofDrugs," Regional Drug Initiative Task Force Position Paper,September 1990. 168 "A Ralph A. Weisheit and Kathrine Johnson, 'Exploringthe Dimensions of Support for Decriminalizing Drugs,"Journal of Drug Issues, Winter 1992. 169 Gabriel G. Nahas, "A Battle Won, a Stalemated War andA New Strategy," Position Paper. 170 Gabriel G. Nahas, "The Decline of DruggedNations," Wall Street Journal, July 11, 1988. Chapter Eleven Summary Sheet: "Anything Is Better ThanWhat We Are Doing Now", Hopelessness, Drug Control, andPotential Solutions Ifthey say... Any policy is better than the status quo. Thenyou say... Drug use has been declining: in 1979 the percentage of 12 to17-yr. olds who said they had used any illicit drug in the pastmonth was 17.6%. In 1992, it was down to 6.1%. Similarly, forages 1825 yrs. use dropped from 37. 1 % to 13.0%. In 1982 thepercentage of 18-25 yr. olds reporting past month use of cocainewas 6.8%. In 1992 the figure had dropped to 1.8%. [PreliminaryEstimates from the 1992 National Household Survey on DrugAbuse," U.S. Department of Health and Human Services, June1993]. Public tolerance for drug use is declining. One Gallup pollreported that over 80% of Americans said legalizing drugs was abad idea- A large majority said they feared legalization wouldlead to increases in addiction, drug overdoses, drug-relatedcrime and drug use in schools. [David Zucchino, "A Push toMake Drugs Illegal," Philadelphia Inquirer, July 5,1992]. In fact, 89% of the public would be willing to payhigher taxes to support the War on Drugs. [Ralph A. Weisheit andKathrine Johnson, "Exploring the Dimensions of Support forDecriminalizing Drugs," Journal of Drug Issues, Winter1992]. Other solutions besides legalization exist: We should continue to employ legal sanctions against drugusers for two reasons. First, studies of high school studentssuggest that between 60% and 70% cite not wanting to get introuble with the law as a reason not to use drugs in the firstplace. [Robert E. Peterson, "Stop Legalization of IllegalDrugs," Drug Awareness Information Newsletter, July 1988].Second, the use of legal sanction is a good means of keepingaddicts in treatment programs for longer periods of time, thusincreasing the probability of successful treatment [James Q.Wilson, "Against the Legalization of Drugs,"Commentary, February 1990]. We should continue to decrease social tolerance for any andall drug use at any and all levels of society. We should promote drug awareness education as a means odeterring use, as is presently being done successfully withregard to tobacco use. We should use tax incentives to encourage businesses to adoptdrug policies such as those of a Portland, Oregon business thatdecreased its workers' compensation claims 90% in three years.["Position Paper In Opposition To The Legalization ofDrugs," Regional Drug Initiative Task Force, September1990.] The general health-consciousness sweeping the country may go along way to decreasing casual drug use. [Ralph A. Weisheit andKathrine Johnson, "Exploring the Dimensions of Support forDecriminalizing Drugs," Journal of Drug Issues, Winter1992]. We should research ways in which biotechnology could be usedto eradicate drug crops and replace them with socially usefulgrowth such as wheat or corn. [Gabriel Nahas, "A Battle Won,A Stalemated War, and A New Strategy," Position Paper]. We should remember that drug use is a long-term problem thatwill take a long time to solve: it took China 50 years to kickits opium addiction. [Gabriel Nahas, "The Decline of DruggedNations," Wall Street Journal, July 11, 1988]. Contents | Feedback | Search DRCNet Library | Schaffer Library | The Drug Legalization Debate WT02-B01-134IA086-000619-B009-121http://206.61.184.43:80/schaffer/DEBATE/MYTHS/myths13.htm 206.61.184.43 19970122035021 text/html 12144HTTP/1.0 200 OKDate: Wednesday, 22-Jan-97 03:50:12 GMTServer: WebSitePro/1.1f (S/N wpo-0deb)Allow-ranges: bytesContent-type: text/htmlLast-modified: Saturday, 28-Dec-96 07:22:37 GMTContent-length: 11926 Bibliography Contents | Feedback | Search DRCNet Library | Schaffer Library | The Drug Legalization Debate Myths and Misconceptions of Drug Legalization: US Dept. ofJustice BIBLIOGRAPHY Books Benjamin, Daniel K. Undoing Drugs: beyond legalization. BasicBooks, 1991. Bugliosi, Vincent. Drugs in America: the case for victory.Knightsbridge, 1991. Searching for Alternatives: Drug Control Policy in the UnitedStates, Krauss, Melvyn and Lamar, Edward P., editors. HooverInstitution Press, 1991. The Drug Legalization Debate. Inciardi, James A., editor. SagePublications, 1991. Szasz, Thomas Stephen. Our Right to Drugs: the case for a freemarket. Praeger, 1992. Zimring, Franklin E. 'Me Search For Rational Drug Control.Cambridge University Press, 1992. Newspapersand Newsletters Auletta, Ken. "Six doses of reality are injected in theargument for legal drugs," New York Daily News, December 17,1989. Bennett, Sandra. "Therapeutic Marijuana: Fact orFiction," Drug Watch, July 1992. Bennett, William. "Mopping up after the legalizers: Whatthe intellectual chorus fails to tell you," The WashingtonTimes, December 15, 19 89. Bent, Daniel. "An Eye Opener For Judges On The HealthEffects Of Marijuana," Drug Watch, March 1992. Buckley, William F., Jr. "The weed of crime bears bitterfruit," New York Daily News, June 10, 1993. "Business tax incentives can help win drug war," TheWashington Times, December 15, 1989. Cohen, Roger. "Amid Growing Crime, Zurich Closes a Parkit Reserved for Drug Addicts," New York Times, February 11,1992. Collins, Christopher and Collins, Susan. "WhatSavings?" The Sun, March 20, 1990. Corcoran, David. "Legalizing Drugs: Failures SpurDebate," New York Times, November 27, 1989. "Drug report: Drop in teen and casual use," U.S.A.Today, September 6, 1990. DuPont, Robert L. and Goldfarb, Ronald L. "DrugLegalization." Asking for Trouble," The WashingtonPost, January 26, 1990. "EURAD Examines Harm Reduction," EURAD Newsletter,Spring 1991. Kerr, Peter. "The Unspeakable Is Debated: Should Drugs BeLegalized?" New York Times, May 15,1988. Kilpatrick, James J. "Drug War: Good News, BadNews," The Grand Junction Daily Sentinel, September 13,1990. Krauthammer, Charles. "Legalize? No. Deglamorize,"The Washington Post, May 20, 1988. "Mistakes of the Legalizers," The Washington Post,April 13, 1990. Labaton, Stephen. "Reno Questions Drug Policy's Stress onSmuggling," New York Times, May 8, 1993. LaFranchi, Howard, "Heavy Legal Drag Use in Spain PromptsCalls for Tougher Laws," Christian Science Monitor, November 7, 1991. Lapey, Janet D. "Marijuana as Medicine Refuted by NIHScientists," Drug Watch, August 1992. "Making DrugsLegal Won't Win the War," USA Today, December 15, 1989. Mann, Peggy. "Reasons to Oppose Legalizing IllegalDrugs," Drug Awareness Information Newsletter, September1988. Moore, Mark H. "Actually, Prohibition Was aSuccess," New York Times, October 17, 1989. "Needle Exchange Is an Approval of Drug Use in the MostDestructive Way," Drug Watch, March 1992. Ostrow, Ronald J. "Study finds acceptance of marijuanafor therapy," The Oregonian, May 1, 1991. Peterson, Robert E. "Stop Legalization of IllegalDrugs," Drug Awareness Information Newsletter, July 1988. "Student Exercise for Marijuana Activist Group GivenNational Media Attention Influence Court Case," DrugPrevention Newsletter, June 1991. Pike, Otis. "Drug War Needs New Direction," ChicagoSun-Times, May 13, 1993. "Poll Finds 90% Favor Keeping Drugs Illicit," NewYork Times, September 15, 1988. Radonich, Timothy. "Controlling drugs throughlegalization," Northwest Libertarian (newsletter), September1990. Raspberry, William. "Legalize Drugs? No.," TheWashington Times, May 14, 1988. Regional Drug Initiative of Portland, Oregon. "PositionPaper In Opposition To The Legalization of Drugs," September1990. Roques, Wayne J. "Marijuana as medicine can do more harmthan good; alternatives available," Ft. LauderdaleSun-Sentinel, March 19, 1993. "There are better ways than legalization to fightcountry's drug problems," Ft. Lauderdale Sun-Sentinel, April17, 1993. Rosenthal, A.M. "Dismantling the War," New YorkTimes, May 18, 1993. "How Much is a Baby Worth?" New York Times, December15, 1989. "The Case for Slavery," New York Times, September26, 1989. Sander, Tom. "Weedotherapy works: Government shouldlegalize marijuana as medicine," Ft. Lauderdale Sun-Sentinel, March 6, 1993. Schmoke, Kurt. "Decriminalizing Drugs: It Just Might Work- And Nothing Else Does," The Washington Post, May 15, 1988. Schuchard, Marsha Keith. "Marijuana.- An EnvironmentalPollutant," P.R.I.D.E. 1991. Schuckit, Marc A, "Should We Legalize Cocaine?" DrugAbuse and Alcoholism Newsletter, June 1990. Skolnick, Jerome H. "Drugs: More or Fewer Controls?"Los Angeles Times, June 22, 1988. Thomas, Kathy. "On Legalizing Marijuana: Let the FDA DoIts Job!" Drug Awareness Information Newsletter, September1988. U.S. Department of Justice, Executive Office for United StatesAttorneys, "Prisoner Survey Provides Look at ViolentCrime," Violent Crime NET, May 1993. Zucchino, David. "A push to make drugs legal,"Philadelphia Inquirer, July 5, 1992. Periodicals "Arguments Against Legalizing Drugs," Drug AbuseUpdate, September 1988. Bennett, Georgette. "Legalization: Would It Work?"National Law Journal, September 26, 1988. Courtwright, David T. "Should We Legalize Drugs? HistoryAnswers. No." American Heritage, February/March 1993. Current, William F. "Arguments Against Legalization ofElicit Drugs," Employee Assistance Quarterly, vol. 6, 1990. Currie, Elliott. "Towards a Policy on Drugs,"Dissent, Winter 1993. Dennis, Richard J. "The Economics of LegalizingDrugs," The Atlantic, November 1990. "Drug Legalization Fraught With Danger,Uncertainty," Narcotics Control Digest, June 22, 1988. Farley, Christopher John. "Hello, Again, Mary Jane,"Time, April 19, 1993. France, Steve. "Should We Fight Or Switch?" AmericanBar Association Journal, February 1990. Kleiman, Mark A.R. "Should Some Illegal Drugs BeLegalized: Legalization: A Simplistic Solution to a Complex Problem," Issues in Science andTechnology, Summer 1990. Kondracke, Morton M. "Don't Legalize Drugs," The NewRepublic, June 27, 1988. Linn, Lawrence S. and Yager, Joel. "Physicians AttitudesToward the Legalization of Marijuana Use," Western Journal of Medicine, June 1989. Lipman, Arthur G. "The argument against therapeutic useof heroin in pain management," American Journal of Hospital Pharmacists, May 1993. McCarthy, Robert L. and Montagne, Michael. "The argumentfor therapeutic use of heroin in pain management," AmericanJournal of Hospital Pharmacists, May 1993. Nadelmann, Ethan A. "Should We Legalize Drugs? HistoryAnswers. Yes." American Heritage, February/March 1993. "Should Some Illegal Drugs Be Legalized: Legalization isthe Answer," Issues in Science and Technology, Summer 1990. Sweezy, Martha. "Why Heroin Should Be Legalized,"Smith College Studies in Social Work, vol. 61, #2, 1991. Teasley, David L. "Drug legalization and the lessons ofProhibition," Contemporary Drug Problems, Spring 1992. U.S. Department of Justice, Office of Justice Programs, Bureauof Justice Statistics. "Fact Sheet: Drug Data Summary," Drugs & Crime Data, November1992. Weisheit, Ralph A. and Johnson, Katherine. "Exploring theDimensions of Support for Decriminalizing Drugs," Journal ofDrug Issues, Winter 1992. Wilson, James Q. "Against the Legalization ofDrugs," Commentary, February 1990, Other Department of Justice, Drug Enforcement Administration.Marijuana Scheduling Petition, Denial of Petition, Remand. 21 CFRPart 1308 [Docket No. 86-22] (Administrative Law hearing). "National Drug Control Strategy: Reclaiming OurCommunities From Drugs and Violence," The White House, February 1994. Russell, John S. and McNicoli, Andre. "The BritishExperience with Narcotic Dependency," Province of British Columbia, Ministry of Health, Alcohol andDrug Commission (Publication of the Province of BritishColumbia). "Report of the International Control Board for1992," International Narcotics Control Board of the UnitedNations, 1992. "State and Local Spending on Drug ControlActivities," Office of National Drug Control Policy, October1993. Contents | Feedback | Search DRCNet Library | Schaffer Library | The Drug Legalization Debate WT02-B01-135IA087-000632-B021-6http://206.61.184.43:80/schaffer/library/graphs/47_90.htm 206.61.184.43 19970122093121 text/html 3063HTTP/1.0 200 OKDate: Wednesday, 22-Jan-97 09:31:13 GMTServer: WebSitePro/1.1f (S/N wpo-0deb)Allow-ranges: bytesContent-type: text/htmlLast-modified: Saturday, 28-Dec-96 06:37:29 GMTContent-length: 2846 Lifetime Use of Alcohol, Nicotine, Cannabis, and CocaineAmong American Adults Contents | Feedback | Search DRCNet Library | Schaffer Library By Gordon E. Kenney, Ph.D. Licensed Psychologist The Universityof Memphis Memphis, Tennessee, USA The graph presents lifetime usage rates("Have you used substance 'x' at anytime in yourlife?") for American adults between 1947 and 1990. The lackof clear and regularly updated national usage estimates before1972 calls into question the extent to which policy-makers were(are) accurately informed about usage patterns and theirrelationships to existing laws and other societal trends. We cansee, for example, that cocaine use has no reliable estimatesuncovered thus far prior to the initiation of NIDA's annualhousehold surveys around 1972, and reliable cannabis useestimates are hard to find prior to 1969. Difficulties with theparochial reporting procedures of alcohol (gallonsproduced/consumed per capita) and tobacco (cigarettesmanufactured/sold/consumed per capita) in many references alsomake it difficult to establish continual use patterns prior to1972. It is difficult to imagine making national policy decisionswithout such reliable national usage estimates. Contents | Feedback | Search DRCNet Library | Schaffer Library WT02-B01-136IA087-000631-B005-47http://206.61.184.43:80/olsen/RELIGION/BROWN/brown-03.html 206.61.184.43 19970122073857 text/html 2517HTTP/1.0 200 OKDate: Wednesday, 22-Jan-97 07:38:46 GMTServer: WebSitePro/1.1f (S/N wpo-0deb)Allow-ranges: bytesContent-type: text/htmlLast-modified: Sunday, 01-Dec-96 18:37:30 GMTContent-length: 2302 SUMMARY OF THE ARGUMENT:     The trial court found that Rev. Brown could not submit evidence as to his religious establishment and exericse, to the jury.  The court based it's decision on the Fifth Circuit's decision in 1967, in Leary v. U.S., 383 F.2d 851.  In doing so, the court ignored all the precedent to compelling interest and least restrictive means developed since Reynolds v. U.S., 98 U.S. 244 in 1878.  Even more significant of it's prejudice, the court refused to recognize the established precedent of the Eighth Circuit in Warner v. Graham, 675 F.Supp. 1177, in 1987 and a half dozen decisions reached under the Religous Freedom Restoration Act of 1993, including the Eighth Circuit decision in Rust v. Clarke, 851 F.Supp. 377 in 1994.     The trial court summarily dismissed all defenses advanced by Rev. Brown regarding Natural Law, Common Law, the Declaration of Independence, the U.S. Constitution, Necessity, and the lack of Federal powers under the Commerce Clause of the Federal Constitution, without allowing any showing of evidense, testimony, or argument.  In doing so it abused its discretion and deprived Rev. Brown of even a shadow of a fair trial under DUE PROCESS.     The trial court threatened Rev. Brown's assisting attornney in a letter dated October 25, 1994.  The court refused to hold a hearing on a motion for clarification of attorneys duties ex parte which is required as this is a matter of attorney client privelege.  The trial court created rules for standby counsel which substantially deprived Rev. Brown of the assistance of counsel.  This constitutes an abuse of discretion on the part of the trial court.     The trial court refused to question two jurors who were overheard discussing the case and making disparaging remarks about the defendant on a break the second day of trial.  The trial court refused to substitute the extra jurrors for these two prejudiced jurors and substantially deprived Rev. Brown of Due Process.     For all these reasons, Rev. Brown has been deprived of his constitutional rights and has been deprived of Due Process.  For these reasons the conviction of Rev. Brown must be set aside and appropriate relief granted to him.WT02-B01-137IA087-000631-B005-18http://206.61.184.43:80/olsen/RELIGION/BROWN/brown-02.html 206.61.184.43 19970122073842 text/html 10504HTTP/1.0 200 OKDate: Wednesday, 22-Jan-97 07:38:34 GMTServer: WebSitePro/1.1f (S/N wpo-0deb)Allow-ranges: bytesContent-type: text/htmlLast-modified: Sunday, 01-Dec-96 18:37:34 GMTContent-length: 10288 STATEMENT OF THE CASE     In 1988, four residents of northwest Arkansas founded Our Church.  They sent out letters to friends and neighbors they thought would want to be a part of Our Church.  The letters were unsigned. (Exhibit A 1,2).  Rev. Tom Brown recieved these letters.  He immediately made photocopys of the letters - as instructed - and passed them to others who he thought would be interested.  The first person he took them to turned out to be one of the origional writers of the letters.  That person expressed interest, denied any knowlege of Our Church, and asked to be kept informed.  Rev. Brown heard rumors of someone trying to get permission from the local Unitarian Church to hold services there, but no more after that.     In January of 1994, about the 10th, Rev. Brown awoke from a dream to a feeling of overwelming peace and expectation of great good fortune.  It was an unprecedented experience.  He felt like he had been touched by the hand of God.  He did not remember any details of the dream, just the extraordinary feeling upon awakening.  He located the letters several day's later while organizing his file cabinet.  He realized that Our Church was what the dream had been about.  It was time to stand up and start practicing his relationship with God openly, the way God intended.     Rev. Brown owns a forty acre parcel of Ozark mountain property known as South Slope Farm.  He deeded one acre of that land to Our Church on February 14, 1994; the day we dedicate to Love, Valentines Day. (Exhibit B 1,2).  He contacted all his friends and asked who would like to start Our Church with him - including the origional founders whom he still had not identified.  They all said they knew the Truth of Our Church, but were afraid of the persecution which Rev. Brown has come to know so well.  They refused to join openly, but each in their own way contributed something to getting Our Church organized.  Then he went to strangers and finally eight other folks signed the papers to start Our Church Incorporated, as a non-profit, religous corporation in the State of Arkansas. (Exhibit C 1,2,3,4,5).  Although it is not required in the State of Arkansas they all agreed to a Statement of Purpose (C-5) which can not be changed except by unanimous agreement of all official members.     The Deed to the acre of land owned by Our Church at Antioch Arkansas, is restricted by covenants as to the use of the land. (A-2)  Our Church Inc. is not so encumbered.  Each of the origional incorporators sought to establish their own branch of Our Church at their home location; or in the case of the Family Church of the New Dawn, preceeded the establishment of Our Church.  FCND was founded in 1982 in Fayetteville, Arkansas.  Official membership in Our Church is established by a notorized statement submitted to the CEO of the Corporation, signifying intention to join Our Church Inc. and abide by the Statement of Purpose.  The purpose of Official membership is to become a public, open and living example of Our Church, so our Brothers and Sisters in God can take heart and begin to openly live their lives in keeping with their knowledge of the God of their own understanding and their Higher Power.     On March 29, 1994, members of Our Church Inc. met with Washington County Sheriff Kenneth McKee and other law enforcement officials in Fayetteville, Arkansas.  They discussed the plans of Our Church at Antioch to plant and distribute herbs and plants given to us by God for our Spiritual discernment and Physical nourishment.     On Easter Sunday, April 3, 1994, Our Church at Antioch, held it's first service and consecration of land.      On August 2, 1994, Rev. Brown was accosted by DEA agents and Sheriff's deputies while tending the garden at Our Church at Antioch.  They attempted to murder him, and when that failed, they stole four hundred and thirty five marijuana plants and three peyote plants that were growing there.     July 31, was the last regular service at Our Church at Antioch.  Since then services for Washington County, Arkansas residents have been held at the Family Church of the New Dawn, 1027 Hickery St., Fayetteville, Arkansas.  Each member church of Our Church Inc. is financially and theologically independent of Our Church Inc.; founded and organized by the membership of that church.  This is a congregational organization similar to the Southern Baptist Convention.  Other branchs of Our Church are operating in Mt. Shasta, California; Boulder, Colorado; Oklahoma City, Oklahoma; Bee Branch, Atkins and Little Rock, Arkansas.     On August 11, 1994, Rev. Brown was arrested and charged with growing marijuana and peyote, and possession of marijuana with intent to distribute in violation of Federal Law.  Rev. Brown insisted on the right to control his own case, and to not give over representation to an attorney, and requested the assistance of counsel.  Two seperate attorneys were appointed who refused to research or help Rev. Brown to research the law, to prepare motions, question witness's, etc. and were discharged by the court.  The third attorney recieved a threatening letter from the judge and sought to withdraw.  The judge appointed her as standby counsel and ordered her to not do the defendant's bidding.     Rev. Brown attempted to testify to the Grand Jury and spent two days waiting while it met, but was refused.  An indictment was returned on September 14, 1994.  On November 4, 1994, Rev. Brown filed a motion to recuse the Judge based on Arkansas State Police documents which show Judge Waters to have been involved in a criminal conspiracy to smuggle drugs and move women around the country for purposes of prostitution in the 1970's prior to his appointment to the bench.  Judge Waters denied the motion.     On November 8, 1994, the government filed a motion in limine which sought to deprive the defendant of all his defenses.  On November 28, 1994, a hearing was held which resulted in Judge Waters finding that Our Church was a sincere establishment and exercise of religion, and that Rev. Brown's acts of growing marijuana and peyote were acts affected by the Religous Freedom Restoration Act of 1993, and that the government had a compelling interest in prohibiting that act because Congress had passed a law with severe criminal penalties for violating the law.  Rev. Brown attempted to introduce documents and witnesses to show that the attitude of law enforcement had changed since the passage of the law, and that there had been a change in the scientific knowledge also, but Judge waters refused to review or entertain any such evidense or witnesses.  Rev. Brown properly protested.  Rev. Brown would have shown that there was no Federal Jurisdiction under the Commerce Clause for prosecuting Our Church of Antioch, Arkansas, and Rev. Tom Brown, but Judge Waters refused to allow any presentation of any issue except as to the question of the sincerely of Rev.  Brown's religous exercise.  Rev. Brown had attempted to obtain subpeona's for witnesses to the hearing, Judge Waters granted the subpoenas but then issued them for the wrong date, so the witnesses could not show up for the hearing.  Rev. Brown protested but Judge Waters refused to allow any correction to be made.  Rev. Brown attempted to introduce evidence and witnesses that Rev. Brown's acts were necessary to prevent a greater evil, a necessity defense, but Judge Waters refused to allow any such introduction into the record, or to allow the use of that defense.     On October 25, 1994, Judge Waters wrote a letter to advising attorney Leslie Borgogoni in which he threatned to not reimburse her for expenses of the defense of Rev. Brown.  In response, she filed a motion for clarification of duties.  At the hearing on that motion, Rev. Brown protested the fact that it was not conducted ex parte.  His motion was overruled.  Borgogoni attempted to withdraw as advising counsel but Waters made her standby counsel instead.  He wrote a set of rules for her which specifically directed her to not perform any task at the direction of Rev. Brown until and unless he gave up his pro per status.     On November 19, 1994, a criminal trial was held.  Rev. Brown was repeatedly stopped from presenting evidense and testimony in his defense.  Judge Waters repeatedly interupted Rev. Brown and made disparaging remarks about him and his attempt to defend himself.  Although Waters had admitted that Rev. Brown was engaged in a sincere exercise of his religion, Rev. Brown was denied the right to present evidence of his religion, the Constitution, Natural Law, Common Law, and government documents related to the issues of compelling interest and least restrictive means.  On November 30, 1994, Rev. Brown was convicted and incarcerated without bail in the County Jail.     Rev. Brown immediately attempted to get access to a law library in order to prepare motions for new trial, etc., but was denied that access until January 28, 1995.  By this time the time limit on motions had passed, and Waters overruled all motions on that basis.     Rev. Brown has been denied a fair trial, due process in keeping with the published precedent of the Eighth Circuit, and the protection of the Constitution and the Religous Freedom Restoration Act of 1993.  The prosecution of Rev. Brown for growing plants given to us by God, and giving away the leaves and flowers of those plants for free, no cost, no exchange, no renumeration whatsoever; exceeds Congressional powers granted by the Commerce Clause of the Federal Constitution.  In addition, Rev. Brown was unconstitutionally denied the assistance of counsel.  For all these reasons the conviction of Rev. Brown must be set aside and appropriate relief granted.     In closing, Rev. Brown notes that he has been forced to prepare this brief without the assistance of counsel, and he requests that a liberal construction and interpretation be given to this document.WT02-B01-138IA087-000631-B004-188http://206.61.184.43:80/olsen/RELIGION/BROWN/brown-01.html 206.61.184.43 19970122073824 text/html 8471HTTP/1.0 200 OKDate: Wednesday, 22-Jan-97 07:38:08 GMTServer: WebSitePro/1.1f (S/N wpo-0deb)Allow-ranges: bytesContent-type: text/htmlLast-modified: Sunday, 01-Dec-96 18:37:38 GMTContent-length: 8256 STATEMENT OF INTRODUCTION     The Defendent / Appellant, Rev. Tom Brown Pro Per, seeks to introduce this appeal by casting the eye of the Court on some issues that should be kept in mind as the Court considers the case at hand.  This case is only one in a long series of battles of the vaunted War on Drugs.  As in any war, looking back over the past thirty years, we can see lots of casualties.  The question is, how many more bodies will be heaped on the Alter of National Paranoia ?  A wise man once said that those who refuse to learn from history, are doomed to repeat it.  Perhaps the Court could look at another war we waged on ourselves, another war bred in ignorance and fed on lies and corruption.     In Dred Scott v. Sandford, 60 U.S. at page 700, Justice Taney announces the decision of the Court saying:        "The question before us, is whether the class of persons   described in the plea of abatement compose a portion of this   people and are constituent members of this sovereignty.  We   think they are not, and that they are not included under the   word citizen in the Constitution, and can therefore claim none   of the rights and priveleges which that instrument provides   for and secures to citizens of the United States.  On the con-   trary, they were at that time considered as a subordinate and   inferior class of beings, who had been subjugated by the dom-   inant race, and whether emancipated or not, yet remained sub-   ject to their authority, and had no rights or priveleges but   such as those who held power and the government might grant   them.        It is not the providence of the Court to decide upon the   justice or injustice, the policy or the impolicy of these laws.   The decision of that question belonged to the political or   law making power; to those who formed the sovereignty and   framed the Constitution.        The language of the Declaration of independence is equa-   lly conclusive.  It proceeds to say; 'We hold these truths to   be self evident; that all men are created equal; that they are   endowed by their Creator with certain unalienable rights; that   among them is life, liberty, and the persuit of happiness;   that to secure these rights, governments are instituted, deri-   ving their just powers from the consent of the governed.'...        The general words above quoted would seem to embrace the   whole human family, and if they were used in a similar instru-   ment at this day, would so be understood.  But it is too clear   for dispute, that the enslaved African race were not intended   to be included, and formed no part of the people who framed   and adopted this declaration; . . ."     The Court will see these words again in the decisions which have refused to recognize the religous use of plants.  Not all courts have refused to recognize over 5,000 years of recorded human history, but the words of those who have are redolent with the scent of the Dred Scott decision, and the bodies of those who perished in the attempt to make up for the cowardice of the Dred Scott court.  Time after time those courts strain to justify the denial of rights which no man can claim did not exist and were not exercised among the peoples who wrote the Declaration and the Constitution.  And as Justice McLean's dissent shows below, despicable and vile acts perpetrated by men who happen to occupy positions of power are not unprecedented.  There was no Truth to the assertion that "no one thought of disputing" the issue of slavery at the time of the revolution.  There was no Truth to the statement that "they formed no part of the people who framed and adopted this Declaration."  In fact:        "Crispus Attucks, a Negro, was the first man killed by   the British in the Boston Massacre.  The five thousand Negro   soldiers who fought in the revolution . . .  Three quarters of   the Rhode Island Regiment passing in review at Yorktown in   1781 were Negroes. (Afro-American Encyclopedia, 1974)But this truth was known in 1856 as we see in Justice McLean's dissent:        "In the Convention, it was proposed by a committee of   eleven to limit the importation of slaves to the year 1800,   when Mr. Pickney moved to extend the time to the year 1808.   This motion carried . . .  In Opposition to the motion, Mr.   Madison said; 'Twenty years will produce all the mischief   that can be apprehended from the liberty to import slaves;   so long a term will be more dishonerable to the American   character than to say nothing about it in the Constitution'   Madison Papers.        But we know as a historical fact that James Madison, that   great and good man, a leading member in the Federal Convention,   was solicitous to guard the language of that instrument so as   not to convey the idea there could be property in Man."     So the lies and deceit of the Taney majority went on to result in a war of unprecedented proportion on this soil.  More died in it than in WWI, WWII, Korea, and Vietnam combined.  And we paid a hard price for that clever though despicable interpretation of History and precedent.  The question is posed here, what price will this Court chose to be paid.  The Rev. Brown comes to this Court as a Man of Honor, with empty hands and outstretched arms.  Rev. Brown comes before this Court as the result of an act of conscience, inspired by the Holy Spirit of God.  The Court is refered to the words of James Michner, in his book Covenent.  As we listen, a young African is asking an old adviser as to the choice of weapons he should carry;        "How do I protect myself ?"        "Integrity is a good shield.  He paused.  Did I ever come   armed to your fathers krall ?  Couldn't he have killed me in a   moment if he wished?  Why didn't he?  Because he knew that if he   killed a Man of Honor, he'd soon have on his hands, men with   none.  And then the whole thing falls apart. (pg. 91)     Later in the book, another character is remembering her brother who became a spy and sold the secrets of the government.        "When she tried to decipher how he had been seduced into   committing his mortal sin - the betrayal of his nation and his   peers - she began to think of the role words play in life.  Our   family was keen on word games.  Wexton and I played them const-   antly.  I think I first came to suspect him when he cheated one   day.  Altered the meaning of a word in order to win.  At Cambridge   he altered the meanings of great words and ended a traitor.   Back in Salisbury, walking within the shadow of the Cathedral,   she thought: Integrity in words protects integrity in life.   If a word is corrupted, everything that stems from it will be   evil."     And so it is that we have evil in our own time, and in our own place. A creeping, seductive evil that knows every nook and cranny of the administrative, legislative and judicial branch of government.  And it is born in a series of little lies, lies told, lies repeated, and lies which become the bricks of the foundation of our life.  And the question is, will this Court end the lies.     There are already over ten million marajuana felons in our nation.  We outnumber all the judges, prosecutors, police, drug bureaucrats, and military by about two to one.  How much longer will thirty perceent of our population be treated as a "subordinate and inferior class of beings . . . (who) had no rights or priveleges but such as those who held power and the government might grant them."  How much longer will we be expected to suffer in peace while the abuses of our rights continue unabated?  How much longer will the courts decide questions of the burdening of religous establishment and exercise one way for the Roman Catholic Church, and another for Our Church ?  Is it too soon to address the question, is the issue not ripe enough ?  You can dam the river, but you can't stop the rain.  Please, for God's sake and our own, stop the lies and live in the truth !WT02-B01-139IA086-000615-B002-211http://206.61.184.43:80/schaffer/library/graphs/graphs.htm 206.61.184.43 19970122024837 text/html 5525HTTP/1.0 200 OKDate: Wednesday, 22-Jan-97 02:48:26 GMTServer: WebSitePro/1.1f (S/N wpo-0deb)Allow-ranges: bytesContent-type: text/htmlLast-modified: Saturday, 28-Dec-96 06:37:16 GMTContent-length: 5308 Charts and Graphs About the Drug War Contents | Feedback | Search DRCNet Library | Schaffer Library | Major Studies Charts and Graphs About the Drug War Drug Related Deaths - Number ofdeaths per year attributed to illegal drug use. Includes opiates,cocaine, PCP, amphetamines. Substance Abuse Related Deaths - Numberof deaths per year due to various substance. Includes tobacco,obesity, alcohol, opiates, cocaine Substance Abuse Related Deaths - Includesobesity, tobacco, alcohol, illicit drugs Substance Abuse Related Deaths -Magnified view of deaths from illicit drugs. Habitual Use Potential - Percent ofpeople who ever used a drug who are currently using the drug. Risk of Death - Deaths per year per100,000 people at risk related to various factors Homicide Rates from 1900 to Present -Rate per 100,000 Population Federal and State Prisoners- Inmatessentenced to a maximum of one year or more. Homicide Motives - Reasons for murder inthe United States U.S. War Casualties - Compared withcasualties from AIDS as a result of the War on Drugs. Drug War Costs -- The Financial Costs ofthe War on Drugs The Drug Deficit - Estimated Drug Profitsleaving the United States Federal Drug Abuse Budget - PastExpenditures of the Federal Government for the War on Drugs. Property Seizures - Percent of peoplewith property seized who are not charged with any crime. Value of Asset Seizures - Breakdown ofassets seized which are under $50,000 as opposed to over $50,000.This chart demonstrates that most asset seizures are not againstbig time dealers. Average Sentence Length in Months - Thischart shows the trend in the length of prison sentences forviolent crimes as opposed to drug offenses. Annual Deaths from Drugs in the US Arrests for Drug andAlcohol Violations in the US 1940-1990 Distribution of all DrugArrests Since 1941 by Decade Relative AddictiveProperties of Six Psychoactive Substances Homicides and Prisonersin Custody Sentenced Prisoners inState and Federal Institutions 1960-2000 Estimated Arrests for Drug Offenses 1983-1992 Arrests and Lifetime Substance Use and Abuseby American Adults (1985 data) Lifetime Substance Use and Abuse by AmericanAdults Lifetime Use of Alcohol, Nicotine,Cannabis, and Cocaine Among American Adults Age at First Use of SelectedSubstances Lifetime Use of Four Substances byEducational Level Lifetime Use of Sedatives/Tranquilizers,Stimulants, Hallucinogens, Inhalants and Opiates DEA Charts - IncludesWorld-Wide Cocaine Production, Cocaine Seizures, Heroin Seizures Contents | Feedback | Search DRCNet Library | Schaffer Library | Major StudiesWT02-B01-140IA087-000632-B019-21http://206.61.184.43:80/schaffer/library/graphs/graph03.htm 206.61.184.43 19970122092510 text/html 1870HTTP/1.0 200 OKDate: Wednesday, 22-Jan-97 09:25:00 GMTServer: WebSitePro/1.1f (S/N wpo-0deb)Allow-ranges: bytesContent-type: text/htmlLast-modified: Saturday, 28-Dec-96 06:37:32 GMTContent-length: 1653 Number of deaths per year attributed to illegal drug use Contents | Feedback | Search DRCNet Library | Schaffer Library Contents | Feedback | Search DRCNet Library | Schaffer Library WT02-B01-141IA087-000632-B021-33http://206.61.184.43:80/schaffer/library/graphs/Age_First.htm 206.61.184.43 19970122093132 text/html 1997HTTP/1.0 200 OKDate: Wednesday, 22-Jan-97 09:31:21 GMTServer: WebSitePro/1.1f (S/N wpo-0deb)Allow-ranges: bytesContent-type: text/htmlLast-modified: Saturday, 28-Dec-96 06:37:38 GMTContent-length: 1780 Age at First Use of Selected Substances Contents | Feedback | Search DRCNet Library | Schaffer Library By Gordon E. Kenney, Ph.D. Licensed Psychologist The Universityof Memphis Memphis, Tennessee, USA Contents | Feedback | Search DRCNet Library | Schaffer Library WT02-B01-142IA087-000632-B021-55http://206.61.184.43:80/schaffer/library/graphs/drugeduc.htm 206.61.184.43 19970122093139 text/html 2010HTTP/1.0 200 OKDate: Wednesday, 22-Jan-97 09:31:32 GMTServer: WebSitePro/1.1f (S/N wpo-0deb)Allow-ranges: bytesContent-type: text/htmlLast-modified: Saturday, 28-Dec-96 06:37:35 GMTContent-length: 1793 Lifetime Use of Four Substances by Educational Level Contents | Feedback | Search DRCNet Library | Schaffer Library By Gordon E. Kenney, Ph.D. Licensed Psychologist The Universityof Memphis Memphis, Tennessee, USA Contents | Feedback | Search DRCNet Library | Schaffer Library WT02-B01-143IA087-000632-B021-91http://206.61.184.43:80/schaffer/library/graphs/lieothe.htm 206.61.184.43 19970122093157 text/html 2758HTTP/1.0 200 OKDate: Wednesday, 22-Jan-97 09:31:44 GMTServer: WebSitePro/1.1f (S/N wpo-0deb)Allow-ranges: bytesContent-type: text/htmlLast-modified: Saturday, 28-Dec-96 06:37:20 GMTContent-length: 2541 Lifetime Use of Sedatives/Tranquilizers, Stimulants,Hallucinogens, Inhalants and Opiates Contents | Feedback | Search DRCNet Library | Schaffer Library By Gordon E. Kenney, Ph.D. Licensed Psychologist The Universityof Memphis Memphis, Tennessee, USA This graph details lifetime use of five classesof substances between 1971 and 1990 among American adults. At notime has use of any single class of substances presented exceeded20% of the U.S. population. The most hated and feared substanceclass of them all, the opiates, has never claimed more than 5% ofthe population as adherents. Even in 1910, the percentage ofAmerican adults using opiates was 0.2%; that is, two-tenths of 1%(Brecher et al., 1972, p. 62). Not presented are usage rates forcaffeine, which is due to the lack of reliable information aboutits longitudinal use among Americans (even NIDA neglects to trackcaffeine's use in its "National Surveys"). Contents | Feedback | Search DRCNet Library | Schaffer Library WT02-B01-144IA086-000615-B002-235http://206.61.184.43:80/schaffer/Library/graphs/graph03.htm 206.61.184.43 19970122024856 text/html 1870HTTP/1.0 200 OKDate: Wednesday, 22-Jan-97 02:48:41 GMTServer: WebSitePro/1.1f (S/N wpo-0deb)Allow-ranges: bytesContent-type: text/htmlLast-modified: Saturday, 28-Dec-96 06:37:32 GMTContent-length: 1653 Number of deaths per year attributed to illegal drug use Contents | Feedback | Search DRCNet Library | Schaffer Library Contents | Feedback | Search DRCNet Library | Schaffer Library WT02-B01-145IA086-000614-B044-284http://206.61.184.43:80/schaffer/Library/studies/cu/cu7.htm 206.61.184.43 19970122021517 text/html 5157HTTP/1.0 200 OKDate: Wednesday, 22-Jan-97 02:14:54 GMTServer: WebSitePro/1.1f (S/N wpo-0deb)Allow-ranges: bytesContent-type: text/htmlLast-modified: Saturday, 28-Dec-96 07:13:29 GMTContent-length: 4940 Licit and Illicit Drugs - Chapter 7 - The Pure Food andDrugs Act Contents | Feedback | Search DRCNet Library | Schaffer Library | Major Studies The Consumers Union Report on Licit andIllicit Drugs Chapter 7 The Pure -Food and Drug Act of 1906 A major step forward in the control of opiate addiction wastaken in 1906 when Congress passed the first Pure Food and Drug Act despiteopposition from the patent-medicine interests. The pressures to pass theact were intense-generated by Dr. Harvey W. Wiley and his crusadingjournalistic followers, notably Samuel Hopkins Adams,' who were known as"muckrakers." The 1906 act required that medicines containing opiates andcertain other drugs must say so on their labels.2 Later amendments to theact also required that the quantity of each drug be truly stated on thelabel, and that the drugs meet official standards of identity and purity.Thus, for a time the act actually served to safeguard addicts. The efforts leading to the 1906 act, the act itself andsubsequent amendments, and educational campaigns urging families not touse patent medicines containing opiates, no doubt helped curb the makingof new addicts. Indeed, there is evidence of a modest decline inopiate addiction from the peak in the 1890s until 1914.3 For those already addicted, however, the protection affordedby the 1906 act and by subsequent amendments was short-lived, for in 1914Congress passed the Harrison Narcotic Act, which cut off altogether thesupply of legal opiates to addicts. As a result, the door was openedwide to adulterated, contaminated, and misbranded black-marketnarcotics of all kinds. The heroin available on the street in the United Statestoday, for example, is a highly dangerous mixture of small amounts ofheroin with large and varying amounts of adulterants. The black marketsimilarly distributes today large quantities of adulterated,contaminated, and misbranded LSD and other drugs. The withdrawal of theprotection of the food-and-drug laws from the users of illicit drugs, as weshall show, has been one of the sign)ficant factors in reducing addicts totheir present miserable status, and in making drug use so damaging today. [47] Chapter 7 Ref: I. Samuel Hopkins Adams, The Great American Fraud: Articles onthe Nostrum Evil and Quackery, reprinted from Collier' (1905, 19)O6 1907,1912) by American Medical Association, Terry & Pellens p. 75. See, for example, Lawrence Kolb and A. G. Du Mez, ThePrevalence and Trend of Drug Addiction in the United States and Factor, InfluencingIt, Treasury Department, U.S. Public Health Service, Reprint No. 924(Washington, D.C.: U.S. Government Printing Office, 1924), p. 14, Table 2. Contents | Feedback | Search DRCNet Library | Schaffer Library | Major StudiesWT02-B01-146IA086-000614-B044-251http://206.61.184.43:80/schaffer/Library/studies/cu/cu6.htm 206.61.184.43 19970122021424 text/html 20139HTTP/1.0 200 OKDate: Wednesday, 22-Jan-97 02:14:08 GMTServer: WebSitePro/1.1f (S/N wpo-0deb)Allow-ranges: bytesContent-type: text/htmlLast-modified: Saturday, 28-Dec-96 07:13:36 GMTContent-length: 19921 Licit and Illicit Drugs - Chapter 6, Opium is Outlawed Contents | Feedback | Search DRCNet Library | Schaffer Library | Major Studies Consumers Union Report on Licit andIllicit Drugs Chapter 6 Opium smoking is outlawed To summarize the data reviewed so far, opiates taken daily inlarge doses by addicts were not a social menace undernineteenth-century conditions, and were not perceived as amenace. Opium, morphine, and heroin could be legally purchasedwithout a prescription, and there was little demand for opiateprohibition. But there was one exception to this generaltolerance of the opiates. In 1875, the City of San Franciscoadopted an ordinance prohibiting the smoking of opium insmoldng-houses or "dens." 1 The roots of this ordinance were racist rather thanhealth-oriented, and were concerned with what today is known as'1ife-style." Opium smoking was introduced into the UnitedStates by tens of thousands of Chinese men and boys importedduring the l850s and 1880s to build the great Western railroads.*The Chinese laborers then drifted into San Francisco and othercities, and accepted employment of various kinds at low wages-giving rise to waves of anti-Chinese hostility. Soon white menand even women were smoking opium side by side with the Chinese,a life-style which was widely disapproved. The San Franciscoauthorities, we are told learned upon investigation that"many women and young girls, as well as young men ofrespectable family, were being induced to visit the [Chinese]opium-smoking dens, where they were ruined morally and otherwise* The 1875 ordinance followed, "forbidding the practiceunder penalty of a heavy fine or imprisonment or both. Manyarrests were made, and the punishment was prompt and thorough.- 6 * Professor Jonathan Spence of the Department of History, YaleUniversity, presented a fascinating account of opium smoking innineteenth-contury China at the Conforence on Local Control andSocial Protest during the Ch'ing Period, hold at Honolulu,Hawaii, from June 27 to July a, 1971. He reported, for example,that "opium was highly regarded in China, both as amedicinal drug (that checked diarrhea and sorved as a febrifuge),and as an aphrodisiac. Therefore people might become addictedeithor becawe they took opium intensively during an illness hrinstanco in the great cholera epidemic of 1821-or bocause theyhad vigor, leisure and money and wanted to make the best of it. 'Those who who ate regularly and well did not sufferphysiologically from their addiction, but for the poor, addictionwas a serious health hazard (even though, ironically, it wasoften first taken for health reasons), since scarce cashresources were put to opium rather than food purchases. Therewards for the poor were a blurring of the pains of prolongedlabor, and an increase in work capacity over short periods oftime. Then there was heavy addiction among coolies andchair-bearers, and among such groups as boatmen who had to worktheir boats upstream, and stone-cutters working out-of-doors incold weather. The last Chinese to become addicted seem to havebeen the peasants, though as they grew moro opium crops theincidenceof heavy opium anoking rose, and by 1902 one could findentire rural communities that were in desperate straits becauseaddiction had become almost total. By the late Ch'ing, it scansthat no major occupational group was without its addicts."5 ~* One white girl of good family and education began opiumsmoking at sixteen in San Francisco in 1880, later became aprostitute, moved to Victoria, British Columbia, and was found inan opium den in 1884 by a Royal Comnmission. The transcript ofher answers to questions reads, in part: Q. Why did you commence to smoke opium? A. Why do people commence to drink? Trouble, I suppose led meto smoke. I think it is better than drink. People who smoke opiumdo not kick up rows; they injure no one but themselves, and I donot thinlc they injure themselves very much. Q.... Why do you smoke now? A. Bocause I must; I oould not live without it. I smoke partlybecause of the quiet enjoyment it gives, but mainly to escapefrom the horrors which would ensue if I not smoke. To betwenty-four hours without smoking is to suffer worse torturesthan the lost. Q. But does not the smoking make you wretched, past asdrinking would? A. No; I require about twelve pipes, then I fall into a stateof somnolence and complete rest. When I awake I feel all right,and can attend to fixing-up the house. I am brisk, and can workas well as anybody else. I do not feel sick or nervous, neitherhave I the inclination to smoke more opium. O. Then why do you return to the use of the drug? A. Ah! that's it; there is a time when my hands fail me; tearsfall from my eyes, I am ready to sink; then I come here and for afew bits have a smoke which sets me right. There is too muchnonsense talked about opium-smoking. Life without it would beunendurable, I am in excellent health; but, I suppose, every onehas their own troubles, and I have mine. Q. I do not want to be offensive, but are you what is called afast woman? A. I am. But you would be greatly mistaken if you inaginedthat all the women wbo oome here to smoke are of that character.In San Francisco I have known some of the first people visitopium houses, and many respectable people do the same here. Q. Are women of your class generaIly addicted toopium-smoking? A. No; they are more addicted to drink, and drink does themfar more harm. Drink excites passions, whereas this allays it;and when a fast woman drinks she goes to min pretty quick.... Q. Have you anything else to add . . . ? A. No; I would say this, though: that if opium houses werelicensed as drinking saloons are one need not have to come intosuch holes as this to smoke. There would be nice rooms with nicecouches, and the degradation would be mitigated. At all events Ithink the government that will not license an opium saloon shouldshut up public houses and hotels where they sell vitriol forwbiskey and brandy, and where men idle themselves with acertainty and a rapidity beyond the power of opium.' This first law, however, like so many subsequent antinarcoticslaws, failed to worlc despite the promptness and thoroughness ofthe punishment. When opium dens became illegal, "The vicewas indulged in much less openly, but none the less extensively,for although the larger smoking-houses were closed, the smalldens in Cbinatown were well patronized, and the vice grew surelyand steadily.". Indeed, the new law "seemed to add zestto their enjoyment." 7 A similar ordinance was passed inVirginia City, Nevada, the following year.8 This also failed toaccomplish its purpose; hence the State of Nevada passed a morestringent act a year or two later.6 Other states and cities votedsimilar statutes soon after. ================================================================== When these laws failed as well, Congress took a hand. Beforeopium can be smoked, it must be specially prepared; and weakopium containing less than the usual amount of morphine is usedin its preparation. In 1883, Congress raised the tariff on opiumprepared for smoking from $6 to $10 a pound; ' and in 1887 itprohibited altogether the importation of the kind of weakopium-that containing less than 9 percent morphine- used forpreparing smoking opium. The 1887 law also prohibited theimportation of opium by Chinese, and a law three years laterlimited the manufacture of smoking opium to American citizens.11 The results of these steps were set forth in a letter datedJanuary 12, 1888, from the Secretary of the Treasury of theUnited States to the Speaker of the House of Representatives. Theeffect, he wrote, had been "to stimulate smuggling,extensively practiced by systematic organizations [presumably theChinese "tongs" or mutual benefit societies on thePacific coast. Recently completed facilities for transcontinentaltransportation have enabled the opium smugglers to extend theirillicit traffic to our Northern border. Although all possibleefforts have been made by this Department to suppress thetraffic, it is found practically impossible to do so." 12 The law was not changed, however; indeed, the tariff onsmoking opium was further increased, from $10 to $12 per pound in1890. Then, in 1897, it was reduced to $6 a pound"experience having at last taught that it could not bear ahigher rate without begetting an extensive surreptitiousmanufacture or serious smuggling operations." Following thereduction in the tariff, "the amount that passed through thecustoms houses . . . progressively increased." 13 Throughout this period, states and cities continued to passlaws against opium smoking;* by 1914 there were twenty-seven suchlaws in effect.. Yet the amount of smoking opium legally importedcontinued to rise steadily, as shown in Table 2. 14 *Several of these laws also made it a crime to possess a pipefor the smoking of opium precedent for later laws prohibiting thepossession of hypodermic needles and syringes without aprescription. There was a lesson implicit in these import figures. Duringmore than thirty years of city, state, and federal efforts tosuppress opium smoking, the amount smoked per year increasedsevenfold-without taking account of smuggled supplies. In 1909, the importation of smoking opium was prohibitedaltogether.l5 This law was successful in the sense that smokingopium imported through the customhouses fell to zero, but it didnot solve the opium-smoking problem. Congress in January 1914found it necessary to amend the 1909 law 16 and to pass anadditional statute imposing a prohibitive tax ($300 per pound) onopium prepared for smoking within the United States.7 In December1914 Congress passed the Harrison Narcotic Act, with far broaderprovisional~ (see Chapter 8). Yet as late as 1930, according to FederalNarcotics Commissioner Harry J. Anslinger and United StatesAttorney William F. Tompkins, "opium dens could be found inalmost any American city." 19 Pounds of Number of Smokers Decade Smoking Opium Imported Who Could Be Supplied a 1860-69 21,176 8,470 1870~79 48,049 19,2l9 1880~89 85,988 34.395 1890~99 92,462 36,985 1900~09 148,168 59,287 At 21/2 pounds per year. Table 2. Rise in Legal importation of Opium, 1860- 1909. l One reason for the failure of these anti-opium-smoking laws,and of subsequent anti narcotics laws, appears obvious. They wereaimed at private transactions between willing sellers andwilling, usually eager, buyers Thus there were no complainants.Other such laws include the Volstead Act, since repealed, whichprohibited the sale of alcoholic beverages; the laws againstfornication, homosexual acts, and other sexual acts betweenconsenting individuals in private; the laws against gambling; andthe drug laws generally. The phrase "crimes withoutvictims" has been applied to such acts; they can moreaccurately be called "crimes without complainants." Itis hard to cite a law aimed at crimes of this class which has hadmuch effect in curbing the behavior aimed at..* * -all laws which can be violated without doing any one aninjury are laughed at. Nay, so far are they from doing anythingto control the desires and passions o men that, on thecontrary, they direct and incite men's thoughts the rnore towardthose wry objects; for we always strive toward what is forbiddenand desire the things we are not allowed to have. And men ofleisure are never deficient in the ingenuity needed to enablethem to outwit laws framed to regulate things which cannot beentirely forbidden.... He who tries to detennine everything bylaw will foment clime rather than lessen it."-Baruch Spinoza(1632-1677).20 The mere fact that a law fails to achieve its goal fully is ofcourse not a sufficient reason for repealing it; witness the lawsagainst murder. The basic argument against laws creating crimeswithout complainants must rest on evidence that they not onlyfail but also, in the process of failing, do more harm than good.Such evidence exists with respect to the laws against opiumsmoking. For one effect of these laws was to convert opiumsmokers to more hazardous forms of opiate use. "Opium smoking is vastly less vicious thanmorphine-taking," wrote an American authority on opiates,Dr. Charles B. Towns, in 1912.21 Dr. Marie Nyswander also commented on opium smoking, in 1956: There is a pattern of self-limitation or restraint in opiumsmoking as practiced in countries where it is sociallyacceptable. It is common for natives of these countries toindulge in opium smoking one night a week, much as Americans mayindulge in alcoholic beverages at a Saturday night party....families who accept opium smoking as part of their culture aremindful of its dangers much as we are mindful of the dangers ofoverindulgence in alcohol.22 The reasons for the lesser harmfulness of opium smoking inmoderation are not hard to find. The opium used, as noted above,is of a specially weak type containing less than 9 percentmorphine. Only about 10 percent of the morphine in this weakopium enters the vapor, and only a portion of the morphine in thevapor enters the human bloodstream when inhaled. Since the opiumis heated rather than burned, only smoke-free vapor is inhaled;there are no "tars" or other carcinogens to causecancer. The so-called "opium smoker" is actually avapor inhaler. At a very rough estimate, a smoker would have tosmoke 300 or 400 grains of opium to get a dose equivalent to theintravenous injection ("mainlining-) of one grain of heroin.Even heavy opium smokers actually smoke less than this daily..And the opium-smoking dose is necessarily spread over aconsiderable span of time rather than being absorbed into thebloodstream almost instantaneously, as in mainlining. Surely thenineteenth-century enemies of opium smoking did not and could notforesee that the new laws were starting this country down thedismal road from that relatively innocent "vice" to theintravenous injection of heroin-the dominant form of illegalopiate use today; yet that was in fact the sequel. ~ Dr. Charles B. Towns wrote (1912) "The averageopium-smoker consuming twenty-five pills a day gets only theequivalent of about a quarter grain [15 milligrams] of morphinetaken hypodermically or of a half grain taken by the mouth. Abeginner could not smoke a quarter of that quantity.... 22 Dr. Lawrence Kolb wrote (1925): "Case 35, nowthirty-eight years of age, started smoking opium twenty years ago[in 1905]. After the importation of smoking opium was preventedby law, he used morphine, and when this could no longer besecured, he changed to heroin." This was the common pattern. Chapter 6 References 1. H. H. Kane, Opium Smoking in America and China (New York,1882), cited in Terry and Pellens, p. 73. 2. Jonathan Spence, ''opium Smoking in Ch'ing Chins,"presented at the Conference on Local Control and Social ProtestDuring the Ch'ing Period, Honolulu, 1971 (under the auspices ofthe American Council of Learned Societies and the University ofCalifornia); unpublished. 3. British Columbia Study pp. 498-500. . 4.Kane, in Terry and Pellens, p. 73. 5.. ibid 6.Ibid. 7. Cited in AIfred R. Lindesmith, Opiate Addiction (Evanston,Ill.: Principia Press. 1947), p. 186. 8. Kane, in Terry and Pellens, p. 808. 9.Ibid. 10. Terry and Pelllens, p. 747. 11. Ibid., p. 748. 12. Esec. Doc. No. 79, House of Representatives, 5Oth Cong.,1st Sess., C. S. Fairchild to Mr. Carlisle, Jan. 12, 1888, citedin Terry and Pellens, p. 747. 13. Terry and Pellens , pp. 747-748. 14. Lawrence Kolb and A. G. Du Mez, The Prevalence and Trng ofDrug Addiction in the United States, and Factors lnfuencing It,Treasury Deparunent, U.S. Public Health Service, Reprint No. 924(Washington, D.C.: U.S. Government Printing Office, 1924), p. 14. 15. Outlook, 91 (February 6, 1900): 275; Public law No. 221,60th Cong., approved February 9, 19O9. 16. Public Law No. 46, 63rd Cong., approved January 17, 1914. 17. Public Law No. 47, 63rd Cong., approved Janualy 17, 1914. 18. Public Law No. 233, 63rd Cong., approved December 17,1914. 19. Harry J. Anslinger and William F. Tompkins, The Traffic inNarcotics (New York: Funk and Wagnalls, 1953), p. 54. 20. Baruch Spinoza, quoted by Joel Fort in Richard Blum andA.ssociates, Utopiatt, (New Yo'rk: Atberton Press, 1968), p. 205. 21. Cbarles B. Tow=, "The Peril of the Drug Habit,"Century Magazhe, 84 (1910 583. 22. Jerome H. Jaffe, in Goodman and Gilman, 3rd ed. (1965), p.285. 23. Charles B. Towns, "The Peril of tbe Drug Habit,"p. 583. 24. Lawrence Kolb, "Pleasure and Deterioration fromNarcotic Addiction," Mental Hygiene, 9 (1925): 719-720. Contents | Feedback | Search DRCNet Library | Schaffer Library | Major StudiesWT02-B01-147IA086-000615-B001-102http://206.61.184.43:80/schaffer/Library/studies/ota/ch2.htm 206.61.184.43 19970122024027 text/html 46692HTTP/1.0 200 OKDate: Wednesday, 22-Jan-97 02:40:19 GMTServer: WebSitePro/1.1f (S/N wpo-0deb)Allow-ranges: bytesContent-type: text/htmlLast-modified: Saturday, 28-Dec-96 06:51:09 GMTContent-length: 46474 CHAPTER 2 INTRODUCTION TECHNOLOGIES FOR UNDERSTANDING AND PREVENTING SUBSTANCEABUSE AND ADDICTION US Government Office of Technology Assessment October 18, 1994 CHAPTER 2 INTRODUCTION Substance abuse and addiction are pervasive in our society,with their consequences felt by people in every economic, social,racial, and political boundary. The United States has grappled with problems associated withsubstance abuse and addiction for over a century (see appendix Aand table 2-1). In 1986, then-President Ronald Reagan launchedwhat has become known as the war on drugs. Federal spending tocombat drugs increased from $1.5 billion in 1981 to more than $12billion in 1994, with spending in 1995 projected to pass the $13billion mark (see table 2-2). Nearly two-thirds of the federalantidrug budget goes toward efforts to curb the supply of drugs(e.g., border interdiction, law enforcement), with the remainderbeing spent on drug treatment and prevention programs. While theuse of illegal drugs has declined in the United States in recentyears, a vigorous debate continues as to whether the nation isindeed winning the war on drugs, and what the balance of federaleffort should be in formulating programs to decrease the supplyof drugs, treat drug abusers and addicts, and educate Americansabout problems associated with drug abuse and addiction. Congress has enacted a number of laws in an attempt to createa national policy to fight the scourge of drug abuse andaddiction. As part of oversight responsibility for national drugpolicy, several committees of Congress have requested the Officeof Technology Assessment (OTA) to undertake a study addressingthe socioeconomic, psychological, physiological, and geneticunderpinnings of substance abuse and addiction (see table 2-3). OTA has been asked to address a number of questions: o What are the root causes of substance abuse and addiction? o Why and how does addiction occur? o Who are the substance abusers? o What factors, scientific and social, lead to addiction? o What are the implications for prevention? ROOT CAUSES At the outset, OTA was asked to address the root causes ofsubstance abuse and addiction. The term root causes has been usedin political discussions and debate (see box 2-1), and althoughmany people have strongly held opinions as to what constitutesthe root causes of drug abuse, no consensus exists as to what, ifanything, is inherent in every case of substance abuse andaddiction. OTA conducted a search of various bibliographicdatabases, which revealed only limited discussion about rootcauses of drug abuse (2). Research into drug abuse looks not at root causes per se, butrather at risk and protective factors that increase or decreasethe possibility that substance abuse and addiction will occur(see table 2-4), and how these risk and protective factors affectvarious subpopulations in different settings. WHAT ARE SUBSTANCE ABUSE AND ADDICTION? Drug consumption is divided into three levels or stagescommonly distinguished by clinicians and researchers: use, abuse,and dependence (see figure 2-1). Each of these stages is, onaverage, more hazardous, more obtrusive, and more likely toprovoke or induce social interventions (e.g., punitive sanctions,attention by prevention programs, admission to treatment) thanthe one before (4). A substance is abusable if it has thecapacity to induce dependence in those who use it. Dependence, aterm that is often used interchangeably with the term addiction,can include psychological dependence (a form of obsessivebehavior whose objective is the attainment of pleasure or theavoidance of unpleasantness) and physical dependence (developmentof tolerance, causing the user to need increasing amounts of thedrug for it to have its desired effect, and withdrawal symptomsif drug use is stopped) (5). Nevertheless, there is considerable controversy about whatconstitutes substance abuse and addiction. A number of issuescome into play, such as: o What substance is being used? A wide range of psychoactivesubstances has the potential for abuse (see box 2-2). Thepossession and use of several substances--such as marijuana,heroin, cocaine--are illegal in all 50 states. Other addictivesubstances--such as tobacco and alcohol--may be legallypurchased, possessed, and consumed by a majority of Americans.Other abusable substances--such as inhalants-- may be legallypurchased, possessed, and consumed by anybody. o Does experimental use constitute abuse? Some maintain thatany use of an abusable or addictive substance constitutes abuse.Others suggest that experimentation-- particularly with suchpsychoactive substances as alcohol or tobacco that are availablefor purchase by adults of legal age--is part of normaldevelopment and does not necessarily have harmful consequences. o In what context are substance abuse and addiction beingaddressed? Four broad arenas that encounter substance abuserelated issues include: mass communications, criminal justice,medicine, and public health. These entities often operateindependently of one another, and use substantially differentterms when describing the use of illicit substances or theillegal use of licit substances (see appendix C). Public Health Model The traditional public health model incorporates the host-agent-environment relationship. Each of these factors has anindividual, as well as an interrelated role in the potential useand/or harmful use of a substance. Host factors may includepossible genetic, psychological, and biological susceptibility.Agent factors incorporate the substance's abuse liabilitycapacity, as well as how the substance is marketed. Lastly,environmental factors encompass not only the availability of thesubstance, but the social, cultural, political, and economicclimate as well. The focus of the public health perspective is tounderstand the importance social norms, environment, andavailability play in the shaping of alcohol- and drug-relatedproblems both on an individual and societal level. The public health approach toward substance abuse has severaldefining characteristics: o The substance abuse problem is primarily one of health, andrisks for ill-health. In every recreational, mood- altering druguser, use increases the risk of contracting one or more diseasesor conditions damaging to one's health. Drug use always createsthe potential, from great to small, for developing one or moredrug-related health problems. o The legality or illegality of a drug is an artificialbarrier that is not as relevant as the health-relatedconsiderations stemming from all types of drug use. Rather thanusing legal/illegal, the public health approach categorizes drugsby such characteristics as addictive potential and long-termhealth risks. o The drug abuse problem and the drug-related crime problemare not one and the same. As two distinct, interrelated problems,they have different, interrelated solutions. o Dealing with the drug problem primarily as a moral problemis considered inappropriate and counterproductive. Medical Model Within the fields of medicine, the two most frequently citedtexts for the definitions of substance abuse and dependence arethe Diagnostic and Statistical Manual of Mental Disorders (DSM)issued by the American Psychiatric Association and used widely inAmerican medical practice, and the International Classificationof Diseases (ICD) published by the World Health Organization(WHO). The current ICD and DSM definitions of substance dependenceare nearly identical. However, the two manuals differ sharply onthe concepts of abuse, which DSM classifies as a maladaptivepattern of substance use leading to impairment or distress, asmanifested by one or more of several events occurring over thesame 12-month period (e.g., failure to fulfill major roleobligations at work, school, or home; recurrent substance-relatedlegal problems, such as arrests for substance-related disorderlyconduct. The current ICD-10 category of harmful use, whileapplicable cross-culturally, is limited to a pattern ofpsychoactive substance use that is causing damage to health. Thedamage may be physical, as in cases of hepatitis from theself-administration of injected drugs, or mental, such asepisodes of depressive disorder secondary to heavy consumption ofalcohol (see appendix C for a full discussion of DSM and ICDdefinitions). Criminal Justice Model While it is well-known that many crimes are committed bypersons with substance use disorders and that these disorders canbe major contributors to their crimes, the criminal justicesystem has no systematic policy for the evaluation of thesedisorders. In many jurisdictions, whether federal, state, orlocal, the prevailing sentiment is that any use of an illicitsubstance and/or use of a licit substance in an illegal manner isconsidered criminal abuse. A limited set of quantitative analysesincluding blood, urine, and breath tests can be performed todetect illegal levels of alcohol and/or the presence of illicitsubstances. Besides the limited amount of testing and evaluation,psychological screening examinations or structured interviews areused infrequently to determine the level and severity of use,abuse, or dependence. For purposes of this report, OTA does not adopt any singledefinition for the terms substance abuse or substanceaddiction/dependence. The focus of this report, the underlyingcauses of substance abuse and addiction, relates to each of thedefinitions discussed above. MAGNITUDE OF THE PROBLEM The abuse of licit and illicit drugs represents a majorpublic health problem in the United States. Abuse of alcohol andother drugs has been associated with many problems (see figure2-2) costing Americans an estimated $144.1 billion annually. Federal survey data estimate that 11.4 million Americans aged12 and older used illegal drugs in 1992, continuing a steadydecline from a peak of 24 million in 1979. Findings from the 1992National Household Survey found the following about specificdrugs: o Illegal drugs. Since 1979, overall rates of current use(defined as use within the last 30 days) have dropped in all agegroups, except those aged 35 and older, whose use of drugs hasremained level. This has resulted in a general shift in the agedistribution of illegal drug users. In 1992, 23 percent ofillegal drug users were aged 35 and older, compared with only 10percent in 1979. o Cocaine. The number of cocaine users decreased 31 percentfrom 1.9 million users in 1991 to 1.3 million in 1992. This isdown from a peak of 5.8 million in 1985. The number of occasionalusers (defined as those who used the drug in 1992 but less oftenthan monthly) also continued a sharp decline from 4.3 million in1991 to 3.4 million in 1992. This is down from a peak of 8.6million in 1985. Frequent use of cocaine (defined as use on aweekly basis) remained unchanged between 1991 and 1992. In fact,no significant change has occurred in this number since it wasfirst estimated in 1985. o Marijuana. This is the most common illegal drug--used by 78percent of all illegal drug users in 1992. o Other illegal drugs. No major changes in the prevalence ofthe use of hallucinogens, such as lysergic acid diethylamide(LSD) and phencyclidine (PCP), between 1991 and 1992. The surveyestimates that approximately 1.8 million Americans have usedheroin at least once. However, the data on these categories aresomewhat unreliable, as these users are less likely to becontacted and reported in a household survey. o Alcohol. In 1992, approximately 98 million persons over theage of 12 had used alcohol in the last month, which isapproximately 48 percent of the population aged 12 and older.This number is down from an estimated high of 106 milliondrinkers in 1988. The number of heavy drinkers (defined as havingfive or more drinks per occasion on five or more days in the pastmonth) has remained steady at an estimated 9 million people. o Tobacco. An estimated 54 million Americans were smokers in1992, a rate of 26 percent of the population aged 12 and older.Cigarette smoking has declined since 1988, when an estimated 57million Americans smoked cigarettes. o Smokeless tobacco. An estimated 7.5 million Americans usedsmokeless tobacco in 1992, the vast majority of whom (7.1million) were males. o Inhalants. The use of inhalants (e.g., gasoline, glue, andnitrites) dropped slightly in 1992 as compared to 1991. o Prescription drugs. The estimated current nonmedical use ofpsychotherapeutics (sedatives, tranquilizers, stimulants, oranalgesics) dropped from 1991 to 1992. The survey also provides demographic variables useful tounderstanding substance use and abuse in the United States (seebox 2-3). However, these figures, as all data on drug use, aresuspect. Most surveys have strengths and weaknesses, which haveled stakeholders and policymakers to make widely divergentconclusions based on the same sets of data. MEASURING SUBSTANCE USE AND ABUSE Like the old fable about blind men describing an elephant,individual drug statistics usually tell us only part of the story(13). Each survey provides useful information, but at the sametime, each survey is flawed. Currently, no single measurement canby itself describe drug use and abuse in all its complexity.Nonetheless, several useful indicators do provide information topolicymakers. Three major national drug monitoring systems are the primarydata source for this review: The National Household Survey onDrug Abuse (the Household Survey), the National Survey of HighSchool Seniors (the Seniors Survey), and the Drug Abuse WarningNetwork (DAWN). These continuing data series have been sponsoredby the National Institute on Drug Abuse (NIDA) since the 1970s.Supplementary data sources include the few small area studiesthat compare drug use by poverty or income status and the DrugUse Forecasting System (DUF), sponsored by the National Instituteof Justice, which provides quarterly estimates of drug use amongthe criminal population in selected cities. National Household Survey on Drug Abuse Since 1974, NIDA has commissioned the Household Survey everyone to three years. The survey is based on a multistage randomsample of the household population in the 48 contiguous UnitedStates. The sample excludes persons living in group quarters,including institutions, prisons, military quarters, and collegedormitories, and those with no permanent address, including thehomeless. Since 1985, a number of enhancements have been made to theHousehold Survey. In 1985, blacks and Hispanics were oversampledto provide additional cases for subgroup analyses, and newmeasures of drug use frequency were introduced to identifypersons who used drugs monthly and weekly during the previousyear. In 1991, special supplementary samples were added for sixmetropolitan areas with highly publicized drug problems.Similarly, reports published since the early 1980s providegreater detail on the demographic characteristics of users byfrequency of use. National Survey of High School Seniors Every year since 1975 researchers at the University ofMichigan have surveyed a nationally representative sample ofapproximately 16,000 high school seniors. Beginning in 1976, afollowup survey of members from each graduating class, includingan over-sampling of drug users, has been conducted by mail. In1990, the followup sample included young adults aged 19 to 32. Drug Abuse Warning Network DAWN, established in 1972, is the federal government's majordata system for tracking patterns and trends in the serioushealth consequences of drug use. DAWN reports include statisticson the total number of hospital emergency room visits (episodes),separate counts of the number of drugs mentioned per episode(drug mentions), and drug-related deaths. Throughout the 1970s and 1980s, the DAWN program focusedprimarily on data from emergency rooms and medical examiners in27 metropolitan areas. The selection of reporting facilities,over 700 emergency rooms and 87 medical examiners by 1989, wasnot random, however, and the number of facilities reportingvaried from year to year, with facilities in metropolitan areasbeing overrepresented. Beginning in 1990, DAWN implemented anational probability sample for the collection of drug-relatedemergency room visit data to allow reporting of national as wellas metropolitan area information. Drug Use Forecasting System DUF, initiated in 1988 by the Department of Justice, providesestimates of drug use among booked arrestees in selected citiesbased on urinalysis tests. The tests, administered shortly afterarrest, measure very recent drug use among lawbreakers. Fourtimes a year, samples of about 250 male adult arrestees inparticipating cities are tested; some areas also test femalearrestees and juveniles. The proportion of persons arrestedexplicitly on drug charges is limited to 25 percent of the totalsample. Limitations of the Data The national drug monitoring surveys have several limitationsfor studying drug use, abuse, and addiction: o Most surveys rely on self-reporting. The results of suchsurveys rely on the veracity of the person responding to thesurvey. A major, and widely recognized, limitation in thenational surveys is that respondents may be unwilling or unableto report their drug use accurately. Comparisons of self-reportand urinalysis results based on DUF data indicate that, amongarrestees, the tendency to underreport drug use is substantial(12). As one Member of Congress noted, "how in the hell canyou expect people who live in households to share with anybody,let alone the government, how often they use drugs?" (3). o Surveys miss populations at risk for drug abuse.TheHousehold Survey, by definition, excludes certain groups whodo not reside in households, such as the homeless and persons injail or prison. Although the excluded groups represent only 2percent of the total population, drug use may be higher, ordifferent, among excluded groups such as the homeless and jail orprison inmates. The Household Survey may also fail to capturedrug users within the target population. Although overall surveyresponse rates are high (82 percent in 1990), drugs users mayhave been more difficult to locate and interview because theirlifestyles may involve irregular hours, avoiding authority, andother behaviors that reduce the likelihood of survey response. Inaddition, response rates tend to be generally lower among youngadults and residents of metropolitan and low-income areas, andthose not interviewed may be more likely to use drugs than thosewho respond to the survey. o Poverty indicators per se are not available. The nationaldrug monitoring systems contain very limited data on poverty, andnone that meet the official poverty definition (in 1991, thepoverty thresholds varied from $6,932 for a person living aloneto $27,942 for a family of nine or more members (6). The proxyvariables relating to employment, education, place of residence,and race and ethnicity unsuccessfully separate the effects ofincome from the effects of other correlated factors. Informationon drug use by income status is available only in the most recentHousehold Surveys, and then only by family income without regardto household size. More information is provided by the HouseholdSurvey on other variables related to poverty, includingemployment status, race and ethnicity, and neighborhoodcharacteristics. The Seniors Survey provides no income data. Forhigh school seniors, the only regularly reported indicators ofsocioeconomic status are college plans and parental education. Nosocioeconomic indicators are available for the followup sample ofyoung adults except current enrollment in college. Race andethnic status are not regularly reported for either sample, butfor high school seniors racial and ethnic patterns of drug useare analyzed and published separately. DAWN has severelimitations for an analysis of poverty and drug use. The onlyindicators in DAWN related to poverty are race and ethnicity. Nodata are available on income status of patients or the economicstatus of areas served by the facility. o Surveys may over- and underrepresent findings regardingpopulations at risk for drug abuse. Populations at risk for bothpoverty and drug abuse, for example, are excluded orunderrepresented in the major surveys and overrepresented inreports from hospital emergency rooms. These problems mean thatthe findings from these surveys are suggestive rather thandefinitive (see box 2-4). o Drug measures focus on use, rather than abuse or addiction.The common measures of drug use employed by the Household andSeniors Surveys--lifetime, past year, and past month use--areinsufficiently refined to distinguish between casual anddependent drug use. Definitions of alcohol, drug abuse, anddependency --such as those set forth in DSM (1)-- link thequantity and frequency of use to indications of persistent,uncontrolled consumption, impaired social and psychologicalfunctioning as a result of use, and physical problems includingwithdrawal symptoms. No published estimates of the number of drugusers meeting medical criteria for abuse or dependence by povertyindicators are available, with the single exception of the DAWNestimates of emergency room contacts for dependency, which arereported by race and ethnicity. o The surveys include few multivariate analyses. Since thesurveys do not examine variables while controlling for factorsrelated to drug use, an accurate link of drug use with the roleof income, race, education, and place of residence is impossible.The dearth of such analyses results in part from sample sizelimitations and in part from the fact that secondary analyses ofthe national survey data have not been encouraged. ORGANIZATION AND SCOPE OF THE REPORT This report has four parts: necessary preconditions,individual factors, community contexts, and policy options. The first part, Necessary Preconditions (chs. 3-5), focuseson several factors necessary for substance abuse to occur. Thesecond part, Individual Factors (ch. 6), explores researchconducted on risk and protective factors thought to be indicatorsin assessing an individual's substance use, abuse, and addiction.The third part, Activity Settings (chs. 7 and 8), looks at howrisk and protective factors play out in various populationsubgroups and in various community settings (home, school,workplace, recreation, and neighborhood). The fourth section,Policy Options (ch. 9), addresses the range of legislative issuesand options for Congress arising from chapters 3 through 8. This report focuses on factors that contribute to or protectagainst substance abuse and addiction, and the implications forprevention. It does not address in any depth drug treatment orlaw enforcement issues and interventions. Based on theliteratures reviewed by OTA about causes and prevention, however,it is clear that comprehensive prevention strategies willgenerally need drug treatment and law enforcement components, ifthey are to be effective. While drawing on data from federalantidrug prevention programs, the effectiveness of suchapproaches needs to be studied in greater depth than was possiblein this report. This report is the second and final publication of thisassessment. The first publication, a background report onBiological Components of Substance Abuse and Addiction, describedgenetic, pharmacological, and abuse liability research issues(9). Readers are also referred to earlier OTA reports thataddress issues related to drug interdiction efforts (10);alcohol, tobacco, and drug abuse prevention and services issuesin adolescent health (7); the effectiveness of drug abusetreatment in controlling AIDS/HIV infection (11); and alternativecoca reduction strategies (8). BOX 2-1: Root Causes: Two Views From the Political Arena "Many states and cities are on shoe-string budgets andmust provide services and alternatives to substance abuse inlocal communities. The failure to address the fundamental causesof substance abuse and to provide immediate interventionstrategies will impact city residents most... The committeerecommends that the National Drug Control Strategy be framed bybroader social and economic problems which require dramaticreforms in order to attack the root causes of substance abuse. Weneed to begin to build the infrastructure necessary to improvethe quality of treatment services by requiring medical schools toprovide comprehensive training to identify and treat substanceabusers; provide adequate treatment services at the communitylevel, including after care, vocational, educational, andpsychiatric assessments; and develop alternative leisureactivities for youth and adults to replace `street life' andassist individuals to escape the drug culture." House Committee on Government Operations committee report "One of [the Democrats'] tactics was to talk about theroot causes of drug use, the `deeper and more profound problems,'as they put it, of homelessness, poverty, helplessness, and thelike. The elites liked this shift in emphasis, too. It took thediscussion away from moral considerations to the (for them) morecomfortable ground of social theory. They wanted to talk about`hopelessness' as a condition caused by lack of governmentinvolvement. We talked about hopelessness, too, but talked aboutit as a condition caused by social decomposition and thebreakdown of the family and a lack of law and order in thesecommunities . . . I found it shocking and disappointing that whenwe argued for more police, jails, courts, and prisons because ofthe exploding crime epidemic in some of America's inner cities,some people responded by saying, `But what are the root causes ofthis? `That's an interesting debate which should go on at anelite university. But if there are drug dealers going aroundshooting people in the affluent suburbs, the citizenry will notcall for a seminar on root causes. They will raise hell anddemand that the dealers be arrested. And they are right to doso." William Bennett Former director, U.S. Office of National DrugControl Policy SOURCES: U.S. House of Representatives, Committee onGovernment Operations, H.Rept. 101-992, "The Role of DemandReduction in the National Drug Control Strategy"; Bennett,W., The De-Valuing of America: The Fight for Our Culture and OurChildren (New York, NY: Summitt Books, 1992).F:\USERS\LL\SUBSTAN\BOX2-2.TXT October 7, 1994 BOX 2-2: Overview of Alcohol and Some Other PsychoactiveSubstances Class of psychoactive substance(a) Description(b) ALCOHOL (ethyl alcohol) Alcohol, one of the most widely used of all drugs, is acentral nervous system depressant with effects similar to thoseof sedative-hypnotic compounds (see below). At low doses, alcoholmay be associated with behavioral excitation thought to be due tothe depression of inhibitory neurons in the brain. Alcoholdiffers from sedative-hypnotic compounds in that it is usedprimarily for recreation or social rather than medical purposes. Examples 1. Beer. 2. Wine. 3. "Hard" liquor (e.g., whiskey,gin). SEDATIVES, HYPNOTICS, OR ANXIOLYTICS Sedative-hypnotics aredrugs of diverse chemical structure that exert a nonselectivegeneral depressant on the central nervous system. In addition,they reduce metabolism in a variety of tissues in the body,depressing any system that uses energy. Depending on the dose,any sedative hypnotic compound may be classified as a sedative(an agent that allays excitement), a tranquilizer (an antianxietyagent), a hypnotic (a sleep-inducing agent), or an anesthetic (anagent that eliminates pain). Sedative-hypnotics are usedmedically as sedatives, anxiolytics (antianxiety agents),hypnotics, antiepileptics, muscle relaxants, and generalanesthetics. Examples 1. Barbiturates ("downers" or "barbs"):pentobarbital sodium[NembutalR], secobarbital sodium [SeconalR],amobarbital [AmytalR]--taken orally. 2. Nonbarbiturate hypnotics: methaqualone [QuaaludesR]--taken orally. 3. Tranquilizers: diazepam [ValiumR], chlordiazepoxidehydrochloride [LibriumR]--taken orally. CANNABIS (THC) THC (tetrahydrocannabinol) the active agent inmarijuana, alters perceptions, concentration, emotions, andbehavior, though the mechanisms of action are not entirely clear.Researchers have found, however, that THC changes the way inwhich sensory information is processed by the brain. It can beused medically to relieve nausea and side effects of chemotherapyin cancer patients; it is very rarely used to treat glaucoma. Examples 1. Marijuana ("pot" or "grass")--smokedor eaten. 2. Hashish ("hash")--smoked or eaten. 3.Hashish oil ("hash oil")--smoked (mixed with tobacco.4. Tetrahydrocannabinol (THC)-- taken orally in capsules. NICOTINE Nicotine, obtained naturally from tobacco, is acentral nervous system stimulant.(c) It exerts its actionsecondary to stimulation of certain cholinergic (excitatory)synapses both within the brain and in the peripheral nervoussystem. Examples 1. Cigarettes. 2. Smokeless tobacco (e.g., snuff or chewingtobacco). COCAINE Cocaine, obtained naturally from coca leaves, is apotent central nervous system stimulant.(c) It stimulates thesympathetic nervous system, which regulates the activity ofcardiac muscle, smooth muscle, and glands. It also producesbronchodilation in the lungs. It is used medically as a topicalanesthetic for surgical procedures. Examples 1. Cocaine hydrochloride powder ("coke" or"street cocaine")--usually snorted or injectedintravenously.d 2. Cocaine alkaloid ("freebase" or"crack")--smoked.e AMPHETAMINES AND RELATED STIMULANTSf 1. AmphetaminesAmphetamines are a group of three closely related compounds, allof which are potent central nervous system and behavioralstimulants.(c) Some amphetamines are used medically to treatattention deficit disorder or minimal brain dysfunction inchildren, narcolepsy (recurrent, uncontrollable, brief episodesof sleep), or (rarely) depression. Examples 1. Amphetamine ("speed" or "uppers"(BenzedrineR]--taken orally, injected, or snorted.(g) 2. Methamphetamine ("speed" or "crystalmeth" or "ice") [MethadrineR]--taken orally,injected, or snorted.(g,h) 3. Dextroamphetamine [DexedrineR]--taken orally, or injected. 2. Nonamphetamine stimulants Like amphetamines,nonamphetamine stimulates are central nervous and behavioralstimulants. Some non-amphetamine stimulants (e.g., PreludinR) areused for weight control, and some (e.g., RitalinR and CylertR)are used medically to treat hyperactivity, minimal braindysfunction, narcolepsy, or (rarely) depression. Examples 1. Pheumetrazine hydrochloride [PreludinR]--taken orally orinjected.d 2. Methylphenidate hydrochloride injected.d 3. Pemoline [CylertR]--taken orally. [RitalinR]--takenorally, or injected.(d) HALLUCINOGENS Hallucinogens, or psychedelics, are aheterogeneous group of compounds that affect a person'sperceptions, sensations, thinking, self-awareness, andemotions.(i) Examples 1. LSD (lysergic acid diethylamide) or"acid"--taken orally or put in the eyes. 2. Mescaline (3,4,5-trimethylox- phenylethyl amide) or"mesc" and peyote--disks chewed, swallowed, or smoked;tablets taken orally. 3. Psilocybin ("magic mushrooms")--chewed andswallowed. 4. MDMA (methylene dioxymethamphetamine)--takenorally. INHALANTS Inhalants are chemicals that produce psychoactivevapors. Although different in makeup, nearly all of the abusedinhalants produce effects similar to those of anesthetics, whichact to slow down the body's functions or produce feelings ofdizziness. At low doses, users may feel slightly stimulated. Amylnitrite is used for heart patients because it dilates the bloodvessels and increases blood supply to the heart. There are nomedical indications for most of the inhalants. Examples 1. Solvents (model airplane glue, nail polish remover,lighter and cleaning fluids, and gasoline)--vapors inhaled. 2. Aerosols (e.g., paints, hairsprays)--vapors inhaled. 3. Some anesthetics (e.g.,nitrous oxide)--vapors inhaled. 4. Amyl nitrite ("snappers" or "poppers")and butyl nitrite ("rush")--vapors inhaled. OPIATES (NARCOTICS) AND RELATED ANALGESICS Opiates arenatural or synthetic drugs that, like morphine, a substancederived from the opium poppy, have analgesic (pain-relieving)properties. Heroin is not approved for medical uses in the UnitedStates. The major medical use of other opiates is for the reliefof pain (i.e., as analgesics); some narcotics are used to relievecoughing (i.e., as antitussives) or to treat diarrhea. Methadoneis used in the treatment of narcotic abstinence syndromes and asan analgesic in terminal illness. 1. Heroin ("smack" or "horse")--injected, smoked, or inhaledd. 2. Codeine (codeine sulfate)--taken orally or injected.d 3. Morphine (morphine hydrochloride)--injected, smoked, orinhaled. 4. Synthetic opiates (e.g., methadone [DolophineR]);hydromorphone hydrochloride [DilaudidR], meperidine hydrochloride[DemerolR], oxycodone and asprin [PercodanR]-- taken orally orinjected. PCP (PHENCYCLIDINE) AND SIMILARLY ACTING SYMPHATHOMIMETICS Phencycyclidine, commonly referred to as PCP, alters thefunctions of the neocortex and has been called a dissociativeanesthetic. It was developed in the 1950s as an anesthetic butwas subsequently taken off the market in 1967 when it wasdiscovered that the drug caused hallucinations in some people.(j)PCP is now used legally only in veterinary medicine as animmobilizing agent. PCP ("angel dust" or "lovely")--takenorally, or smoked (sprayed on joints or cigarettes).(d) ______________ (a) According to Julien, one could conceivablyclassify psychoactive drugs by at least three methods: 1)mechanism of action, 2) chemical structure, and 3) behavioraleffects. Probably the most useful approach would be to classifythem by mechanism of action, but knowledge of the brain'sphysiology is too limited for this approach to be comprehensive.A limitation of the second approach is that many drugs ofapparently similar structure exert quite different effects, andmany drugs of dissimilar structure exert quite similar effects.The classification in this table largely reflects the behavioraleffects approach. The classification used here is based on thecategories in the American Psychiatric Association's Diagnosticand Statistical Manual of Mental Disorders, 3rd ed., revised.According to the American Psychiatric Association, all of theclasses of psychoactive substances listed in this box exceptnicotine are associated with both abuse and dependence. Nicotineis associated with dependence but not abuse. (b) The potential physiological, psychological, andbehavioral effects of using the psychoactive substance shown arediscussed in the sources listed below. The consequences depend inpart on the specific drug used, the dosage level and mode ofadministration. (c) Central nervous system stimulants are drugs that canelevate mood, increase alertness, reduce fatigue, provide a senseof increased energy, decrease appetite, and improve taskperformance. They can also produce anxiety, insomnia, andirritability. The drugs differ widely in their molecularstructures and mechanisms of action. (d) According to the American Psychiatric Association, theroute of administration of a psychoactive substance is animportant variable in determining whether use will lead todependence or abuse. In general, routes of administration thatproduce more efficient absorption of the substance in the bloodstream (e.g., intravenous injection) tend to increase thelikelihood of an escalating pattern of substance uses that leadsto dependence. Routes that quickly deliver psychoactivesubstances to the brain (e.g., smoking or intravenous injection)are associated with higher levels of consumption and with anincreased likelihood of toxic effects. Use of contaminatedneedles for intravenous administration of amphetamines, cocaine,and opiates can cause hepatitis, HIV infection, and otherillnesses. (e) Freebase cocaine is a form of cocaine made by converting"street cocaine" (cocaine hydrochloride) to a purifiedbase that is smoked. The effect of smoking freebase is similar tothat of intravenous injection but smoking provides a shorter moreintense high than sniffing or ingestion because of the rapidabsorption of the drug through the lungs. "Crackcocaine" is the street name given to freebase cocaine thathas been processed from cocaine hydrochloride to a chemical baseby cooking it with baking soda and water. The term crack refersto the cracking sound that is heard when the mixture is smoked(heated), presumably due to the sodium bicarbonate. (f) Describing a drug as a stimulant does not adequatelydescribe its properties. Drug use surveys typically meanamphetamines when they use the word stimulants. Some surveysregard as stimulants both prescription (amphetamines) andnonprescription substances (e.g., caffeine-based compounds usedin No-Doz, diet pills, and "fake pep pills"). Cocaineand nicotine (described above) are also central nervous systemsimulants. (g) According to the National Institute on Drug Abuse,designer drugs are structural analogs of substances scheduledunder the Controlled Substances Act that are prepared byunderground chemists to mimic the psychoactive effects ofcontrolled substances or produce other psychoactive effects.Because such analogs are not identical to their parent compound,their manufacture and distribution does not violate the law. Asof June 1986, there were synthetic analogs of PCP, fentanyl andmeperidine, and amphetamine and methamphetamine. (h) In the past, abuse of methamphetamine had been in theform of tablets or intravenous injection. More recently,"ice" (one of the common street names ford-methamphetamine hydrochloride) has gained popularity in a formsuitable for smoking. (i) Most of the agents in this class of drugs can inducehallucinations if the dose is high enough. But the termhallucinogen does not adequately describe the range ofpharmacological actions of the diverse group of substancesusually included in the class. The term psychedelic was proposedby Osmond in 1957 to imply that these agents all have the abilityto alter the sensory perception and thus may be considered"mind expanding." The effects of hallucinogens areunpredictable and depend on the amount taken, the user'spersonality, mood and expectations, and the surroundings in whichthe drug is used. (j) PCP is considered a hallucinogen in some surveys of druguse. SOURCES: Office of Technology Assessment, 1991, based on thefollowing sources: American Psychiatric Association, Diagnosticand Statistical Manual of Mental Disorders, 3rd ed. revised(Washington, DC: 1987); R.M. Julien, A Primer of Drug Action, 5thed. (New York, NY: W.H. Freeman and Co., 1988); J.F. Kauffman, H.Shaffer, and M. Burglass, "The Biological Basics: Drugs andTheir Effects," Alcoholism and Substance Abuse: ClinicalInterventions (New York, NY: 1985); U.S. Department of Health andHuman Services, Public Health Service, Alcohol, Drug Abuse, andMental Health Administration, National Institute on Drug Abuse,"Hallucinogens and PCP, Inhalants, Marijuana, Opiates,Sedative-Hypnotics, Stimulants, and Cocaine," Rockville, MD,1983; U.S. Department of Health and Human Services, Public HealthService, Alcohol, Drug Abuse, and Mental Health Administration,National Institute on Drug Abuse, "Designer Drugs,"NIDA Capsules, Rockville, MD, June 1986; U.S. Department ofHealth and Human Services, Public Health Service, Alcohol, DrugAbuse, and Mental Health Administration, National Institute onDrug Abuse, "Marijuana Update," NIDA Capsules,Rockville, MD, May 1989; U.S. Department of Health and HumanServices, Public Health Service, Alcohol, Drug Abuse, and MentalHealth Administration, National Institute on Drug Abuse,"Methamphetamine Abuse," NIDA Capsules, Rockville, MD,January 1989; and U.S. Department of Education, Growing Up DrugFree: A Parent's Guide to Prevention (Washington, DC: 1989). BOX 2-3: Household Survey Demographic Portrait According tothe 1992 National Household Survey on DrugAbuse:o Illegal druguse is most prevalent in the 18- to 25-yearage group.o Mostillegal drug users are in the white population (76percent of allcurrent users or 8.7 million people).o Men have a higher rate ofcurrent illegal drug use thanwomen.o Illegal drug use is highlycorrelated with educationalstatus. Those who had not completedhigh school had thehighest rate of use.o Unemployed people aretwice as likely as employed peopleto be using illegal drugs.o Theprevalence of illegal drug use in large metropolitancities isslightly higher than in nonmetropolitan areas.SOURCE: Office ofTechnology Assessment, 1994, based on U.S.Department of Healthand Human Services data. BOX 2-4: Two Contrasting Surveys Measuring Cocaine Use Because of populations not represented in the HouseholdSurveys (including homeless, run-away children, andinstitutionalized populations such as the incarcerated), thesurveys may greatly underestimate the involvement of the poor indrug use. Two years ago, for example, Abt Associates conducted astudy to determine the number of heavy cocaine users in theUnited States. Two measures of heavy cocaine use were employed,both of which measured use of cocaine in the very recent past.Estimates of the number of regular weekly cocaine users from the1990 Household Survey were compared to estimates of the number ofrecent cocaine users based on urinalysis tests of arrestees fromthe Drug Use Forecasting (DUF) program. DUF urinalysis tests wereconducted at the time of booking, and the results measuredcocaine use during the day or two before arrest. DUF estimatestherefore measured the prevalence of very recent drug use amongthose involved with the criminal justice system in selected majorcities. The two data systems generated significantly differentestimates. From the Household Survey, Abt estimated that therewere about 662,000 heavy cocaine users in this country in 1990.This is substantially lower than the Abt estimate of 1.709million heavy cocaine users derived from DUF data. Reasons forthe differences include both possible underreporting on theHousehold Survey and the fact that many heavy cocaine users maybe excluded from the household population or may be exceedinglydifficult to locate and interview. Overall, the study indicatedthat approximately two-thirds of the heavy cocaine users in thiscountry are not counted by the Household Survey and thatapproximately 87 percent of all heavy cocaine users are involvedwith the criminal justice system. SOURCE: Office of Technology Assessment, 1994; based on AbtAssociates, Heavy Cocaine Use in the United States: The Number ofUsers (Washington, DC: Abt Associates, 1991). _ CliffSchaffer's Home Page WT02-B01-148IA086-000615-B001-180http://206.61.184.43:80/schaffer/Library/studies/ota/ch5.htm 206.61.184.43 19970122024146 text/html 35176HTTP/1.0 200 OKDate: Wednesday, 22-Jan-97 02:41:32 GMTServer: WebSitePro/1.1f (S/N wpo-0deb)Allow-ranges: bytesContent-type: text/htmlLast-modified: Saturday, 28-Dec-96 06:50:34 GMTContent-length: 34958 SUBSTANCE USE AND TRANSITIONS TO ABUSE AND ADDICTION TECHNOLOGIES FOR UNDERSTANDING AND PREVENTING SUBSTANCEABUSE AND ADDICTION US Government Office of Technology Assessment October 18, 1994 CHAPTER 5 SUBSTANCE USE AND TRANSITIONS TO ABUSE AND ADDICTION Substance use is another precondition and contributor toaddiction, since one cannot become dependent on a substancewithout first using it, continuing its use, and passing throughstages of progressively more serious use. Patterns of progression from use to addiction are not,however, consistent or predictable for all individuals. They canvary widely, depending on numerous individual and contextualfactors and on characteristics of the use itself, such as age ofonset and the type, frequency, and quantity of substance used.While other chapters in this report focus on individual andcontextual factors, this chapter focuses only on thecharacteristics of drug use itself that can contribute to theprogression to abuse and addiction. Researchers have failed to identify specific levels ofsubstance use or of substance-related problems that clearlydistinguish use from abuse (16). This is the case, in part,because substances can differ greatly in their abuse liabilityand, in part, because the same levels of use of a particularsubstance can affect the functioning of various individualsdifferently. For example, for some individuals, the initial useof certain substances may constitute substance abuse, because ofthe severe adverse consequences of the initial use itself.(Although abuse is usually associated with large quantities ofsubstance use per occasion, resulting in either the risk of harmto others (e.g., drunk driving) or to self (e.g., blackouts),some in the prevention field define any initial use of an illicitsubstance as substance abuse, because the substance being used isillicit and should not be used.) Although the distinction between use and abuse is unclear,the causes of substance use--especially initial or casualuse--are thought to differ in many cases from the causes ofsubstance abuse and addiction. Some researchers have assertedthat substance use results primarily from social influences(e.g., peer pressure), while abuse results more from internalpsychological and physiological processes (13). Others havereported, based on longitudinal data, that current substance usewas related more to the early modeling of use by adults and toone's own prior use, whereas problem use was related more toearly rebelliousness (22). A review of prevention programs alsosupports the conclusion that the factors associated with theinitiation of use differ from the factors associated withescalation to abuse (23). SUBSTANCE USE Because substance use is necessary as a precondition to abuseand addiction, prevention efforts can be directed at initial use,continuing use, or progression in use to block the laterdevelopment of addiction. Possible goals are: o Prevent initial use. One way to prevent substance abuse andaddiction is to prevent any initial use. The surest way tosucceed would be to keep abusable substances out of thecommunity, since, if they are unavailable, they cannot be used.However, once the substances are available in a community, otherpreventive approaches can be tried, including scare tactics (aswith a policy of zero tolerance, backed up by stern parental,school, and legal penalties for use), educational efforts(through media campaigns or prevention curricula in the schools),training in refusal skills, and promotion of safenonsubstance-using activities. The lack of clear standards andpenalties, credible information, and alternative activities maycertainly increase the vulnerability of youth to the appeals ofabusable substances, but the presence of such efforts has notguaranteed success in preventing initial use among all youth. o Delay initial use. Another goal is to delay initial use aslong as possible, thus delaying the point at which anyprogression from use to abuse to addiction can begin. Such anapproach can provide at least some protection for somechil-dren--i.e., those who might otherwise initiate use atearlier ages and then more rapidly progress to abuse and possiblyaddiction. Early onset of substance use is often more severe thanlate onset and, as is discussed later in this chapter, early useof substances is one of the better predictors of subsequentproblems. Thus, a delay in initial use may offer significantprotection even if substances are used later on. o Prevent, reduce, or control continued use. Another approachis to try to prevent current users from continuing or escalatingtheir use of one substance or moving on to other substances withgreater abuse liability. Many youth experiment with cigarettes,alcohol, and marijuana, but do not progress to problematic use ofthese or other substances. Others, however, do progress. Effortsto reduce, prevent, or control continued and progressive use, ifsuccessful, can protect individuals from the problems of abuseand addiction. Preventing, delaying, reducing, or controlling the use ofsubstances can help prevent abuse and addiction. Because of theirdirectness and apparent simplicity, these goals can be veryappealing. Detracting from their appeal, however, is that theycan be difficult to achieve, especially for multiproblemindividuals in communities where abusable substances are widelyavailable and aggressively marketed, and for individuals who maybe physiologically predisposed to the continued and escalatinguse of substances. In addition to being a precondition (without which abuse andaddiction become impossible), substance use can also be animportant contributor to later abuse and addiction, by affectingindividuals physiologically, psychologically, andsocioculturally. Physiological Effects Addictive substances affect processes in the brain, some ofthem operating through reward systems, and can produce drugtolerance and dependence. Tolerance manifests itself when, toproduce a given response (e.g., a high), an individual mustingest more of a substance. Physiological drug dependence has atleast two defining characteristics: the development of toleranceto the effects of the drug and the manifestation of symptoms ofwithdrawal on abrupt discontinuation or reduction in dosage. Thedevelopment of physiological tolerance and dependence cancontribute to the progression from use to abuse and addiction: astolerance to a substance increases, an individual must ingestmore of the substance to continue to obtain a given desiredresponse; as dependency develops, an individual must continue toingest the substance to avoid the unpleasant experience ofwithdrawal. Psychological Effects Substance use may contribute to further use and abuse throughpsychological means as well. For example, an initial successfulexperience of use may reduce an individual's fear about thesubstance, thus opening the way to continued use that can lead togrowing tolerance and dependence. Changes in expectations about the consequences of alcohol usehave also been associated with increases in behavioral tolerance.Specifically, less impairment from drinking alcohol occurredwhen, after the ingestion, successfully performing certain taskswas rewarded, while all other variables that increase tolerancewere controlled. Several recent studies and a literature reviewhave found that the ingestion of alcohol increased when therewards for alternative behaviors were constrained (24). Also,social drinkers who expect the effects of alcohol to be betterthan the outcomes of other activities may well be more likely tomake the transition to abusive drinking. Such a hypothesis issupported by several studies that found that alcohol abusersidentify a greater number of favorable conseqences of alcoholconsumption than do nonabusers (24). Continued use of substances can also impair the learning ofskills, especially among the young, and the ability to rememberlessons once learned. Developmental processes may be slowed,which may hamper decisionmaking, in general, and about the use ofsubstances, in particular. However, the progression from use toabuse may also, in many cases, not be simply linear, as whenindividuals move in and out of substance abusing patterns,depending on the developmental stages and social and culturalsituations and contexts that may be affecting them. Sociocultural Effects Sociocultural factors, triggered by substance use, can alsocontribute to progression in use. An individual who initiatesuse, for example, may begin to participate in a subgroup thatencourages use, such as the patrons of crack houses, groups ofheroin users, members of substance-using motorcycle gangs,adolescent peer groups, cocktail party groups, after-work beergroups, and groupies who follow certain rock bands. (In somecases, too, such groups and subcultures may provide the impetusfor the initiation of use as well.) Such social and culturalenvironments encourage, reinforce, maintain, and increasesubstance use and abuse--all of which can develop after theinitiation of use outside the group. Conversely, the lack ofrewarding, substance-free alternative groups and activities mayrender individuals more vulnerable to the appeals of substance-using groups and subcultures. STAGES IN THE INITIATION OF USE Do individuals first use one substance (e.g., alcohol ortobacco) and only later use another (e.g., cocaine or heroin)?Are stages in the first use of different substances similaracross cultures? Does the use of one substance (e.g., marijuana)directly increase the likelihood of later use of anothersubstance (e.g., heroin)? Or is progression in use caused more byother mediating factors, such as multiple behavior problems? Ifso, might these other problems contribute to later use of certainsubstances even in the absence of the use of other substancesearlier on? The basic question about whether there are stages in theinitiation of the use of different substances has been studied inthe United States (9,11,12,21,27) and in Israel and France (1).While study results vary somewhat, the sequence most oftenreported is that alcohol and cigarette use come first, followedby marijuana use and then by the use of other illicit substances.Some variations in this sequence have been found for individualsof different sexes, racial and ethnic groups, and cultures. Theidea that the use of some substances increases the likelihood ofthe use of other substances has led to several hypotheses. The Stepping Stone Hypothesis In its strongest form, the so-called "steppingstone" hypothesis asserted that the use of marijuana oftenor almost always led to violent crime and to the use of otherillicit substances (28). This hypothesis has never been proved.An even earlier version of the stepping stone hypothesis goesback to the beginning of the 20th century, when the presumedprogression from tobacco to alcohol to morphine use was presentedas an argument for prohibiting both alcohol and tobacco. Oneobserver commented that there was no strong evidence that the useof these substances causes progression from one to another;rather, some individuals are more prone to the use of multiplesubstances. Also, the criminalization of marijuana may havecaused some marijuana users to move on to other illicitsubstances through contact with the subculture of illicit users(14). The Gateway Hypothesis More recently, a more moderate hypothesis, the gatewayhypothesis, has been put forward. It asserts that use of certainsubstances increases somewhat the chances of progression to theuse of other substances. For example, in one longitudinal study,men who had used both alcohol and cigarettes by age 15 had a 52percent greater chance of using marijuana, compared to men whohad never used alcohol or cigarettes by age 25 (26). For women,the increased chance of marijuana use among alcohol and cigaretteusers was 46 percent. Similarly, for the next stage, men who hadused marijuana by age 15 had a 68 percent greater chance ofinitiating the use of other illicit substances, compared withthose who had never used marijuana. For women, the increasedprobability was 53 percent. Early and Frequent Use A still more constrained version, but one that may be morepredictive, suggests that early and frequent use increases theprobability of movement to later levels in the sequence (12). Forexample, researchers have reported that early use of substancesis associated with later problematic use (7,20). Nonuse of a Substance at an Earlier Stage Another hypothesis proposes that the nonuse of a substance atan earlier age reduces the chances of later use of othersubstances. A longitudinal study has found that the chance thatan individual who had never used marijuana would move up a levelto use other illicit substances was very low (26). This findingcorroborated conclusions reached earlier based on across-sectional study (18). Because of variations among communities and cultures, thesearch for a universally applicable sequence in the initiation ofthe use of different substances may be less fruitful than thestudy of why there may be somewhat different sequences, dependingon factors such as availability and social norms. The relativeease of availability of some substances (e.g., cigarettes, beer,wine) may well account for their frequent appearance at an earlystage in the sequence of use. However, this may vary amongcultures. In France, for example, wine is widely available andused both at an early age and at an early stage in the sequence.In other cultures, where wine is less available but inhalants arewidely available and inexpensive, inhalants are used at an earlyage and early in the sequence. Use at a young age may be amarker, at least in some cultures, for other risk factors, suchas parental substance abuse and other family problems, which cancontribute to later substance abuse problems, independently ofearly and frequent use. For example, one study found that,irrespective of the age of onset of use, individuals whoexhibited numerous behavioral problems in their youth moved on toproblem substance use, no matter how early or late in their youththey began to use substances (20). Limitations in the Research Research into stages in the initiation of the use ofdifferent substances has itself evolved through stages. A numberof issues, which have not been thoroughly addressed, remain: o The identification of stages in the progression from use toabuse and addiction is more a description of the stages someindividuals move through than a prediction of necessary stagesfor most individuals, since the majority of substance users donot move on to abuse. Reasonable questions are: What preventssome individuals from progressing from initial use to abuse andaddiction? Are the obstacles primarily due to the absence ofpreconditions, such as biological and pharmacologicalpreconditions or availability and marketing. Studying thoseindividuals who do not progress from use to addiction may provideinsights and lessons about how to prevent progression among thosewho do progress. Of particular importance are studies of thechanging vulnerabilities and resiliencies of individuals indifferent developmental stages from childhood throughadolescence, young adulthood, and adulthood. o What is the role of substance use in progression to abuseand addiction? The initiation of use of a particular substancemay often not be the most important contributor to the use of asubstance higher in the sequence. Other factors directly relatedto use may play a larger role. For example, age of onset,quantity, frequency, techniques, and purposes of the substanceuse may be more salient. Longitudinal risk factor and expectancystudies have begun to look at the role of these other elements. o Are some individuals more predisposed to use and abusesubstances than others? Individual biological and psychologicalfactors may also strongly influence which individuals progressfrom use to abuse. o What environmental factors contribute to substance use andabuse? Availability, marketing, social norms, peer groups,subcultures, and settings that encourage substance use may alsobe key in determining which individuals progress. Despite the need for greater understanding about the issuesabove, already completed research into stages in substance usehas been influential in providing the basis for policy andprogram recommendations. The gateway hypothesis has encouragedsome prevention advocates and program planners to focus onpreventing or delaying the use of gateway substances (e.g.,alcohol, cigarettes, marijuana) as a possibly effective way toprevent later use of illicit substances. Longitudinal studieshave found that the use of cigarettes by youth can be a strongpredictor of later problems with substances (17). STAGES IN THE CYCLE OF USE, ABUSE, AND ADDICTION One approach to the study of stages in substance use focusesnot just on the initiation of use; but also on the continuationof use, maintenance and progression of use within a class ofsubstances; progression across classes; and regression,cessation, and relapse cycles in use and abuse (2). Initiation of Use Initiation is clearly a key first step in the progression tomore serious levels of use. Because substance use is ofteninitiated during adolescence, most substance use research hasfocused on initiation of use among adolescents. However, mostindividuals who initiate substance use do not progress to harmfuluse. Also, the factors associated with such progression may oftendiffer from the factors associated with initiation. Thus, thefocus on the initiation of use during adolescence is notsufficient for an understanding of the progression from use toabuse and addiction. Continuation of Use After trying a substance for the first time, one person maysay, "I won't be trying that again," while another maysay, "That's for me." Although only limited researchhas been conducted on risk and protective factors associated withthe transition from experimentation to continued use, thecontinuation of use can apparently be influenced by thepharmacology of the substance (e.g., whether it produces desiredor pleasant experiences), the biology of the individual (e.g.,whether specific individuals have genetic or acquired biologicalpredispositions or intolerances to the use of specificsubstances), the availability and marketing of the substance(e.g., whether a substance is widely available, used, andaccepted for use), other characteristics of the individual (e.g.,at what developmental stage one is, and whether one has mental oremotional problems, which may be ameliorated at least temporarilyby substances), and community contexts (e.g., substance-usingsubcultures or settings that strongly encourage and reinforce acontinued use of substances). Maintenance and Progression of Use Within a Class of Drugs Maintenance and progression may include conformity with normsof consumption--for example, initial and continued heavy use ofalcohol in a college fraternity. Progressionwith cocaine couldentail movement from snorting to smoking or injection. Collegestudents in some fraternities and sororities with drinkingtraditions may be at higher risk for heavy substance use,especially of alcohol. But very little research has beenconducted on the risk factors for maintenance of high levels ofuse or for progression within classes of substances to excessiveuse among this age group. Progression in Use Across Classes of Substances At this stage, an individual may try different substances fordifferent, and often compensating, effects. For example, theantiemetic properties of tetrahydracannabinol in cannabis can beused to facilitate greater use of alcohol, alcohol or marijuanacan be used to smooth out the aftermath of snorting cocaine, andheroin can be used for similar purposes after a binge with crack. Regression, Cessation, and Relapse Cycles The transition away from abuse may occur a number of timesbefore an individual succeeds in getting off a substance or,failing that, remains dependent. It may also be influenced by thesame factors, or kinds of factors, that contributed to thesubstance abuse problem in the first place, including the fullrange of biological and pharmacological factors, availability andmarketing, individual emotional needs, or contextual factors. STAGES IN PROBLEM BEHAVIORS Does substance use itself contribute to conduct disorders,delinquency, and other problem behaviors? Do these behaviorsthen, in turn, contribute to the progression to more use and toabuse and addiction? Adolescents who use substances, especially those that areillegal, are more likely than nonusers to exhibit various problembehaviors, including: early sexual experimentation, delinquentactivities, eating problems, and psychological or psychiatricproblems, including suicide and suicidal thoughts (10). Less isknown, however, about the sequencing of these behaviors. Theinterrelations among the factors is likely to vary widely amongindividuals, but some sequences may predominate. Several suchsequences have been proposed. One suggested developmentalsequence, for example, includes six stages: oppositional(characterized by disobedience at home); offensive (includingdisobedience in school, fighting, lying); aggressive (physicalattacks on others, theft at home); minor delinquency (shopliftingand status offenses, such as alcohol use, truancy, running away);major delinquency (break-in and entry, car theft, substanceabuse, robbery, drug dealing); and violence (assault, rape,homicide) (15). One of the few studies of problem behavior sequences lookedat the order of initiation of four different substances,delinquency, and sexual activity, among a sample of blackadolescents (3). For males, it found involvement proceededgenerally from beer use to cigarette use, then to delinquency,sexual activity, marijuana use, and the use of hard liquor. Forfemales, the progression was generally from cigarette use, todelinquency, beer use, sexual activity, marijuana, and hardliquor. For both sexes, delinquency and youthful sexual activitytended to precede the use of marijuana and hard liquor. While a high correlation among problem behaviors has beenfrequently found, the sequencing of those behaviors is lessclear. The early use of so-called gateway drugs, such as beer andcigarettes, may contribute to later problem behaviors, while thelater use of marijuana, hard liquor, and other illicit substancesmay be more the result of extended participation in problembehaviors. More research is needed in this area if thesehypotheses are to be better understood and tested. KEY ASPECTS OF USE Some research has focused on characteristics of substance usethat can strongly influence the progression from use to abuse andaddiction. In addition to the age of first use, thesecharacteristics include the frequency, quantity, and type ofsubstance used, and the technologies and purposes andexpectations of use. Age of First Use Initiation into substance use at a young age is one of themost striking and often-found predictors of later problems,including abuse. For example, in one large community epidemiologystudy, men who first used substances before age 15 developedmental and behavioral problems in 51 percent of the cases,compared with 16 percent among those who began at age 18 orlater. For women, the comparable figures are 39 and 12 percent,respectively. Other studies have also found problems later onassociated with the earlier introduction to alcohol or other druguse (19). This pattern seems to hold specifically for later substanceuse and abuse as well. Early use of substances was found to beassociated with later problematic use (7,20). Another studyestimated that, of the men who had initiated the use of marijuanaby the age of 14, 71 percent would be expected to initiate theuse of other illicit substances by age 25, compared with 9percent of those who first started at age 21 (12). One report asserted that frequency of use was the mechanismthrough which early onset probably operates (12). However,another study concludes that preexisting conduct problems are abetter predictor of later substance abuse problems than is earlyuse (19). It found that, in individuals with many conductproblems, any use of a substance, no matter how late in youth,was followed by abuse. Frequency and Quantity of Substance Used When addiction occurs, it usually results from a period ofincreasing intensity and frequency of use (5,6). Althoughfrequency has often been employed as a measure of problematicuse, one study found that quantity of substance used, rather thanfrequency of use, was a more powerful predictor of disruptive andproblematic use (21). Quantity and frequency are often related,but they are not identical. An infrequent user could go on abinge, where large quantities are consumed, that could beextremely harmful. By contrast, a frequent user, such as someonewho drinks alcohol every day but in strict moderation, may notencounter substance-related problems (although a maintenancealcoholic may drink daily with no apparent intoxication, but withthe later development of associated health problems). Thequantity and frequency of substance use can be strongly affectedby the availability and marketing of the substance and by thetechniques or technologies for administering the drug. Type of Substance Used The type of substance used can also influence the chances oflater substance problems. More addictive substances--those withgreater abuse liability--will make restraint from continued andpossibly escalating use more difficult. Cigarettes provide anexample experienced by many individuals: nicotine is extremelyaddictive, and only a minority of those who try cigarettes andcontinue to smoke them will be able to control or easily cut backon their use. Techniques of Use Techniques of administration can also influence theprogression of substance use. The introduction of prewrapped,prepackaged cigarettes, together with widely distributed matches,was followed by the rapid escalation of cigarette use, andpresumably addiction to nicotine, in the United States in thelate 1800s and early 1900s. Similarly, the introduction ofsmokable free-base and crack cocaine, the administration of whichis much more efficient than the snorting of powdered cocaine, ledto an explosion of cocaine abuse and addiction. The Bahamas, forexample, experienced a hundredfold increase in cocaine-relatedhospital emergency room admissions following the introduction ofcrack and free-base cocaine in the 1980s (8). Expectations and Effects of Use The expectations and effects of use can also reinforce useand influence progression from use to abuse and addiction.Research reviews have discussed some examples of the expectationsand effects of using illicit substances that can reinforce theiruse and may increase the likelihood of progression to abuse andaddiction (13,25). These purposes include: o The reduction of negative feelings, including the use ofstimulants to alleviate depression and weakness; psychedelics tocombat boredom and disillusionment; alcohol to assuage feelingsof guilt, loneliness, and anxiety; and tranquilizers,amphetamines, and sedatives to reduce painful feelings. o The reduction of self-rejection. Some researchers havefound an association between substance use and indices ofinsecurity, dis-satisfaction with self, desire to change oneself,defensiveness, low self-esteem, and low self- confidence. o The increase in potency. Increases in physical and sexualpotency, daring, and toughness can be achieved by using specificsubstances in certain situations. This can be especiallyappealing to youth, who may be wrestling with feelings ofpowerlessness, dissatisfaction, and frustration. o The expression of anger. Substances can heightenexpressions of anger (e.g., in opposition to mainstream norms) orcan medicate away anger and rage. Narcotics and hypnotics mayhelp reduce rage, shame, jealousy, and impulses toward extremeaggressiveness. o The achievement of peer acceptance. Peers often play thelargest role in endorsing and encouraging substance use, and insupplying substances. The initiation, continuation, andprogression of use can be important ways for individuals to gainacceptance into peer groups. This can be true in school (e.g., ina fraternity), at work (e.g., in a sales force that demands thatone be able to "hold one's liquor"), in substance-usinggangs, and among certain groups of artists (e.g., somecontemporary painters and musicians). o The seeking of euphoria. Many substance users, especiallyaddicts, report favorably on drug-induced euphoria. Indeed, theprospect of euphoria may be the initial attraction of thesubstance. It can also encourage continued use, even to the pointof addiction and negative consequences. o The coping with problems. For some users, substancestemporarily alleviate problems they have been unable to resolvein other ways. While the problems may be causing emotional pain,the use of substances, especially for the young, can inhibit thedevelopment of other problem-solving skills and may alleviatesymptoms only in the short-run, since the underlying causes ofthe problems are likely to remain unresolved. o The reduction of overwhelming trauma. Post-traumatic stress(e.g., after a war, or after physical or sexual abuse) can resultin the use of addictive substances, since use may temporarilyreduce fears, flashbacks, and other negative feelings. o The suppression of appetite or hunger. Another function ofusing some psychoactive substances is appetite suppression. Anextensive literature exists on the use of nicotine, fromcigarette smoking, to control appetite and weight. Thisphenomenon often manifests itself in the negative: for example,current smokers (especially women) are reluctant to stop smokingfor fear they will gain weight (4). o The seeking of stimulus. Individuals who seek higher levelsof external stimulation can also turn to substances, for a high,for hallucinations, for unpredictable effects. o The regulation of affective and behavioral impairments.Those with mood disorders, such as depression, and behavioralimpairments may find that some substances alter moods and allowthem to modify behaviors. The above expectations and effects might well be expected tocontribute to more continued and progressively heavier substanceuse than would more casual purposes such as curiosity,experimentation, or recreational use. The more"serious" the expectations, effects, and functions ofsubstance use, the greater the likelihood of continued use andabuse may be. As noted earlier, the use of substances, especiallyby the young, to address problems or to achieve feelings mayimpede the development of skills for managing feelings andbehaviors and for solving problems, and thus may result indeficiencies in handling problems in life later on. Indeed, theuse of substances at very young ages may even contribute topermanent changes in the brain that may contribute to further useand abuse. More research is needed to clarify the connectionsbetween the expectations and effects of use and the progressionto heavier and more problematic use and abuse. SUMMARY Substance use, including the progression to heavier and moreharmful use, is a precondition and contributor to abuse andaddiction. Researchers have focused on stages in the progressionof substance use in several ways. They have studied stages in theinitiation of the use of different substances, finding a sequencethat moves from the use of cigarettes and wine or beer, to theuse of marijuana, then hard liquor, and finally other illicitsubstances. Because many individuals who use substances do not goon to substance abuse, and because use at one level does notguarantee use at a higher level, these stages are descriptive butnot predictive. In addition to the biologically and pharmacologicallyreinforcing properties of addictive substances that can lead totolerance and dependence, key aspects of substance use thatcontribute to abuse and addiction include age of first use, thefrequency, quantity, and type of substance used, and thetechniques and expectations and effects of use. _ CliffSchaffer's Home Page WT02-B01-149IA086-000615-B001-255http://206.61.184.43:80/schaffer/Library/studies/ota/ch7.htm 206.61.184.43 19970122024248 text/html 47174HTTP/1.0 200 OKDate: Wednesday, 22-Jan-97 02:42:35 GMTServer: WebSitePro/1.1f (S/N wpo-0deb)Allow-ranges: bytesContent-type: text/htmlLast-modified: Saturday, 28-Dec-96 06:49:59 GMTContent-length: 46956 CHAPTER 7 ETHNOGRAPHIC DRUG STUDIES TECHNOLOGIES FOR UNDERSTANDING AND PREVENTING SUBSTANCEABUSE AND ADDICTION US Government Office of Technology Assessment October 18, 1994 CHAPTER 7 ETHNOGRAPHIC DRUG STUDIES Ethnographic techniques allow researchers to study howenvironmental and cultural factors affect values, attitudes, andbehaviors of individuals and groups. Historically, ethnographyhas roots in both anthropology and sociology (see box 7-1). ETHNOGRAPHIC STUDIES OF ALCOHOL AND OTHER DRUG USE Since the 1960s the number of drug ethnographies has grownsteadily. Many of the nation's social issues were in one way oranother associated with drug use: poverty, urban unrest amongminorities, counter culture, failure of social programs, AIDStransmission, and urban violence. Research conducted byanthropologists and qualitative sociologists was an importantpart of understanding new drug-related social problems andtrends. By the mid-1970s, "street ethnography" orsimply "ethnography" were the terms commonly used todescribe the drug research they were conducting in the UnitedStates (60). Alcohol Nineteenth century and early twentieth centuryanthropologists conducted comprehensive community studies innonindustrial societies in which they recorded ritual and socialuses of alcohol. This extensive but generally unfocuseddocumentation provided data for later cross- cultural analysesrelating alcohol use patterns to other cultural variables. The contribution of ethnographic studies conducted outsidethe United States was to provide data on the social conditioningof alcohol's effects. The findings from one such study conductedin Bolivia during 1958, alerted the alcohol research communityto the existence of culturally accepted alcohol use patternsquite different from those customarily encountered in the UnitedStates. For example, "virtually all of the Camba (of easternBolivia) drink to the point of passing out, at least twice amonth." Although the beverage they drink is stronger inalcoholic concentration than that customarily drunk by otherpopulations, there appeared to be no major health or socialproblems associated with their drinking (35). These data along with findings from research on four othersocieties (the Aritama of Colombia, the Ifaluk of Micronesia, theTakashima of Japan, and the town of Juxtlahuaca in Oaxaca,Mexico), support the view that the experiential effect of alcoholis socially conditioned (37). Each of these societies possesseddistinct messages regarding the use of alcohol, which were clearand consistent. In contrast, individuals in modern societies areinfluenced by overlapping, and sometimes contradictory, socialmessages based on religious, ethnic, occupational, generational,regional, and class differences. Drinking habits and behaviorswithin the United States vary enormously. Since the 1970s, ethnographic research on alcohol use in theUnited States has concentrated on specifying and explaining thevariations in American drinking patterns. Some ethnographers havefocused on specific subcultures defined by their problematicalcohol use (53). Other ethnographers have focused on alcoholbeliefs and behaviors in ethnically, religiously, andprofessionally constituted subcultures-- usually exploring theadaptation of culturally sanctioned drinking patterns, passed onthrough family and community modeling, to changing socialcontexts (5). Heroin The majority of ethnography studies conducted in the 1960sfocused on heroin use. Several of these studies challenged theaccepted perception "that heroin provides an escape for theuser from his psychological problems and from theresponsibilities of social and personal relationships--in short,an escape from life" (47). Researchers documented drug useas a way of life, rather than just as an escape from life. Twosuch articles, based on three years of field work in Oakland,California, detailed several distinct patterns or styles amongheroin users. Varying levels of prestige were associated withthese different styles, and heroin users at the top of thehierarchy were observed to work hard to maintain their lifestyles(54,55). Another study in New York City, New York, in the late 1960s,asked why heroin use periodically mushroomed, in epidemicproportions, in lower class communities. The data revealed that,regardless of ethnic background, in poor neighborhoods"there are pressures on adolescent boys to live up to theideals of toughness, strength, daring, and the willingness tochallenge the bleak fate of being poor." Simply put,"movement into heroin use was one route to becoming a`somebody' in the eyes of the important people who comprised theslum social network" (20). Later articles elaborated on theidea of so-called street status. Based on 4 years of research, ahierarchy of illicit drugs was defined by perceived riskcomponents, such as physical harm, addiction potential, parentaldiscovery, police, and intragroup dangers. The use of drugsperceived by the group to be risky, increased a user's personalstatus within that group. The researcher concluded that relianceon legal sanctions and scare tactics to reduce the use of certaindrugs will only make the use of these drugs appear more daringand hence to some, more attractive (21,23). Cocaine and Crack Although ethnographers noted that cocaine use was on the riseamong some middle-class professionals and drug experimenters bythe mid 1970s, it was not until the 1980s that extensive studieson cocaine users were begun. While some of these early users, many of whom were white,progressed from experimental use of cocaine to heavy use withsubsequent biological and behavioral problems, many others didnot (57,58). Several years later, though, middle- class userswith cocaine-related problems were becoming more common,prompting many would-be experimenters to steer clear of the drug.During this same time period, cocaine smuggling escalated,resulting in increased availability, lower prices, and higherquality. Within low-income, minority communities, cocainesmoking, first as free-base and then as crack, grew soprecipitously that it was commonly called an epidemic. In NewYork City, ethnographers provided complementary perspectives onthe rapidly changing crack culture. In a series of ethno-historical articles, Ansley Hamiddocumented the history of cocaine smoking as it evolved in lowerincome minority neighborhoods in New York City. Among theelements identified as central to the widespread diffusion ofcrack smoking was the interest shown by heroin injectors withcollapsed veins in the concentrated high of smoked cocaine; theentry of Rastafarian marijuana distributors into the cocainetrade; the emergence of young, nonusing street distributors ableto sell unit doses in vials at relatively low prices; and therise in crack prices due to increased demand combined withsuppliers who had greater control over the market. Hamid believesthe rise and fall of cocaine smoking to have followed adevelopmental cycle similar to that of heroin use between 1964and 1972 and marijuana use in the 1960s and 1970s (31,32,33,34). A 1992 study of crack use focused on the children of crackusers. It found that the extended family networks in the AfricanAmerican community, a major source of stability and support, werebeing overwhelmed by the drug crisis as the number of childrenwhose mothers were no longer able to care for them because ofincreased drug use. Further, children exposed to drug-takingbehavior by adults may be more likely to display similarbehavior. In one family headed by a 60- year-old woman, an adultson was a crack dealer and a daughter was a crack-abusingprostitute (18). Hallucinogens Most ethnographic studies of hallucinogens and mind-alteringdrugs (e.g., peyote, mescaline, mushrooms) have focused on tribalsocieties. Anthropologists have uniformly found that the use ofhallucinogens was socially approved and integrated into thereligious and social life of the community. If one defines abuseas use of a drug in such a way that it interferes with physical,economic, or social functions, then little if any evidence pointsto drug abuse among tribally organized peoples (1,27,15,42). Other than scattered studies of hallucinogenic drug use amonghippies (12,14,45,46), few ethnographic studies have beencompleted on use of hallucinogenic substances in Americansociety. However, the persistent use of lysergic aciddiethylamide (LSD) by some young people, and concerns that itsuse may be increasing, have sparked new interest amongethnographers (30,38). Marijuana As with hallucinogens, most of the ethnographic research onmarijuana use has been conducted outside the United States. Muchof it was initiated in the 1960s and 1970s, when increasing useof marijuana among American youth led researchers to question thesocial and medical consequences of marijuana use, especiallylong-term use. Research was conducted in countries in whichmarijuana use was long standing and widespread, such as Brazil,Colombia, Costa Rica, Egypt, Jamaica, Mexico, Rwanda, and SouthAfrica (11,16,17, 51). In Jamaica, for example, anthropologists Vera Rubin andLambros Comitas directed a research team of 45 social scientistsand medical professionals to conduct original ethnographicresearch at several field sites, in addition to medical,psychological, and psychiatric testing in hospitals and clinics.Their controversial findings were that none of the deleterioussocial or medical consequences believed by many to be associatedwith the drug in the United States could be found among Jamaicanusers: .?.?. There is no evidence of any causal relationship betweencannabis use and mental deterioration, insanity, violence orpoverty; or that widespread cannabis use in Jamaica produces anapathetic, indolent class of people. In fact, the ganja complexprovides an adaptive mechanism by which many Jamaicans cope withlimited life chances in a harsh environment (52). Other than a few studies of middle-class users (10,39) andyoung African American dealers (24,25), substantial U.S.ethnographic research on marijuana use in the United States hasbeen generally lacking, despite the fact that marijuana has beenthe most commonly used illicit substance for decades. Phencyclidine (PCP) An ethnographic study in 1979 of PCP users is frequentlycited for its substantive findings and methodologicalcontribution as the first multisite ethnographic drug study.Initiating the study when PCP use was believed to be spreadingamong white working-class and middle-class young people, theNational Institute on Drug Abuse (NIDA) contracted for afour-city ethnographic study of PCP users not in treatment. After3 months of working in Miami, Florida, Philadelphia,Pennsylvania, Chicago, Illinois, and Seattle, Washington,ethnographers documented groups of users and the underlyingsocial processes. They found that it was relatively rare for ayoung person to use PCP exclusively. Use occurred mainly withinsocially distinctive groups of young people who displayed "akind of restlessness, an orientation for action, and a sense thatlife generally was boring, uninteresting, and lacked recreationalactivities" (22). The young people studied were very knowledgeable about drugeffects and understood that the PCP drug experience varieddramatically with dosage. Low doses of the drug were reported bydifferent user groups to be mildly euphoric and hallucinogeniclike LSD, or sedating like barbiturates. What concerned regularPCP users was not the acute adverse effects reported in the media(e.g., psychotic episodes, assaultive outburst, irreparableharm), but rather "burning out"--a "spacey"state accompanied by incoherent thoughts, forgetfulness, andmemory loss. As burnout became apparent, individual users andgroups of users consciously cut back their PCP use. Within thisgroup, violent episodes were found to be rare, mainly involvingefforts by law enforcement or hospital treatment staff torestrain users, thereby seeming to set off panic reactions andstruggle. The study suggested that a significant gap existed betweenofficial agencies responsible for drug education and preventionand street drug users. When PCP use increased dramatically in themid 1970s, there were no official responses because quantitativenational data sources, such as surveys of high school studentsand hospital emergency reports, failed to include PCP as aseparate drug. When the official agencies recognized thewidespread use of PCP, their prevention efforts were viewed byusers as distorted and were discounted. Ethnographers attributethe eventual decline in PCP use to "the general consensusamong users themselves on the negative features of its long-termeffects rather than the kind of expert opinion that accompanieslegitimate efforts at prevention" (22). SOCIAL CONTEXT OF DRUG USE Specificity in Drug Abuse Research As more questions are asked about alcohol and other drug use,it becomes clear that drug use is not one phenomenon, but many.There is no generic pattern of drug use; rather, there is use ofspecific drugs in specific situations. Quantitative researchers frequently use ethnic categories toincrease study specificity. While studies on different ethnicgroups are useful, often the definitions of ethnicity vary andthe concept is employed uncritically. Moreover, most of thequantitative researchers using the concept of ethnicityimplicitly assume what anthropologists call a "static"concept of culture, viewing ethnicity as a trait one is bornwith, an unchanging characteristic, like hair color or body type.In contrast, most ethnographers view culture as "a dynamicprocess through which individuals and societies learn the sumtotal of their society's behaviors and associated belief systems,including those encompassing drug use practices and beliefs"(4). Many recent ethnographic studies focus on socially meaningfulunits in which members share social statuses, behaviors, andattitudes. For example, a recent book on drug use among Hispanicsincluded ethnographic accounts of Cuban so-called streetside druguse in Miami, Florida, drug use among male and female gangmembers from the East Los Angeles, California, barrios, and druguse and dealing among low-income Puerto Ricans in New York City,New York, and Chicago, Illinois. (28). Inclusiveness in Drug Abuse Research One drawback of studying increasingly specific drug-usingcommunities is losing sight of the larger whole. Ethnographicdrug studies at times fail to link the customs of the specificstudy communities to customs in other communities or to place thecustoms in a larger framework. A way that both highlights andcritiques the contribution of ethnography in the field of drugresearch is to focus on the social relationships around drug use,specifically, on the pattern of use in relation toself-identification with a social group. In the ethnographicliterature, four basic patterns appear: o Individuals who use drugs with others who share anidentification with a lifestyle or subculture in which drug useis the central component. o Individuals who use drugs with others who share anidentification with a lifestyle or subculture in which drug useis customary and openly accepted, but not the central component. o Individuals who use drugs with friends and acquaintances,but there is no self-identification with a drug-using lifestyleor subculture. o Individuals who use drugs by themselves while maintainingself-identification with a group that stigmatizes drug use (seetable 7-1). Drug Use Within a Drug Subculture Numerous studies have documented that, for pragmatic andsocial reasons, individuals whose lives have become oriented to adrug often associate with others who use the drug in a similarfashion. Over time a subculture develops with specializedknowledge, norms, and expectations. Individuals think ofthemselves as belonging to the subculture, and others define themas such. "Where subcultures exist, social-psychologicalbarriers separate participants from onlookers" (13). It hasoften been noted, for example, that for many heroin users, use ofthe drug overrode background characteristics, such as race,class, and national origin, to become the definingcharacteristic. As one heroin user related: I always refer to myself as a junkie, even when I'm nothooked on anything. And when you're introduced to somebody forthe first time the first thing you find out is whether he's ajunkie or not. It's like belonging to some fantastic lodge, youknow, but the initiation ceremony is a lot rougher (57). However, even within a drug-using subculture variationsexist, especially with regard to frequency and amount of use.This difference was emphasized by a 38-year-old regular heroinuser from New York City: .?.?. all heroin addicts are not heroin abusers, okay? Andyou get the abuser, he's a dog, right? He's the one who sits inthe drug house and shoots all day long. That's an abuser. I'm avisitor, you never catch me in the drug house. Not me, no (41). A similar distinction was made by a female crack user, who,although her life revolved around crack, was still attractive,healthy, in a relationship, and the social center of a network ofusers. In contrast, for her: The crack addict is the person who's lost all sense of what'sgoing on. They are like zombies. They are out there standing inthe pouring rain. If it's cold and snowing, they'll be walking upand down out there .?.?.?. They are .?.?. to the point ofdesperation where they will take off [rob] people they know. Theywill set you up. It comes to the point where they will set upfamily, friends, anybody--the point where they don't care anymore(61). One ethnographer noted that these types of individuals wereattempting "to become `visitors' in social networks of otherusers, to establish a degree of contact and membership whileremaining somewhat detached from the network. Their attempts toremain partially marginal to both street and straight society area central part of their strategies for controlling their use andtheir own lives" (41). Drug Use as Part of a Lifestyle or Identity Drug use often occurs within a lifestyle or subcultureinwhich drug use is common and accepted, but is not the definingcharacteristic. The subculture may be professionally oriented.For example, some of the earliest drug research was done amongjazz musicians (2,62). Anabolic steroid use was common amongprofessional and amateur athletes in certain sports (29). Duringits peak, cocaine use was rampant among entertainers. In one study, a waitress at a rock-and-roll bar calledcocaine use an "occupational hazard." She and otherrestaurant workers in the study described how groups of workerswould pool funds to purchase small amounts of cocaine for usewhile working: "For them. ?.?. hard work, constant activity,and long, late hours seemed instrumental to their cocaineuse" (59). Recent research has documented that at times the nuclear orextended family may act as the subcultural unit in which illicitdrug use is common and accepted. We was with my mother over her girlfriend's house when AuntJeannie came by and she had some coke. She cooked it up and toldMa and Ruth to try it. After that things started goin' crazier. Ihad to take care of my oldest sister's two sons, my son, and myyounger brother. I had to do everything. Most of the time wedidn't have nothin' to eat. We stayed hungry all the time. When Iwashed clothes I'd find vials in her [mother's] pockets.. ?.?. I`member comin' home one day and she'd been smokin' for awhilethen, but the house was full of people smokin' all over theplace. I went to go to my bedroom and close the door and it wasfull too. I said to her, `what's happenin'? I just turned roundand left. I was tired, the house was dirty with vials on thefloor and the tables and I'd just had my son.. ?.?. I just wantedto get away.. ?.?. At first I had smoked some crack to kill myappetite, to keep me from bein' hungry. ?.?. I just felt like Icouldn't take it no more so I took my son to my sister and left .?.?. I went on a binge and smoked for three months. Nobodyknew where I was, but I was out smoking crack and gettin' moneyanyway I could get it (18). Drug Use With Partners and Peers Drug use can also occur when there is no subcultural supportor membership in a group that approves of drug use. In somecases, an orientation toward, or acceptance of, drug use may havebeen acquired earlier in life when the individual was part of adrug-accepting subculture: former hippies, student drug users, orparticipants in street life. Such individuals may continue theirdrug use long after ending their other associations with thesubcultures. Recently reported by ethnographers is the recreational use ofMDMA (Ecstasy) by some middle-class individuals. Some professionals, particularly those whose ideas aboutdrugs were formulated during the 1960s, quietly view psychoactivesubstances as one of many ways to relax, to relate, to "kickback." It is within this context, coupled with the need torelax fast and relate quickly, that Ecstasy is used (50). Drug Use in Social Isolation Last, some individuals use illicit drugs primarily bythemselves. Often they identify themselves with a professionalsubculture or social group that is opposed to drug use. Onewell-documented pattern is that of physicians, nurses, and otherhealth workers who illicitly use psychoactive pharmaceuticaldrugs, especially narcotics (63,64). Other patterns of use in social isolation are known butpoorly documented in the ethnographic literature. Unsuperviseduse of pharmaceutical drugs is fairly common and often the linebetween licitly obtained and illicitly obtained drugs can beblurred. Emergency room and family physicians, for example,encounter suspected middle-class prescription drug abusers. Onemiddle-class housewife interviewed as part of a study ofemergency room drug episodes began her use of prescription painkillers because of a back problem, and then continued chronic(and essentially unsupervised) use of the drug for years byobtaining prescriptions from multiple physicians (49). Typology as a Whole The ethnographic method of describing how and, to someextent, why people use drugs differs from the purely quantitativemethod that analyzes the association of drug use with the socialand demographic characteristics of the users. To date, most of the ethnographic research has concentratedon drug-focused subcultures or on crime-related subcultures.There are few studies on other populations, and many of these arenow dated. For example, there have been no significantethnographic studies of student drug use in almost two decades.The drug problem has been defined in the public mind and amongsome funding sources as a problem of poor minority communities.Some ethnographers acknowledge that, to some extent, their ownattitudes have contributed to the skewing of the drug research aswell. Ethnographic field work with drug-focused and criminalsubcultures is considered by some to be more adventurous andprofessionally rewarding. Also, in its own way, it may be easierthan field work in the general population, since studyparticipants can be readily delineated from onlookers andsubjects can be relatively easily located on the street orthrough their relationship with treatment and law enforcementagencies. One consequence of the absence of information concerning druguse within the general population is that, like a self-fulfilling prophecy, attention continues to be paid almostexclusively to minority drug use. Drug use and drug users aredefined as the "other," different from the rest ofsociety. Ethnographers have paid relatively little attention tothe relationship between culturally approved drug use (e.g.,caffeine, nicotine, alcohol, psychoactive prescription drugs) andillicit drug use. Another consequence is that there are few data available onwhich to base prevention programs for individuals who areunlikely to become members of a drug or criminal subculture.Virtually nothing is known about experimenters, casual users,controlled users, or chronic users not associated with a drugsubculture. POVERTY, RACISM, AND CYCLE OF ABUSE The preceding section outlined a variety of drug usingcontexts in the United States and documented the presence of druguse and abuse among different social, racial, and ethnic classes.Equally important, however, is the realization that theconsequences of drug abuse are especially devastating inchronically poor, often minority, communities. While poverty asan individual risk factor for substance abuse is described inchapter 6, this section considers ethnographic observations onthe links between the poverty of the inner-city communities andsubstance abuse. The Social Context of Poverty Drug ethnographers have noted that urban poverty means morethan lacking money. Often it means living in substandard housingin communities that lack basic municipal services, and for youngpeople it usually means attending overcrowded, underfunded,demoralized schools. Researchers regard illicit drug use,especially the use of heroin, cocaine, and crack, as both aresult of oppressive social conditions and a cause of theworsening of these conditions. To cope with difficult social circumstances, ethnographershave documented the effective utilization of extended familynetworks and kin relationships. However, even with thesesafeguards, it is not uncommon for children to encounteralcoholism, other drug use, depression, physical abuse andneglect, sexual abuse, and other traumatic experiences. Lack of Opportunity In ethnographic life histories of men and women who becomedeeply involved with illicit drugs, the characteristic ofinner-city life most often mentioned is the lack of opportunityfor meaningful work. For example, an ethnographer studying heroinaddicts in the early 1970s noted: Often in interviews with addicts I have thought that thisantiwork attitude was a sour-grapes defense because so few havehad meaningful work experiences and many do not considergood-paying or creative jobs work, but I think that theseattitudes are more than psychological mechanisms. They are, Ibelieve, deeper in the fabric of our society and arise out ofpoverty and the reality of poor, uneducated persons who can onlyexpect the most dull, stultifying, and meaningless work. Most, Iwould expect, held these attitudes before their addiction andwhen they became addicted simply added another good reason not topursue something that offered so little (56). More recently, ethnographers studying the crack subculture,have related changes in drug use patterns to structural changesin the world economy. For many inner-city residents the difficulteconomic situation of the 1950s and 1960s became impossible inthe 1970s and 1980s, as many of the secure semiskilled andunskilled jobs shifted overseas. New York City, for example, losta half million manufacturing jobs and 100,000 jobs in wholesaleand retail trade between 1967 and 1987 (36). For individualswithout post secondary degrees, jobs that could support a familybecame scarce. Because of the structural shifts, basic expectations aroundwork have changed dramatically: The option of a steady, legal job appears so distant forinner-city high-school dropouts (and even graduates), that theycease job searches after a few attempts or experiences inlow-wage jobs. Adult household members can rarely provideconcrete assistance in finding jobs or help in accessing networksof employers (19). Racism Clearly a person need not be a member of a racial or ethnicminority group to use drugs. Much of the early ethnographicresearch was done on white heroin-using individuals (20,21,48) orwith mixed ethnic and racial backgrounds samples (47, 20,56).Nonetheless, many ethnographers introduce race as an explanatoryelement. It is not used in the genetic or biological sense butrather that racial discrimination has shaped the social contextand opportunity structure for many people of color. Ethnographerscite the indirect racism of some politicians who have beenunresponsive to the worsening social conditions of schools,housing, and municipal services in many minority communities.Also reported is the active racism encountered by many minoritypeople in daily life (9,8). Ethnographers describe inner-city minority residents ashaving a pervasive sense of not fitting into white mainstreamsociety. Within most poor inner-city communities, whites arerarely encountered except as representatives of conventionalinstitutions such as police, teachers, and social workers. Development of an Oppositional Culture While oppressive social conditions, limited economicopportunities, and racism are identified by ethnographers ascontributing to the high prevalence of drug abuse in the innercity, in and of themselves they offer little insight into thespecific attitudes and behaviors of those involved in illicitdrug use. For this, ethnographers have often relied on the notionof an oppositional culture, one of resistance or refusal. Some ethnographers argue that amidst oppression andexclusion, minorities, such as blacks, Hispanics, and AmericanIndians, develop "a collective identity or sense ofpeoplehood in opposition to the social identity of whiteAmericans." Developed in tandem with this oppositionalsocial identity is a cultural frame of reference that defines"certain forms of behavior and certain activities or events,symbols, and meanings" as not appropriate because they arecharacteristic of white Americans while "other forms ofbehaviors and other events, symbols, and meanings [are defined]as more appropriate because they are not a part of whiteAmericans way of life. To behave in the manner defined as fallingwithin a white cultural frame of reference is to `act white' andis negatively sanctioned" (26). Many ethnographers studying inner-city communities argue thatillicit drug use is embedded in an oppositional culture, formedin response to oppressive social conditions and lack ofopportunity. Ethnographer Terry Williams explains: .?.?.?to some extent, it is possible to see the violence,crime, and substance abuse that plague the inner city asmanifestations of resistance to a society perceived as white,racist, and economically exclusive. This could be called aculture of refusal. The young people in the crackhouses refuse tobe part of the system, refuse to obey their parents, rejectschool or any adult-controlled education or training, spurnprevailing social values and most authority. In the crackhouses,teenagers and adults refuse to obey the law, refuse to staysober, refuse to engage in safe sexual practices--even thoughthis refusal leads them to behaviors that are manifestly harmfulboth physiologically and psychologically (61). Cycle of Abuse Attraction of the Drug Ethnographers have emphasized three factors to help explainthe use of illicit drugs, especially heroin and crack by poor,inner-city, and minority populations. First, ethnographers report that as the use of a drug beginsto spread through a community, its use is seen as a status symbolwithin the street hierarchy. Many ethnographers attributed thequick expansion of cocaine smoking that occurred in the middle1980s to cocaine's reputation as a high-status drug, especiallywhen smoked or free based (23). Second, initiation into drug use almost always occurredthrough an established friendship or kin relationship. Virtuallyevery ethnographic study of drug use quotes users as saying: Iwas at a party (or with a friend) and someone offered me someheroin (cocaine, crack), so I tried it. The third theme is simply that many people, when they tryheroin or crack cocaine, like it. For some individuals, at leastin the beginning, their drug experiences are more highly valuedthan anything else in their lives (6,61). Several ethnographers have suggested that once crack becameavailable at relatively low cost in the late 1980s, the sharprise in its use was due primarily to the intensity of the drugexperience, comparable in somatic effect to arterial injection.The drug's effects attracted intravenous drug users withcollapsed veins or with concerns about HIV transmission, as wellas many nonintravenous drug users (23,40,43). Slide Into Abuse In explaining the slide of inner-city residents into drugabuse, addiction, and dependency, ethnographers have highlightedtwo complementary themes. One theme explains the function drugdependency serves in simplifying and giving meaning to a druguser's life. Stated succinctly: "The euphoria of heroin andthe excitement of hustling serve many addicts in the same waythat jobs, sex, and consumption serve nonaddicts" (56). A similar conclusion was drawn by another ethnographerstudying crack use patterns: Substance abuse in general, and crack in particular, offerthe equivalent of a millenarian metamorphosis. Instantaneouslyusers are transformed from being unemployed, depressed highschool drop-outs, despised by the world--and secretly convincedthat their failure is due to their own inherent stupidity,"racial laziness" and disorganization-- into being amass of heart palpitating pleasure, followed only minutes laterby a jaw-gnashing crash and wide awake alertness that providestheir life with concrete purpose: get more crack--fast! (8). The complementary perspective emphasizes the lack of a viablelifestyle alternative to drug use. One researcher contends thatdue to the unequal distribution of viable nonaddict social rolesin society, some groups will have more difficulty in recoverythan others: For example, a white, middle-class, high-school-educated,male addict will have more personal and social resources to drawfrom when he decides to give up drugs than will a Chicano addictliving in a barrio. In fact, a relatively uneducated Chicanoaddict may opt to retain the junkie- dealer role and identitybecause it provides him with greater status and financial rewardsthan any other social role available to him (7). End of the Cycle Despite little improvement in the social conditions of manyinner cities, recent journalistic accounts, ethnographic studies,and reports from surveillance systems indicate that theprevalence of crack use may be decreasing. Ethnographers reportthat for many individuals, the initial appeal of crack use hasfaded. "Youths under 16 have made a new pastime ofridiculing or beating up crackheads who they say disgraceneighborhoods or are nuisances or thieves. Five years ago,youngsters their age had initiated crack use after first becomingdistributors, as youngsters had previously been drawn into heroinuse" (34). Ethnographers present several possible explanations for thisdownturn. Epidemiologically, a parallel could be drawn to thedecrease seen in bacteria-based epidemics, where all individualsmost likely to be infected have been. Economically, it could beargued that all possible wealth to be extracted from the innercity has been. There are simply fewer resources for drugtraffickers, smugglers, and importers. A complementary explanation is based on concepts put forward25 years ago (3). It was argued that the social consequencesresulting from a drug's use could be related to the historicalstage of the drug's introduction in society. Most importantly,over time, a subculture of drug users develops ".?.?.material on how to obtain and ingest the drug, definitions of thetypical effects, the typical course of the experience, and thepermanence of the effects.. ?.?." In the case of marijuanaand LSD, this type of shared information may have accounted forthe sharp decrease in reported psychotic reactions even thoughthe actual number of users was increasing. This subculture can also define certain drugs or styles ofuse as dangerous. For example, ethnographers argue that thedownturn in cocaine use in the late 1980s among middle- andworking-class individuals was due to the belief that"cocaine can mess you up," and that this subculture ofusers understood this warning as more than just propaganda ofprevention proponents (59). This same process may be occurring in inner-city communitiesamong the subculture of crack users. Researchers note that thecrack epidemic has followed a predictable developmental cycle,previously seen with heroin use, "characterized by periodsof onset, incubation, widespread diffusion, peak, and decline.The final stage is stabilization at reduced levels of use"(34). In exploring the devastation caused by crack epidemics oninner-city communities, ethnographers have called attentionto theprocess through which harm-reducing information develops within asubculture of users. For example, among middle-class,cocaine-using individuals, many users gained information fromconventional sources (such as books, magazines, and evenscholarly journals) on the progression of cocaine dependence,long-term negative consequences, danger signals, and methods tocontrol or end use. This information then spread through thewider user community. In contrast, researchers note that theinner-city subculture of crack users paid little attention toconventional information sources and were ideologicallypredisposed to discount what information did reach them. Whilethere was no deficit of warnings about the dangers of crack usein the popular media, ethnographers observed that little effortwas made to translate prevention information into moreappropriate media messages for inner-city communities. FUTURE RESEARCH Over the past 30 years, ethnographers have contributed to theunderstanding of substance abuse research through their workamong different countries and among different subpopulations inthe United States. However, some additional contributions couldbe made in the following areas. Filling in the Gaps The earlier sections on the social contexts of drug useemphasized that drug use in the United States is much more thanheroin and cocaine in the inner cities and LSD in the suburbs.Research is needed, for example, on middle-class prescriptionabusers, substance abusers in rural areas, and hidden populations(e.g., homeless, runaways, dropouts); since many of theseindividuals are either excluded from, or under sampled in, thenational drug abuse surveys. To further complete the matrix ofsubstance use and abuse in the United States, future researchcould address not only those individuals whose use isunmanageable, but individuals and communities who do not use, orwhose use is moderate and controlled. Expanding Research Hypotheses The documentation that cultural and societal norms, to alarge degree, shape individuals' and groups' behaviors towarddrugs use, could be used to formulate new substance abuseresearch hypotheses, or expand on existing hypotheses. Forexample, understanding the etiology of drug use through studiesof children will help explain initiation of drug use and provideguidance for prevention efforts. Basic studies that document howchildren come to perceive drugs are lacking. "...when ithappens, how it happens. How they conceptualize, for example,what is a drug and what is a poison, and how that changes whenthey begin experimenting with drugs" (44). Planning Prevention Programs The insight gained by ethnographic research on a community'sor subculture's view on substance use could be incorporated to agreater degree in the needs assessment, planning, implementation,monitoring, and evaluation components of substance abuseprevention research. The information gained from ethnographicresearch could help assure that the prevention information isculturally appropriate not just in a generic ethnic sense, but interms of the specific cognitive framework and concerns of thetarget audience. Additionally, the qualitative tools used inethnography can assist quantitative researchers in theinterpretation of substance abuse data in varying contexts. Identifying Emergent Trends Ethnographic research is also useful in its ability torelatively quickly document changes in existing drug use patternsor identify the use of new drugs by a particular subculture. Thistimely information could assist in the planning of appropriateprevention strategies. SUMMARY Studies on drug-using subcultures have provided a wealth ofknowledge on why, how, and who uses and abuses drugs.Experience-based methods of data collection, such as ethnography,provide the field of substance abuse research with uniqueinformation on drug abuse among individuals, groups, andcommunities. Some of the contributions discussed in this chapterhave been theoretical, substantive, and programmatic. Ethnographic studies have documented drug use patternsworldwide and in so doing have assisted the understanding ofsocietal influences on drug use. These insights have, forexample, been utilized in the planning, implementation, and tosome extent, evaluation of drug prevention programs in a varietyof different social contexts. Researchers have also utilized ethnographies to followconstantly changing drug use patterns. Moreover, ethnographersprovide valuable data on new drug use such as who is using it,how the drug is being used, and where the probable epicenters ofthe drug use are. While not without methodological limitations, ethnography andother experience-based research provide new insights intosubstance abuse, as well as complimenting more quantitativemethods of data collection. BOX 7-1: What is Ethnography? Ethnographic research isdescriptive, subjective, analytical, and comparative. The focuson context is central to the ethnographic approach, explaininghow a particular behavior, institution, or process is acted on bylarger forces outside of the control of the participants. Itdescribes how events happen and the social life of the studyindividuals. While qualitative interviewing and other more formalmethodologies are usually part of an ethnographic study,participant observation (i.e., informally interacting withparticipants and observing events as they naturally occur) is ahallmark of ethnographic research. Studies are subjective in thatthey focus on the understandings, interpretations, and worldviews of the participants. Ethnographic accounts describe notonly what occurs, but also the multiple levels of distinctions bywhich individuals and groups make sense of and purposively act inthe world. Ethnographic studies are also analytical. Theobservations, interviews, and documents are raw data, as formsand responses are raw data for survey statisticians. Theethnographer's analytic responsibility is to condense and orderthese data. The analytic work can include the identification ofnonobvious patterns, associations, and themes, as well as theconstruction of typologies, process models, or explanatoryframeworks. Finally, ethnographic research is comparative in twosenses of the term. First, it often explores how attitudes andbehaviors are shaped by social forces in two or more contexts.The contexts are at times spatial (two different cultures orsubcultures), at other times temporal (the same culture orsubculture at different times). Ethnographic studies are alsoconducted within a research tradition, so that each new projectdraws on the methods and findings of previous research. Overtime, a corpus of work develops regarding a particular culturalcommunity (e.g., Samoans, inner-city drug users) or a particulartopic (e.g.,witchcraft, ethnic boundaries). As new work appearsit is scrutinized for fit with the existing corpus. Lack of fitmay be attributed to differing circumstances, methodologies,theoretical concerns, or possibly to inferior research oranalysis._ CliffSchaffer's Home Page WT02-B01-150IA086-000615-B001-312http://206.61.184.43:80/schaffer/Library/studies/ota/ch9.htm 206.61.184.43 19970122024320 text/html 47105HTTP/1.0 200 OKDate: Wednesday, 22-Jan-97 02:43:14 GMTServer: WebSitePro/1.1f (S/N wpo-0deb)Allow-ranges: bytesContent-type: text/htmlLast-modified: Saturday, 28-Dec-96 06:49:29 GMTContent-length: 46887 CHAPTER 9 POLICY OPTIONS TECHNOLOGIES FOR UNDERSTANDING AND PREVENTING SUBSTANCEABUSE AND ADDICTION US Government Office of Technology Assessment October 18, 1994 CHAPTER 9 POLICY OPTIONS Issues related to substance abuse and addiction have longoccupied the attention of the American public. Congress has:authorized a multitude of federal programs aimed at reducing orpreventing the supply and demand of illicit drugs and to regulatethe availability of illicit substances, appropriated billions ofdollars each year to federal agencies, provided oversight offederal programs, and passed broad-based legislation tocoordinate programs as part of the war on drugs. Congress faces several fundamental difficulties in addressingthe causes of substance abuse and addiction: o No scientific consensus exists as to what is the drivingcause of substance abuse and addiction. A range of risk andprotective factors have been associated with drug use, abuse, andaddiction. o Federal antidrug efforts, though coordinated by the WhiteHouse Office of National Drug Control Policy (ONDCP), are spreadamong many federal agencies, whose authorization andappropriations are the subject of action by numerouscongressional committees and subcommittees. ONDCP efforts in drugdemand reduction efforts alone involved the efforts of federalagencies across at least 11 Cabinet-level departments. This makescoordinated legislative action difficult to achieve. o The federal budget deficit is an obstacle to the creationof new domestic programs that target known risk and protectivefactors in individuals and communities. The framework andliterature reviews presented in this report make clear thatmultiple factors in individuals, groups, and substance abuse andaddiction can arise and be influenced by communities. Thus,effective intervention requires prevention practitioners toselect from a variety of options, so they can target the specificfactors that are especially important for the particularpopulations and communities they are addressing. This does notmean that everything must be done at once nor that everything beknown in advance of taking action. To the contrary, policymakersand practitioners can take small steps at a time, and then, asresources and new knowledge permit, take additional steps thataddress a fuller range of factors and contexts in greater depth. o Current drug prevention programs lack scientificallyaccepted standards for determining their success or failure.While federal supply-side efforts yield hard data (e.g., amountof illicit drugs confiscated, number of persons incarcerated), itis much more difficult to demonstrate and quantify the impact ofa domestic program designed, in part or in whole, to prevent drugabuse. Whatever methods are developed, tested, and incorporatedinto prevention programs, a critical component of success iscareful, rigorous evaluation. Answering "what works?"is essential in making advances in preventing substance abuse. This chapter addresses some of the policy issues brought tothe Office of Technology Assessment's (OTA's) attention duringthe course of this assessment, and possible options forcongressional action. The issues and options are broken into fourbroad categories: federal focus and prevention program structure,research needs, community activity settings, and availability.Given the broad nature of federal antidrug efforts, manyimportant issues relating to federal antidrug efforts remainbeyond the scope of this report. Such topics include drugtreatment, interdiction and enforcement, and drug legalization. The order in which the issues and options are presented doesnot imply priority. Moreover, the options presented under eachpolicy question are intended as a short menu from which Congresscan choose one or more options for consideration andimplementation, and they are not necessarily mutually exclusive. FEDERAL FOCUS AND PREVENTION PROGRAM STRUCTURE Supply vs. Demand Reduction The federal substance abuse control policy has as its primaryfocus the eradication of the supply of drugs. The federalgovernment currently spends over $12 billion annually on antidrugefforts, with approximately two-thirds of this amount supportingdrug interdiction and law enforcement activities, and theremainder supporting demand- side activities, such as drugtreatment, research, and prevention programs. While ONDCP's mostrecent National Drug Control Strategy argued for a slightlyincreased percentage of funds for demand-side reduction, thelarger percentage of funds remain devoted to supply-side efforts.Congress could decide that existing levels of effort and programapproaches in interdiction may need to be continued for a longerperiod of time before they can succeed in reducing theproduction, distribution, and local availability of illicitsubstances. Congress could direct that interdiction efforts, andthe balance between supply and demand efforts, continue on thesame track. If Congress decided to increase federal efforts in demandreduction efforts, it could adopt any of three methods: 1)increase appropriations for treatment and prevention programs; 2)redirect some of the interdiction funds to increase support fortreatment and prevention programs; or 3) require that assetsforfeited in drug seizures be increasingly used to supporttreatment and prevention programs. If Congress chose to simplyincrease appropriations for additional treatment and preventionprograms, this option would require raising the current level offederal spending for drug control efforts at a time when thefederal deficit is a key concern. Since costly interdiction andincarceration programs have not eliminated either the supply ofillicit substances or the demand for and use of such substances,Congress could decide to increase appropriations for treatmentand prevention programs by reallocating funds currently spent indrug interdiction and law enforcement activities; this would meana drop in supply-side efforts such as drug interdiction and lawenforcement activities. The reallocation of assets forfeited indrug seizures to treatment and prevention programs, if donetogether with closer coordination of local antidrug efforts amonglaw enforcement and treatment and prevention practitioners, maybe an attractive small step. Congress could direct that ONDCPmonitor the reallocation of such assets, to ensure the flow offunds to programs that directly focus on substance abuse andaddiction and, programs that do not directly address substanceabuse and addiction but that target risk and protective factorsknown to be associated with abuse and addiction. Many stakeholders agree that the federal antidrug effortshould be more focused on treatment and prevention. Widespreaddisagreement exists, however, as to whether such additionaltreatment and prevention efforts should be created at the expenseof, or in addition to, current supply-side efforts. Structure of ONDCP Since its creation in 1988, ONDCP has served as the mostvisible federal entity in the war on drugs. The Director, theso-called drug czar, has the opportunity to galvanize publicattention on federal antidrug efforts, and to propose andadvocate policies within the White House. ONDCP's effectivenessis limited, however, both in its statute and through itsoperation as a White House office. Congress could choose toreauthorize ONDCP, and in so doing maintain or alter its missionand authority; or allow ONDCP to expire. If Congress chooses to reauthorize ONDCP, a number of optionsexist for altering its mission. Congress could: o Direct ONDCP to address the full range of the most harmfulabusable substances, including alcohol, tobacco, and inhalants.Although federally funded prevention programs address the rangeof abusable substances, the statute creating ONDCP emphasizedillicit substances. As a result, ONDCP has historically providedlimited attention on abusable substances that have beenassociated with higher levels of death and injury than illicitdrugs. More recently, ONDCP increased the focus in its NationalDrug Control Strategy on the illicit use of alcohol and tobaccoby minors because of the extensive damage to the health andsafety of minors, resulting from the use and abuse of thesesubstances. This approach could be enhanced through congressionalauthorization. o Alter ONDCP's leadership structure. ONDCP by statute has aDeputy Director of Supply Reduction and a Deputy Director forDemand Reduction. This structure has, in part, resulted in anongoing public policy debate regarding the overall federal focuson antidrug efforts, with supply-side and demand-side reductionefforts seen by some as philosophically incompatible (seediscussion on supply versus demand reduction earlier in thischapter). By creating an alternative structure, ONDCP may beencouraged to adopt programs that more closely link variouselements of the antidrug strategy (e.g., a focus on drugavailability could link current supply-side elements that targetphysical availability of a drug with current demand-side effortsthat focus on economic and social availability, as discussed inchapter 4). Despite the advantages that may result from a neworganizational structure, the simplicity of the current structuremakes it easier to provide a sharper focus on supply and demandelements of the National Drug Control Strategy. o Give ONDCP increased authority over federal agency antidrugprograms. Although ONDCP is charged with leading a war on drugs,its authority is limited to a coordinating function. Congresscould provide the Director of ONDCP with specific authority overcertain elements of various federal programs, or with additionalauthority over federal agency budget proposals. Such actionswould give the drug czar more substantive authority to direct thewar on drugs, but would likely be viewed by some federal agenciesas an unwarranted intrusion in agency matters. o Mandate the size of ONDCP. Because it is part of theExecutive Office of the President, ONDCP is subject to increasedpolitical manipulation by each administration. Recently, forexample, ONDCP took the largest personnel cut of any White Houseoffice to meet President Clinton's pledge of a 25 percentreduction in overall size of White House staff. While mandating aspecific size for ONDCP might lead to increased effectiveness forthe office, it would hamper White House efforts to control staffsize. Alternatively, Congress could allow the authorization forONDCP to expire. While ONDCP has produced National Drug ControlStrategies that summarize and set policy for federal efforts, theoffice lacks the authority to shape the antidrug policies of thefederal agencies. Coordination of antidrug efforts is difficultat best when the number of relevant agencies is so large; sinceantidrug policy involves many federal agencies, it might makesense to disband ONDCP and rely on efforts by diverse federalagencies to continue to address the many aspects of the drugproblem. Recent reductions in the size of the ONDCP staff, as apart of the down-sizing of the White House staff, could make thisan opportune time to eliminate the office altogether. TerminatingONDCP would, however, be viewed by many as federal abdication ofthe war on drugs. Structure of Federal Substance Abuse Prevention Programs Federal efforts supporting substance abuse preventionprograms are housed at a number of agencies. Congress recentlyreorganized the Alcohol, Drug Abuse, and Mental HealthAdministration (ADAMHA), splitting service-based components intothe Substance Abuse and Mental Health Services Administration(SAMHSA) and research-based components--the National Institute onAlcohol Abuse and Alcoholism (NIAAA), the National Institute onDrug Abuse (NIDA), and the National Institute on Mental Health(NIMH)-- into the National Institutes of Health (NIH). Morerecently, the Centers for Disease Control (CDC) has been renamedthe Centers for Disease Control and Prevention (CDCP), which hasalready expanded its title and mission to include prevention.Congress could maintain the current structure if it determinesthat substance abuse is a problem that has many aspects anddeserves to be addressed by many agencies and in many settings. If Congress decided to create a more centralized structure,it could enact legislation designating a single federal entity asthe chief agency for prevention efforts, or merge the componentsof various agencies under one federal roof. Possibilitiesinclude: o Merging NIDA and NIAAA into a single National Institute onSubstance Abuse and Addiction. The use of multiple substances(including alcohol, tobacco, marijuana, cocaine, and heroin) isincreasingly reported by researchers and practitioners. Indeed,the gateway theory or hypothesis focuses on the progression inthe use of substances, beginning with alcohol and tobacco (whichare illegal for youth, but legal for adults) and moving tomarijuana, cocaine, and heroin. Since clinicians and researchershave increasingly commented on the progression in substance useand on the co-occurrence of the use of multiple substances, theseparation of the major federal research agencies into an alcoholagency (NIAAA) and a drug agency (NIDA) is more and moreinconsistent with the shape of the problem. The Center forSubstance Abuse Prevention (CSAP) is an integrated substanceabuse agency that explicitly focuses on alcohol, tobacco, andother drugs, and all state alcohol and drug abuse agencies arenow integrated or located in the same place. To facilitate moreintegrated and coherent research on the range of abusablesubstances, NIDA and NIAAA could be combined into a nationalinstitute on substance abuse and addiction. Such a merger wouldfurther integrate the federal research efforts in substanceabuse, but might be seen by some as downplaying the emphasisgiven to illicit substances. o Place CSAP in CDCP or in the Health Resources and ServicesAdministration (HRSA). CDCP could give the substance abuseprevention field a solid base in the health and medical sciences,especially in the tracking and prevention of diseases. HRSA couldgive CSAP a broader health care environment to work within, whichincludes Community Health Centers and the National Health ServiceCorps. One disadvantage to the merging of CSAP into either ofthese other health agencies is that it would emphasize themedical aspects and interventions of drug prevention and downplaythe many nonmedical factors and interventions that are importantin the onset of substance use and abuse. Merger would alsopresent problems of moving people--CSAP is headquartered inRockville, Maryland, while CDCP is headquartered in Atlanta,Georgia--and threaten the loss of identity that some proponentsof CSAP say is found in an agency that solely addresses substanceabuse and prevention. However, the fragmentation of the federaleffort on substance abuse prevention has been viewed by some asextreme and counterproductive, and the efforts of ONDCP have notsucceeded in achieving coordination across departments. o Merge federal substance abuse prevention efforts into asingle agency, such as CSAP. CSAP has been workingcollaboratively with the staff in many other federal agencies,and would be seen as a natural leader for this effort. Inaddition, its recent efforts to begin to develop standards ofpractice for substance abuse and addiction prevention programscould be continued and more effectively infused into thecomponents of programs currently in other agencies anddepartments. Evaluation of Prevention Programs Current drug prevention programs lack scientifically acceptedstandards for determining their success or failure. Mostevaluations focus on the processes used in formulating andimplementing a prevention program (e.g., who was involved, whattype of program was used) and outcome evaluation (e.g., how manypeople were part of the program, how the program was replicated).Congress could allow the current level of process and outcomeevaluation related to substance abuse prevention programs tocontinue. If it chose to improve the quality of program evaluation,Congress could direct NIDA and NIAAA, or CSAP to design, lead,and support a multiyear national process (involvingrepresentatives of other federal agencies and of outsideorganizations) to forge consensus on standardized definitions andoutcome measures, using technical reviews, consensus-formingtechniques, and technical assistance monographs. Thesedefinitions and measures could include substance use, heavydrinking, substance abuse, substance addiction or dependency, andrelated behavioral problems such as school truancy, unemployment,delinquent and criminal behaviors, and the like. CSAP, NIDA,NIAAA, the Department of Education (DOE), and other federalagencies could be required to increase funding and technicalassistance for process and outcome evaluations through grants andcontracts. CSAP could focus on process evaluations that mayassist program managers throughout the course of a program. NIDAand NIAA could focus on outcome evaluations that are morerigorously designed and conducted by individuals who areindependent of the programs being evaluated. DoE could requireboth process and outcome evaluations by states and by schools,using Drug-Free School monies. NIDA, NIAAA, or CSAP could bedirected to provide incentives for researchers and programs toparticipate in a national program database, using consistentdefinitions and including data from multiple evaluations. Thecreation of such a database would allow researchers to extendtheir own analyses by tapping into data from other program sitesand populations that have used consistent definitions andmeasures. States could be required by legislation to use a portion oftheir 20 percent prevention set-asides under the Alcohol and DrugAbuse Block Grant program and a portion of their Drug- FreeSchools funds for evaluation of substance abuse preventionprograms. Since evaluations of prevention programs can beexpensive, Congress could consider increasing block grant fundinglevels to allow increases in evaluation studies without requiringdecreases in programs. If such an option were enacted, Congresscould mandate that evaluations be conducted by independentbodies, such as university-based researchers, rather than bystate government agencies that have vested interests indemonstrating program effectiveness. RESEARCH NEEDS Data Collection The National Household Survey and the National Survey of HighSchool Seniors have developed credibility over the years fortheir regular reporting of substance use in households and highschools. These surveys could be allowed to continue, with nosubstantial changes in the cost, frequency of data collection,focus on target groups, analysis, and sharing of the database. Because of the methodology employed, national surveys miss orunderreport various populations. Much of the data now collectedfocuses on substance use (e.g., any use within the past 30 daysor anytime in a lifetime), rather than on more intense substanceabuse and addiction. In addition, questions aresubstance-specific, and less oriented to the use and abuse ofmultiple substances. Such polydrug users and abusers areincreasingly being identified by researchers and clinicians.While substance use is a key precondition to later abuse andaddiction, most individuals who use illicit substances do not goon to addiction. Thus, an important question for the developmentof prevention policies and programs is: What are thecharacteristics of individuals who abuse and become addicted tosubstances, and how do they make the transition from use to abuseand addiction? If Congress felt that current data do not provide adequateinformation, it could direct that the Household and High SchoolSurveys be conducted less intensely or less frequently. Theexpense of these surveys, especially the National HouseholdSurvey, is high. In 1992, the High School Survey cost about $3million, and the Household Survey costover $12 million. Spendingcould be reduced if the survey data were compiled less intensely(e.g., with fewer questions or from a smaller sample) or lessfrequently. Alternatively, Congress could direct NIDA to developand support survey methodology that reaches populations missed bycurrent surveys (notably the homeless, school dropouts, andresidents of some inner-city and rural areas), or throughlegislation, create a mechanism, comparable to the release ofeconomic indicators, for the regular and nonpolitical release ofsurvey data. Data could then be released through a well-definedprocess that includes careful and timely technical reviews forcompliance with high standards of data collection and analysis,rather than being subjected to bureaucratic or political reviewsthat may delay the release of or bias the data. Individual Risk and Protective Factors A substantial body of research has been developed regardingpotential risk and protective factors for children andadolescents. A variety of theories has been developed concerninghow many and which risk factors increase the chances for a childor adolescent to first use alcohol or other drugs. Historically,one of the flaws with much of the risk and protective factorresearch has been that studies analyzed one factor in isolationfrom all others. Increasingly though, researchers are examining awider variety of factors among different populations, as well asusing more complex data analysis procedures. Even so,sophisticated multifactor research studies are still in theminority. While a substantial amount of risk and protective factorresearch has focused on children and adolescents, not as much isknown about factors among other populations. Recent research hasled to interest in the possibility of further analyses inselected populations and/or selected risk or protective factors.Some examples: o Adults. Additional research in this area could result inlearning more about factors associated with long-term drug abuseand addiction as well as the importance of factors more oftenfound in adult populations (e.g., effects of aging, death of aspouse or child, divorce). Data from a recent National HouseholdSurvey on Drug Abuse show that individuals aged 18 to 25, and 26to 34, respectively, have the two highest reported rates forheavy drinking and smoking, past month use of cocaine, crack,marijuana and hashish, or psychotherapeutic drugs. Additionally,gender, racial, and ethnic substance use differences appearwithin the adult population. Some research has indicated thatwomen who drink heavily do so several years later than men,although the reasons for this remain unclear. Researchers alsoindicate that black men who drink heavily, do so in their latetwenties and early thirties, in contrast to white men whosedrinking peaks at age 15 to early twenties. Increased research onthe adult population could be useful in developing appropriatesubstance abuse prevention and treatment programs for adults. o Race and Ethnicity. The biological and genetic substanceabuse studies completed on different racial and ethnic groupshave been few in number, mostly limited to alcohol, andinconclusive. While race and ethnicity have not been shown to bebiological or genetic predictors for substance use, abuse, oraddiction, certain risk factors appear to be unique for specificcultures. To date, however, the racial and ethnic categories usedin many large-scale studies are so broad that many researchersconsider them useless. Increased federal funding for studies ofspecific subpopulations living in geographically different areas(e.g., urban versus rural, reservation versus nonreservation)will provide much needed baseline data on which to plan,implement, and evaluate appropriate substance abuse services. o Poverty. Disagreement exists on the appropriate definitionof poverty and its exact relationship to substance abuse. Whilefew researchers deny that the daily stresses associated withliving in chronic poverty probably contribute to substance abuse,poverty is certainly not the only factor, or perhaps even themost important. There are after all, more individuals living inpoverty who do not abuse substances than who do. However, theconsequences of substance abuse appear to be worse in chronicallypoor areas. Additional research to study the complex relationshipbetween poverty and substance abuse could provide substance abusepractitioners with a framework from which to build programs mostsuitable for the special needs of chronically poor areas. Congress can, through its reauthorization and oversightpowers, monitor the amount and scope of risk and protectivefactor research that is being conducted, and redirect federalefforts toward more extensive multifactor research and analysis,as appropriate. Such focus could include factors other thansubstance use that may contribute to later abuse and addiction,such as other problem behaviors, availability, marketing,psychological factors, social norms in communities, andsubcultures. The increased use of ethnographers as part of amultidisciplinary drug abuse prevention research teams could alsobe encouraged. Biomedical Research Biomedical research on substance abuse helps explain theacute and chronic biological effects of substances on the brainand other organs, and also points to appropriate short- andlong-term medical treatments for substance abuse. This in turnhelps treatment providers understand treatment outcomes andrelapse rates for long-term abusers. Most federally supportedbiomedical research is administered by the 17 institutes thatcomprise the NIH. With the passage of the Alcohol, Drug Abuse,and Mental Health Administration Reorganization Act of 1992(Public Law 102-321), NIDA and the NIAAA were moved to NIH.Research targeting substance use, abuse, and addiction issupported primarily by these two institutes, whose combinedappropriation level ($580.7 million in fiscal year 1994) isapproximately 5 percent of the NIH total. Congress has historically increased annual appropriations forbiomedical research at NIH; if Congress continues this trend,both NIDA and NIAAA annual appropriations will rise, although notat the dramatic levels many scientists would like. If Congresswere to decide that substance abuse and addiction should commandmore of the nation's biomedical research budget, it couldsubstantially raise appropriation levels for NIDA and NIAAA. Suchan action would allow increased levels of research in a number ofareas including: genetics; drug development; identification ofbiological factors related to transitions from casual drug use toabuse, addiction, and dependence; the pharmacology of multipledrug use; environmental factors and their effect on individualbiological susceptibility; and the biological effects of drug useand abuse on the development of children and adolescents. Givenbudget realities, however, an increase in the funding levelsavailable for basic biomedical research could mean a decreasesomewhere else. A number of budgetary pressures have recently slowed robustNIH budget growth, including the need to fund disease- specificresearch (e.g., acquired immunodeficiency syndrome), indirectcosts of research, and the increasing pressure to limitdiscretionary spending. Some scientists identify stable budgetgrowth--as opposed to sporadic increases targeted at particulartopics--as most important for continued progress in research. Infiscal year 1994, both NIDA and NIAAA received a 5.2 percentincrease in appropriations, following an Administration requestthat would have raised NIDA's appropriation by less than 1percent, and decreased NIAAA's appropriation by 1.6 percent.Fluctuations in appropriation levels could impede the developmentof scientific advances that are necessary to the creation of newmedications and therapies. The Congressional Budget Office (CBO), in its March 1994report to Congress, Reducing the Deficit: Spending and RevenueOptions, identified a reduction in funding for NIH research asone of nearly 200 policy options. As noted by CBO, a reduction inNIH funding could have adverse effects on biomedical research andmight cause some researchers to leave the field. NIH cannotcurrently fund the majority of grants it approves; in addition,funding is insufficient to support some important areas ofresearch. According to a 1992 General Accounting Office report onDrug Abuse Research: Federal Funding and Future Needs, antidrugresearch appears now to have a very modest role, with only about4 percent of total drug strategy spending devoted to research anddevelopment. COMMUNITY ACTIVITY SETTINGS Substance abuse and addiction occur in communities around ourNation. Those who believe that drug abuse and addiction areclosely related to social and economic problems argue thatantidrug programs should more directly address the risk andprotective factors that have been identified by researchers. Manyprevention program providers also argue that the most successfulprograms are those that are more comprehensive in scope (i.e.,tailored to address the many community settings in which drugabuse can occur) rather than addressing one or two risk factorsin isolation. In conducting this assessment, OTA surveyed literaturesaddressing substance abuse and addiction in various communitysettings--families and homes, schools and peers, workplaces, andrecreational settings (see ch. 8). The literature reviewspresented in this report make clear that substance abuse andaddiction can arise and be influenced by multiple factors inindividuals, groups, and communities. Thus, effectiveintervention ideally should be comprehensive, employing multipleservices and addressing the many factors that cause drug abuseand addiction; and community-based, sensitive to and directed atthe needs of the local population. Still, three problems arise in assessing policy optionsrelated to community settings: 1. There is the inherent difficulty in drawing a link betweenmany social services and their effect on drug abuse andaddiction. 2. Since broad-based social services are provided through thework of many federal agencies, further analysis (e.g., by ONDCPor a congressionally enacted national commission) could identifywhich federal agencies are best suited to implement the varietyof options that Congress may wish to employ. 3. The federal budget deficit is an obstacle to the creationof new domestic programs that target known risk and protectivefactors in individuals and communities. Schools and Peers The primary focus of federal efforts at community-based drugprevention is programs aimed at our nation's schoolchildren. Infiscal year 1993, Congress appropriated $598 million to DOE underthe Drug-Free Schools and Communities Act of 1986. The federalgovernment could continue to fund school-based preventionprograms, with a continued emphasis on prevention curricula andevaluations that are limited to substance use prevention. Thelikely limited effects on preventing abuse among high-risk youthwould continue. Other school-based prevention programs wouldcontinue to be implemented sporadically, without significantevaluation and with few or unknown effects. If Congress decided that more rigorous evaluation of school-based programs was called for, it could mandate DOE to spend aset percent of its Drug Free Schools monies on research andevaluation of prevention curricula and the dissemination offindings. A special initiative could be launched to testprevention curricula for high-risk youth and for different racialand ethnic groups, since most of the research and evaluation todate has been based on samples of schools with middle incomewhite youth. Special expertise would need to be brought in, onstaff and as advisers, to assure the research and evaluation meethigh standards of methodological rigor. This could be achieved byhiring staff with research and evaluation expertise, detailingstaff from the NIDA, setting up an interdepartmental advisorygroup that guides and oversees a research and evaluation program,or appropriating funds directly to NIDA (e.g., as a set- asidefrom the Drug-Free Schools appropriation) to support such aresearch and evaluation program. Also, easier access toinformation about the many drug prevention curricula that existcould help school personnel select curricula that fit theirneeds. DOE could be directed to prepare and disseminate morewidely information about the purposes, design, methods, resourcesrequired, and evaluations (if any) of drug prevention curriculacurrently available, and to inform school personnel of thelimitations of school- based curriculum approaches and thegrowing availability of supplementary and alternative approaches.If Congress decided that Drug-Free Schools funds should be usedmore widely to target risk and protective factors found inschool-aged populations, it could require DOE to set aside acertain percentage of Drug-Free Schools funds for a variety ofactivities that target high-risk youths and to work individuallywith them and their families. Such targeting could enhanceactivities already carried out under the Drug- Free Schools Act(e.g., Drug Abuse Resistance Education, replication of successfulprograms, local programs for high- risk youth, school personneltraining). However, congressional mandates could reduce state andlocal flexibility in tailoring programs best suited to localneeds, and could increase administrative costs associated withimplementing the Drug-Free Schools Act. In addition to Drug-Free Schools programs, comprehensiveprimary health, mental health, and social services can beprovided in many school-based clinics. School-based clinics canbe supported by a variety of federal funding sources, includingMedicaid, the Maternal and Child Health Block Grant, Drug-FreeSchools, and Special Education funds. DOE and the Department ofHealth and Human Services could be encouraged or directed tocollaborate on the support of such services in schools. Since researchers have found that peers and other socialinfluences strongly affect substance use, programs thatstrengthen total school environments may be potent in preventingsubstance use and abuse. Models that involve schoolrestructuring, parent involvement, mental health components, andelevated expectations for achievement have been developed and arebeing tested. The hypothesis is that engaging high-risk youth inpositive educational environments and experiences can profoundlyinfluence their behaviors for the better. Congress could expandresearch on the effects of restructuring of school environmentson substance abuse by appropriating funds for extensive large-scale longitudinal research that could be supported by DOE, NIDA,the Centers for Disease Control and Prevention (CDCP), and otherfederal agencies that conduct and support research on youthoutcomes. Homes and Families Congress appropriates funds for federal programs addressingsubstance abuse and addiction in homes and families, which aresupported by the HUD and HHS' Administration on Children, Youth,and Families (ACYF) and CSAP. Also relevant to the health andwelfare of families are health funding programs (e.g., Medicaidand Medicare) and welfare programs (e.g., Aid to Families withDependent Children). Through its oversight, authorization, andappropriations of these programs, and others that impact on thequality of family life, Congress can support a number ofpreventive interventions that are both comprehensive andintensive. Programs can be initiated by almost any local serviceor support setting, such as health care, school, familypreservation, juvenile justice, and housing authority, withcoordination with other services and settings. Such interventionscan include health care, counseling, intensive in-home services,neighborhood patrols, clean sweeps of public housing, and familyand parent education for all family members. Because substance abuse and other related problems can beinfluenced by so many family factors and programs, a long- termeffort to identify family needs may be desired. Congress couldenact legislation to create a Presidential commission or taskforce to formulate a national family policy and create ablueprint for long-term national efforts to shore up the manyfamilies, rich and poor, that would benefit from more guidance,skills, and support. Such a national policy could be framed inthe near-term, based on the many studies and programinterventions that have been documented so far. Alternatively, itcould be formulated later, after additional research and programinterventions have been supported and major gaps in knowledgehave been filled. Workplaces Congress could allow current activities that focus onproviding workplace employees with information, development ofdrug-free workplace policies, drug testing, and employeeassistance programs to continue. These programs are scatteredamong many federal agencies, with some leadership by theDepartment of Labor (DOL), CSAP, and the Office of Management andBudget. If Congress chose to increase efforts in workplace antidrugprevention, it could mandate that federal agencies increase theinformation that is made available to workplaces about drug-freeworkplace programs and policies. For example, DOL is implementingan electronic database, with information about workplacesubstance abuse treatment, prevention, and other control programsand research. Such a database, if properly supported, publicized,and accessed by businesses and unions, could help workplacesidentify and implement approaches that can meet their needs inaffordable ways. Recreational and Community Settings Congress currently funds community partnership demonstrationprograms administered by CSAP. These partnerships fosterpublic/private sector partnerships that create and preservecomprehensive strategies for addressing substance abuseprevention within communities. A major advantage of thesepartnerships is the ability to create programs that addresssubstance abuse prevention within individual communities. As withother drug prevention programs, however, evaluation has generallybeen limited. Congress could, through appropriations andauthorization, direct CSAP to expand the provision of technicalassistance and expand the national process and outcome evaluationof partnerships. More site visits would be possible, withadditional resources for national and regional workshops,conferences, and training. Other federal activities in this area remain limited andlargely uncoordinated. Major current programs are administered bythe Department of Agriculture's Cooperative Extension Service(with its 4-H program, which is refocusing its efforts onhigh-risk youth) and CSAP (through some of its High Risk YouthDemonstration Grants). The President's Council on PhysicalFitness addresses one aspect of recreational and leisureactivities--that is, physical fitness. If Congress decided toprovide more information and support more research onrecreational, leisure, and other youth development programs, aninformation clearinghouse could be established to shareinformation about federal and non-federal recreational, leisure,and youth development activities. The purpose would be to helpcommunities and program developers identify and develop suchprograms especially for youth at risk of drug use and abuse. Theclearinghouse could be managed in-house or under contract, andcould be located in the Cooperative Extension Service (which isnow attempting to redirect 4-H programs to address high-riskyouth); ACYF; or CSAP (perhaps in the existing National Centerfor Alcohol and Drug Information, a federally sponsoredclearinghouse). The dearth of recreational places, especially in highlydeveloped urban areas, can be remedied by an enhanced nationaleffort to acquire land and facilities for park and recreationpurposes. Such an effort could focus especially, but notexclusively, on rural and inner city areas where low propertyvalues make the acquisition of such properties financiallyattractive as long-term investments in the future development andenrichment of communities. Such a national effort could becomparable in scope and long-termcommitment to the development ofthe national park system, but could contribute to a broadernational system of parks owned and managed by the federal, state,and local governments specifically for more intense human uses.Such a system could focus on the developmental needs of youth,especially in urban areas, where usable open spaces are often inshort supply. Congress could designate a lead federal agency forsuch an effort (e.g., Department of Interior or HUD), and couldacquire properties outright or by encouraging and subsidizing theacquisition of properties by nonprofit groups and by state andlocal governments. The latter approach would require less federalfunding and administration. Possible sources of land andfacilities include: closed military bases, holdings of theResolution Trust Corporation, assets forfeited through drugseizures, individual gifts and bequests, and corporate andphilanthropic gifts. AVAILABILITY The primary current focus of federal antidrug efforts isstemming the physical supply of illicit drugs. A multitude ofpolicy issues arise in addressing drug availability, most ofwhich are beyond the scope of this report. The discussion inchapter 4, however, touches on two availability issues currentlyon the congressional agenda. Taxes The federal government currently levies excise taxes onalcoholic beverages and tobacco products. Excise taxes on alltypes of alcoholic beverages were raised in 1990 to their currentlevels. Currently, for example, beer (six pack, 12-ounce cans)carries a 33 cent federal excise tax, a 750 ml bottle of winecarries a 21 cent federal excise tax. A pack of cigarettescarries a federal excise tax of 24 cents. If Congress takes noaction, current federal levies will remain in effect. Congress could enact legislation raising the federal excisetax on a variety of tobacco and alcohol products if it sought todecrease consumption of such products, to recover estimatedsocietal costs (i.e., health costs, injury, death) resulting from consumption of such products, or toraise revenue for federal spending programs. Such tax hikes couldbe targeted at all tobacco and alcohol products, or at selectedproducts in these industries. Advocates of increased excise taxeshave argued that abuse of and addiction to tobacco and alcoholproducts cost the United States more than any illicit substance;that increased taxes would make such products less economicallyaffordable and hence less used and abused; that increased taxescould be used to pay for financial damages arising from the useof such products; and that such excise taxes, which haveincreased less rapidly than the general rate of inflation, shouldbe adjusted upward to reflect inflation. Opponents of taxationhave argued that excise taxes are regressive in that they targetprimarily low- and middle- income taxpayers, that increased taxeswould result in significant losses to major companies that areimportant players in the American economy, and that targetingso-called sin taxes unfairly singles out millions of Americanswho use tobacco and alcohol products. Alcohol Labeling Federal law currently requires that each alcoholic beveragecontainer bear a specific warning statement that is conspicuouslyand prominently located (27 USC 215). This requirement wasenacted by Congress in 1980. Both Congress and States haveauthority regulating alcohol advertising. At least 35 statesregulate alcohol advertising, and self-policing by segments ofindustry places some limits on advertising (e.g., the distilledspirits industry code prohibits the advertising of liquor onradio or television). Congress has considered legislation that would requirewarnings on all alcohol beverage advertising, both print andelectronic media. Congress could amend current alcohol labelinglaw to require stricter labeling (e.g., multiple labels, rotatinglabels, specific messages). Opponents of such action argue thatno significant relationship has been found between exposure ofindividuals to alcoholic beverage advertising and/or labeling anddrinking behaviors. _ CliffSchaffer's Home Page WT02-B01-151IA086-000614-B044-338http://206.61.184.43:80/schaffer/Library/studies/cu/cu44.htm 206.61.184.43 19970122021545 text/html 42518HTTP/1.0 200 OKDate: Wednesday, 22-Jan-97 02:15:37 GMTServer: WebSitePro/1.1f (S/N wpo-0deb)Allow-ranges: bytesContent-type: text/htmlLast-modified: Wednesday, 01-Jan-97 22:44:55 GMTContent-length: 42299 How To Launch a Nationwide Drug Menace Contents | Feedback | Search DRCNet Library | Schaffer Library | Major Studies The Consumers Union Report on Licit and IllicitDrugs 44. How to launch a nationwide drug menace During the 1960s, Dr. Ralph M. Susman of the United StatesDepartment of Health, Education, and Welfare, and his associateLenore R. Kupperstein, prepared a "Bibliography on theInhalation of Glue Fumes and Other Toxic Vapors," which theypublished in the Spring 1968 issue of the International Journalof the Addictions. Despite diligent search, the earliestreferences to glue-sniffing in either the medical or the popularliterature that they were able to find dated from 1959.1 Asimilarly thorough search in the course of preparing thisConsumers Union Report has turned up no earlier mention ofglue-sniffing. Other documented studies of glue-sniffing aresimilarly void of references earlier than 1959. Thus, while it islikely that children (and adults as well) sniffed glue onoccasion before 1959, the practice either went unobserved or,more probably, was not deemed worthy of recording. The firstknown mentions of glue-sniffing in print date from 1959 andconcern the arrest for sniffing glue of children in Tucson,Arizona, Pueblo, Colorado, and perhaps other Western cities. Lawsagainst sniffing glue or sniffing anything else, of course, didnot yet exist. Accounts of these remarkable arrests reachedDenver, where two reporters investigated. Their account ofglue-sniffing-the first full description in the mass media thathas yet turned up-appeared in Empire, the Sunday magazinesupplement of the Denver Post, on August 2, 1959. The articlereported: "Police in Pueblo, Colo. and several other citiesin the West and Midwest report that juveniles seeking a quickbang and a mild jag spread liquid glue on the palms of theirhands, then cup their hands over their mouth and nose and inhaledeeply." 2 Alerted by these police actions in other cities,the two reporters interviewed Denver police officers concernedwith juvenile problems, and other authorities, to learn aboutglue-sniffing in Denver. Apparently Denver bad no cases toreport, for the story led off with an account of a childaccidentally affected by glue fumes in a poorly-ventilatedbasement room; and an expert the two reporters interviewed-Dr.Samuel Johnson, director of Denver's Poison ControlCenter-similarly warned against using quick-drying glue in a roomwith the windows closed, lest intoxication accidentally result.Dr. Johnson was on the whole reassuring about the glue"menace." If a person is affected by the fumes, hesaid, he need only go out and breathe fresh air to recover.Permanent injury is possible only if the exposure is prolongedand heavy-as when a worker in a glue factory breathes the stuffall day long every day. Yet the pioneer Denver story, setting apattern soon to be followed by newspapers and magazinesthroughout the country, carried a scare headline: SOME GLUES ARE DANGEROUS Heavy Inhalation Can Cause Anemia orBrain Damage This and subsequent warnings in the mass media wereall based on the results of earlier industrial studies that, asnoted above, could not be justifiably applied to theglue-sniffing fad. The newspaper story also explained that oneway to inhale glue is to soak a handkerchief with glue and holdit over the mouth and nose." A photograph accompanying thearticle showed a young man demonstrating how the glue-soakedhandkerchief should be held. Interesting results were promised ifthe glue were sniffed as directed: "The first effect ofbreathing the undiluted fumes is dizziness, followed bydrowsiness. There is a feeling of suspension of reality. Laterthere is lack of coordination of muscle and mind." In aword, it was like getting drunk. The effects of this newspaperarticle, published August 2, 1959-and no doubt of other similararticles and broadcasts in other Denver mass mediathereafter-were visible by June 1960, when Denver police reportedthat during the past six or eight months they had investigatedsome 50 cases of glue-sniffing. In addition to these 50 cases, ofcourse, there were no doubt many hundreds of others which had notcome to the attention of the police. Denver was thus experiencingwhat-so far as the available literature reveals-was the earliestof many similar local glue-sniffing epidemics throughout thecountry. Denver police met the new peril in the usual way-byescalating the warnings. In August 1959, Denver glue-sniffers hadbeen threatened merely with anemia and brain damage. In June 1960a spokesman for Denver's juvenile Police Bureau was quoted assaying: "This practice is extremely dangerous, and a kid candie from it if he gets too much." A second police spokesmanadded that "inhaling large quantities of the cement fumescan lead to permanent injury of the respiratory system and couldcause death." And the head of the Police Crime Laboratorywarned: "I'm afraid some kid will get hold of too much ofthe stuff and we'll have a fatal case on our hands." 3 InOctober 1961 a Denver police lieutenant was quoted as explainingthat glue fumes "diminish the oxygen supply to theblood" and "cause severe brain damage and death ."4 A representative in the state legislature warned thatglue-sniffing "can result in permanent damage to the brain." 5 In April 1962Denver youngsters were warned that glue-sniffing causes"stimulation of the central nervous system, followed bydepression and often convulsions," and that "it canaffect the respiratory tract, mucous membranes, skin, liver,kidneys, heart and blood-depending on what type of glue isused." 6 The headline over the June 1960 story presented thetwo central themes which were later to characterizeanti-glue-sniffing propaganda in other cities as well: COULD BE FATAL Plane Glue Gives Kids a Kick Far from ending Denver's glue-sniffing epidemic, however,these warnings were followed by a further spread of the epidemic.The warnings seemed to function as lures. By October 23, 1961,the chief probation officer of the Denver juvenile Court was ableto announce: "We are averaging about 30 boys a month now onthis glue-sniffing problem." Worse yet, he added, the customwas spreading from the high schools into the junior highs and"even into the grade schools." I A police spokesmansimilarly announced that glue-sniffing, unknown 26 monthsearlier, was now "a major problem among juveniles inDenver." He noted that 278 arrests were made forglue-sniffing in 1961, as compared with only 95 in 1960.8 Nor wasthe problem limited to Denver. Tom Adams, director of the statereform school in Golden, Colorado, was quoted in October 1961:"Right now I have about 50 boys here because of thisglue-sniffing." 9 Since no city or state law againstglue-sniffing had yet been passed, the reporter who covered thestory felt called upon to explain how 278 arrests could be madein 1961 for glue-sniffing and how 50 children could beincarcerated in a reform school for the same offense. Hisexplanation, however, did not entirely clarify the mystery. Allhe could say was that "the youths are charged under juveniledelinquency procedures when they are found sniffing glue." Apolice spokesman added a detail: the 278 Denver arrests forglue-sniffing were classed for statistical purposes as"drunkenness arrests."' Throughout 1960 and 1961,Denver police made further headlines by periodic raids onglue-sniffers. A typical 1961 example was headed: * Readers should not be surprised at this development, for asubstantial proportion of arrests and incarcerations of juvenilesthroughout the country are for actions which are not prohibitedby any law and which would not be crimes if indulged in byadults. (See Ruth and Edward Brecher, The Delinquent and the Law,Public Affairs Pamphlet No. 337 [New York: Public AffairsPamphlets, 1962]; also, The Challenge of Crime in a Free Society,A Report by the President's Commission on Law Enforcement andAdministration of Justice [New York: Avon Books 1968], . 227-228. 7 DENVER YOUTHS ARRESTED FOR DEADLY "GLUE-SNIFFING"The story began: Seven Denver teenagers were arrested over the weekend for"glue-sniffing," a new thrill-seeking activity thatjuvenile authorities label "extremely dangerous." Fiveof the boys, four of them 16 and the other 17, are in City jail.Two others, 13 and 14, were lodged in juvenile Hall. All sevenwere arrested Sunday near the Curtis Park Recreation Center, 50thand Curtis Sts., by Patrolmen Dale Nelson and Donald Smith.10 Thus the broad pattern was established-the dramatic policeraids and the imprisonment of children and teenagers, accompaniedby dire warnings of physical and psychological damage. The nextelement in the pattern was soon added: proposals for specificantiglue legislation. On December 8, 1961, just six weeks afterthe sensational Curtis Park police raid, the Denver papersreported that State Representative Ben Klein, a former probationofficer, would "propose to the January [1962] session of theColorado Legislature three new laws to deter youngsters fromsniffing airplane glue. . . ." 11 Denver youngsters no doubtnoted the order of events: arrests and jailings first,legislation later-a sequence unlikely to encourage respect forlaw. In support of his three new laws, Representative Kleinquoted Denver's juvenile Court judge Philip Gilliam as sayingthat he considered gluesniffing to be now "the Number Ijuvenile problem in the metropolitan area." Glue-sniffinghad achieved this preeminence within two and a half years afterthe two writers in Empire had found no evidence of gluesniffingin Denver. Representative Klein's three laws would make it anoffense (1) to sell glue to minors without parental consent, (2)to drive a car while under the influence of glue, or (3) to sniffglue. This last proposed offense was remarkable-for, as noted inPart 1, it is not an offense to use even such drugs as heroin, inDenver or elsewhere in the United States. Representative Kleinsaid his legislation would also require retailers "to keep aregistry of sales . . . similar to the registry of sales ofnarcotics drugs." Thus glue-sniffing was more or less subtlylinked with heroin. just as arrests for glue-sniffing werefollowed by laws against gluesniffing, so medical warnings werefollowed by medical studies designed to justify the warnings. Astudy undertaken by Dr. Oliver Massengale, director of theAdolescent Clinic at the University of Colorado Medical Center,and Dr. Helen Glaser, assistant professor of pediatrics at theuniversity, was no doubt the first scientific research on therecreational aspects of glue-sniffing in the history of themedical sciences. Dr. Massengale explained that he became interested inglue-sniffing way back in 1960, when early newspaper reports ofglue-sniffing hazards had appeared. A mother almost in tears, herecalled, had brought her son to his office. "He's sniffingglue," the mother declared. "You've got to stop himbefore he dies." A reporter for a Denver paper, in aninterview with Drs. Massengale and Glaser published April 29,1962, cited these researchers as authority for the statement thatsome types of plastic cement "may cause damage to the liver,kidneys and brain." 12 When the full text of theGlaser-Massengale study was published in the Journal of theAmerican Medical Association for July 28, 1962, however, certaindetails were added that the newspaper interview had neglected.Cases of damage from glue all involved either the swallowing ofsubstantial amounts or else the continuous dayafter-day exposureto high concentrations among workers in industrial plants."Although a great deal of concern about the ill effects ofthis practice is expressed by parents, school personnel, juvenileauthorities, and the children themselves," the medicalexperts noted in the medical publication, "very little isactually known about possible damage to organ systems resultingfrom deliberate inhalation of cement vapors. Many children sharethe so far unsubstantiated belief that glue-sniffing producesinsanity and death, and we know of one case in which glue wasfirst used by an adolescent boy in an attempt to commitsuicide." 13 Drs. Glaser and Massengale then presented sixcases of juvenile Denver glue-sniffers. In none of them was anyphysical damage attributable to glue-sniffing; and in none ofthem was glue-sniffing the source of the child's psychologicalproblems. Case Number 1, for example, concerned aneleven-year-old boy; "his mother worked at night; hisparents were separated; and he had not seen his father for sixyears." The mother of Case Number 2 "was an alcoholicand was possibly also psychotic. The parents were separated, andthe patient lived in a foster home, where he was unhappy.... Hewas ... depressed, anxious, and fearful, and longing foraffectional security. Seeing the world as hostile andpain-inflicting, he tended to withdraw into passive, immatureforms of behavior." Patient Number 3 was a fourteen-year-oldwhose father had died when he was five, "and he had beentaken out of the custody of his alcoholic mother but subsequentlyhad been returned to her. A few months before being seen in theclinic the boy bad spent eight months in a reformatory because ofstealing." Case Number 5 was the boy who tried to commitsuicide by sniffing glue. "This boy's father, possiblyacting out of a cultural pattern of insecurity and fear, was verystrict and rigid and was looked upon by the patient as a tyrant.His mother was a weak, inadequate person who sided with her son but was unable to rebel againsther husband in his behalf." Case Number 6 was afifteen-year-old; "the patient's father, who had been verystrict and punitive, had died about six months before, and themother was finding her son increasingly unmanageable anddestructive. This boy had been in trouble even before hisfather's death because of writing obscenities in school books,running away, and joy-riding." 14 In all cases, the child'sproblems and disturbances had antedated the glue-sniffing. justwhat good was accomplished by arresting and incarcerating thesetroubled youngsters for sniffing glue did not appear in thestudy. It should be noted, moreover, that these were not typicalglue-sniffers. Rather they were typical of the small subsample ofglue-sniffers who were caught at it-arrested by the police andreferred to the university's adolescent clinic. TheGlaser-Massengale paper in the Journal of the American MedicalAssociation confirmed the incredible speed with whichglue-sniffing had spread following the first accounts in the massmedia: "Glue sniffing, almost unheard of two years ago, hasbecome a serious threat in some communities. In the Denver areait is considered by responsible juvenile authorities to be themost serious problem they face currently in working with knowndelinquents and other youngsters brought to the attention of thecourt because of violations of the law."' The 130 Denverchildren arrested in the two-year period for glue-sniffing"ranged in age from 7 through 17, with a mean age of 13years, and all but 6 were boys."" Eighty percent badSpanish surnames; this high incidence was perhaps due as much tothe arresting practices of the police as to the frequency ofglue-sniffing among those children. Glue-sniffing children inmiddle-class white neighborhoods are customarily seen bypediatricians in private practice. The remainder of the Denverstory need here be only briefly summarized through selectednewspaper items:  January 18, 1965: Legislation introduced to banglue-sniffing."  March 21, 1965: juvenile court laysplans for preventive approach to glue-sniffing."' * April22, 1965: Adams County sheriff announces breakup of juvenileglue-sniffing activities with arrest of nineteen-year-old girl.18* April 29, 1965: Thirteen-year-old leader of glue-sniffing gangadmits burglaries19 * June 25, 1965: Glue-sniffing chargesagainst boy will be dismissed if he enlists in armed servicesbefore September 13 .20 * As noted above, however, there was asyet no law to be violated. * July 2, 1965: United States Department of Health, Education,and Welfare makes $85,500 grant to finance study of glue-sniffingin Denver.21 * January 11, 1966: Thirteen-year-old resident ofcounty receiving home hangs himself after being scolded forsniffing glue.22 a May 18, 1966: Twenty-one-year-old jailed afteradmitting he burglarized drugstore to get glue to sniff.23 * June10, 1966: Three with Spanish surnames sentenced to 30 days eachin County jail after pleading guilty to sniffing glue .24 *October 30, 1966: An additional $44,923 HEW grant is made tostudy glue-sniffing in Denver . . . . 25 While Denver was in all probability the first city in theworld to suffer a major glue-sniffing epidemic, other cities soonfollowed Denver's example. In New York City, for example, the NewYork Times ran a story about glue-sniffing on October 6, 1961:"L.I. Youths Inhale Glue in Model Kits For NarcoticEffect." 26 Other New York area newspapersand no doubt radioand television stations as well-ran similar stories. As inDenver, the New York stories stressed the hazards ofglue-sniffing. The initial New York Times story, after statingthat youngsters sniff glue to "obtain a feeling of elationsimilar to that of narcotics," and that youngsters who sniffglue are "found in seemingly drunken stupors," went onto cite the Nassau County Health Department as authority for thewarning that toluene, the organic solvent most commonly used inmodel airplane glue, "dulls the brain when it is inhaled andcould kill a person. It can cause damage to the liver and bonemarrow if it is taken in small repeated doses. The chemical hasan irritating effect on the lungs and can cause pain, vomiting,headaches, confusion, and ultimately coma. It can also cause theheart to beat irregularly and can result in transient euphoria.The lethal dose is unknown. No fatalities have beenrecorded." These warnings, like the earlier Denver warnings,seemed to be highly effective lures. Within fifteen months, NewYork City police had made 778 arrests for glue-sniffing 27 andthe city authorities were seriously considering proposals to makeglue-sniffing illegal. In 1963, New York City arrests totaled2,003.28 Many tens of thousands of others, of course, were nodoubt sniffing glue by then without coming to the attention ofthe police. Salt Lake City was another city where local newsmedia publicized glue-sniffing early, and where the glue-sniffingepidemic had an early start. Twelve boys, aged fourteen toeighteen, were apprehended there for glue-sniffing andinterviewed in 1962; the interviews were of particularsignificance in revealing the way in which glue-sniffing, which afew years earlier was only one of a number of forms of sniffing,had become the prime form of sniffing. "Seven of the boysbad previously inhaled the fumes of other substances, notably thefumes of gasoline (6 boys), ether, and nasal inhalers (one each), and one of these boys had beensmoking marijuana." Glue-sniffing had recently, however, faroutstripped the other sniffings, "to the extent that in onesmall town the practice was considered virtually universal amongboys. Girls, as yet, have not been widely involved." 29Marijuana smoking did not catch up with glue-sniffing amongchildren until a major antimarijuana campaign was launched alittle later. The glue interests contributed notably to expandingthe anti-gluesniffing campaign from a local to a nationwidephenomenon. As early as 1962 the Hobby Industry Association ofAmerica, representing 1,100 industry members, announced that itwas spending $250,000 a year to combat glue-sniffing. "Tohelp inform communities about the sniffing problem," theWall Street Journal announced on its front page on December 7,1962, "the Hobby Industry Association has produced a15-minute color film 'The Scent of Danger,' which it soon willrelease to local civic groups. The film describes the harm doneby glue sniffing and mentions other products, such as cleaningfluid and nail polish, which also contain solvents that can causeintoxication. It recommends that communities make it illegal tosniff any substance with an intoxicating effect." 30 Forthis the hobby industry won rewards of two kinds-public approvalfor its dedication to the anti-glue-sniffing campaign, and amarked rise in glue sales during the subsequent years. The earlyanti-glue-sniffing laws were remarkable in several respects. Oneof the first of them-perhaps the very first-was Ordinance Number1722, passed by the City of Anaheim, California, on June 6, 1962.This ordinance made it illegal for any person to "inhale,breathe, or drink any compound, liquid, chemical, or anysubstance known as glue, adhesive cement, mucilage, dope, orother material or substance or combination thereof, with theintention of becoming intoxicated, elated, dazed, paralyzed,irrational or in any manner changing, distorting or disturbingthe eyesight, thinking process, balance, or coordination of suchperson ." 31 Whiskey drinking was no doubt illegal underthis ordinance. A Maryland law enacted a little later was notquite so broad; this statute made it "unlawful for anyperson under twenty-one years of age to deliberately smell orinhale such excessive quantities of any narcotics, drugs, or anyother noxious substances or chemicals containing any ketones,aldehydes, organic acetates, ether, chlorinated hydrocarbons orany other substances containing solvents releasing toxic vapors,as cause conditions of intoxication, inebriation, excitement,stupefaction, or dulling of the brain and nervous system. . . .Any person violating this section will be guilty of a misdemeanorand upon conviction thereof shall be fined . . . . 32 Whyglue-sniffing by adults aged twenty-one or older was exemptedfrom the Maryland law is not apparent. Other cities and states passed laws restricting the sale ofglue in various ways-though this approach was opposed by theHobby Industry Association. At the beginning of 1968 theKupperstein-Susman bibliography listed 13 states and 29 countiesand municipalities that had already passed glue-sniffing laws;additional states, counties, and municipalities had such lawsunder consideration. The national news media contributed notablyto the glue-sniffing campaign. In its issue of February 16, 1962,for example, the weekly news magazine Time carried an item headed"The New Kick," which declared: "The newest kickis glue-sniffing. A 14-year-old sniffer explains: 'You take atube of plastic glue, the kind squares use to make modelairplanes, and you squeeze it all out in a handkerchief, see.Then you roll up the handkerchief into a sort of tube, put theend in your mouth and breathe through it. It's simple and it'scheap. It's quick, too. Man! , " 33 As is customary, theinformation about how to get high on glue was accompanied in Timeby ritual warnings-much as crime movies of the era, afterglorifying the heroic criminals, ended with their tragic deaths.Time quoted Dr. Alan K. Done, director of Salt Lake City's PoisonControl Center, as saying: "I have found definite evidenceof effects on the kidneys from glue sniffing. It is too soon toknow whether this effect is temporary or permanent damage ."34 Neither Time nor the other media, however, publicized thefindings of Dr. Massengale and his Denver associates indicatingthat glue-sniffing did not produce kidney damage in Denver.Newsweek followed on August 13, 1962, with a story entitled"The New Addicts." It began: You're in outer space. You're Superman. You're floating inair, seeing double, riding next to God. It's Kicksville. Arethese the fantasies of narcotics addicts on a pop? No. Moredisturbingly, these hopped-up reactions are those of teenagershooked on goofballs, model airplane glue, and cough medicine.Across the nation, police last week reported case after case ofthis alarming trend.35 In Miami, Newsweek noted, "a 12-year-old boy, discoveredsniffing airplane glue by his father, snatched up a knife andthreatened to kill him." A police officer with the Miamijuvenile Bureau was then quoted as commenting: "It's commonfor the boys who sniff glue to become belligerent. They arewilling to take on a policeman twice their size." AndNewsweek added: "Glue sniffers-while not physiologicallyaddictedcan do equal damage to their systems. Some of thelong-term effects [include] burned-out nose membranes, liverdamage, perforations of the gall bladder, destruction of bonemarrow, blindness, and possible death. But," Newsweekcogently went on, "this threat doesn't deter youngsters fromsqueezing up to five tubes of glue daily into a paper bag andbreathing the fumes ." 36 Consumer Reports, the magazine ofConsumers Union, also ran a warning against glue-sniffing-a bitmore restrained than the othersin January 1963. "Althoughthere is as yet no documented evidence . . . " the ConsumerReports article cautiously noted, "CU's medical consultantsare convinced that the inhalation of sufficient solvent vapors toproduce the mental effects the sniffers seek probably will alsoproduce damage to the liver, kidneys, respiratory organs, andpossibly other organs as well." 37 Even the Federal Bureauof Investigation took a hand in the anti-gluesniffing campaign.Its FBI Law Enforcement Bulletin for October 1965 carried anarticle by Dr. Jacob Sokol, chief physician for the Los AngelesCounty Probation Department, entitled "A Sniff ofDeath." The tenor of the article was summarized in thesubhead: "Glue-sniffing-in all its horrifying and alarmingramifications, mentally, physically, and medically -is discussedby Dr. Sokol in plain, lay language. His report should be of theutmost interest to law enforcement officers, parents, teachers,civic leaders, and all persons concerned with the welfare andhealth of young people ." 38 The FBI Bulletin article,moreover, cited a new argument by Dr. Sokol againstglue-sniffing: Glue sniffers have described to me bow a number of children,boys and girls, meet in unoccupied houses where they sniff gluetogether and later have sexual relations-both homosexual andheterosexual. To my knowledge this practice has not, however,come to the attention of law enforcement agencies. Recently,while conversing with deputy probation officers, I have beeninformed that several episodes of homosexual relations haveoccurred between adults and children under the influence of glue.Some of these sexual perverts are encouraging the children tosniff glue with the intensions of having homosexual relationswith them." just where the "sexual perverts" got this idea ofgiving children glue was not discussed; perhaps it was fromreading the anti-glue-sniffing campaigns in the mass media. Toend the glue menace, the FBI Bulletin article recommended sevenmeasures, including the following: "I. We should arousepublic opinion as to the dangers of this practice.... "7.Legislation should be passed which would prohibit the sale ofglue containing certain toxic chemicals to persons under 21 yearsof age." 40 One side effect of the anti-glue-sniffingcampaign, which continued throughout the 1960s, calls for specialmention. The campaign produced subtle changes in the relations ofparents and teachers to children. A child was now a suspect to bespied upon lest he secretly be sniffing glue. Health departmentsand other authoritative agencies encouraged this espionage, and listed the symptoms adults should be on thealert for: "Parents suspecting or told that their childrenhave deliberately sniffed glue should take them to a doctorwithout delay. "Schoolteachers should note irritability,inattentiveness, sleeping or loss of consciousness as symptoms ofglue sniffing." 41 The one voice of reason and common senseamid the near-hysterical concern with glue-sniffing was found inthe Verhulst-Crotty bulletin issued by the National Clearinghousefor Poison Control Centers, cited earlier. Summing up theevidence from the studies of glue-sniffers reviewed by theauthors, the bulletin noted: By speculation, projection, and imagination, one can ... buildup quite a case for the potential hazards of the repeatedinhalation of organic solvents such as those used in plasticcements. It behooves us, however, to ascertain facts in thisregard. [One expert] inferred from his contact with a number ofboys who practice glue-sniffing that the boys could and wouldgive up the practice readily if they were convinced it wasdangerous. At the same time, however, it became evident that thetransparent misinformation or contradictory statements byauthorities concerning the dangers of these practices would becompletely disregarded by these boys and taken as evidence thatnone of the information was true. It also became apparent that,if the boys gave up glue-sniffing, they would take up otherhabits which would provide a comparable effect. [One expert]points out that, in our present state of knowledge, toluene (oneof the more commonly used solvents in plastic cements) isconsiderably safer than many other organic solvents.42 The mass media of the early 1960s were filled with reports ofdeaths due to glue-sniffing. The Verhulst-Crotty bulletin trackeddown these reports and found a total of nine allegedglue-sniffing deaths-each one reported many times. Six of thenine were not due to glue fumes but to asphyxiation, whichoccurred when the victim's head was covered by an airtightplastic bag. A seventh death was probably also a plastic-bagcase. In an eighth case there was no evidence whatever that thevictim had been sniffing glue before his death, and no toluenewas found at autopsy. The last case was probably not due toglue-sniffing; the victim had been ill and bad sniffed gasoline.Thus among tens of thousands of glue-sniffers prior to 1964, nodeath due unequivocally to glue vapor had as yet been reported.The lifesaving advice children needed was not to sniff glue withtheir heads in plastic bags. The Verbulst-Crotty bulletin alsoreviewed behavioral effects of gluesniffing; childrenunquestionably did all sorts of silly and potentially dangerousthings when high on glue much the same things they would havedone if drunk on alcohol. Those bulletins, unfortunately, weredistributed in mimeographed form to only a short list ofrecipients. They had no visible effect on the nationwideanti-glue-sniffing campaign. The toxicology of recreational solvent-sniffing at thiswriting remains very much where it was at the time of the 1964Verhulst-Crotty summary. No one is prepared to say thatoccasional solvent sniffing is safe, and some studies suggestthat frequent sniffing may be moderately harmful. Later in thedecade, it was widely observed that young people paid little orno attention to dire warnings against the hazards of marijuanasmoking, LSD-using, and other forms of drug use. It seems highlylikely, in retrospect, that the exaggerated warnings againstglue-sniffing were among the factors desensitizing some youngpeople to drug warnings in general. Most teenagers knew of othersin their own neighborhoods who had sniffed glue repeatedly, andwho did not drop dead or go to the hospital with brain damage,kidney damage, or liver damage. Children may be ignorant, butthey are not stupid. When the evidence of their own experiencecontradicts adult propaganda, they (like sensible adults) rely ontheir own experience-and tend to distrust in the future a sourceof information which they had found unreliable in the past. Thenationwide anti-glue-sniffing campaign, it should be noted,preceded the anti-LSD campaign, to be described later, and inpart set the model for it. The anti-LSD campaign, like theantiglue campaign, featured solemn warnings of dire damage, lawsagainst LSD, sensational police raids, scientific studiesdemonstrating hazards-and an endless bombardment of publicityconcerning all of these other factors. Both campaigns werefollowed by increased use of the drugs attacked. There was alsoone difference. In the case of LSD (see Chapter 50), the drug waspopularized through the simultaneous efforts of LSD enthusiastsand LSD enemies. But glue-sniffing had no Timothy Leary toadvertise and praise it. The enemies of glue-sniffing popularizedthe custom all by themselves. At the beginning of the decade,gasoline sniffing was the most common form of organic solventinhalation. Paint-thinner sniffing, varnish-remover sniffing,cigarette-lighter-fluid sniffing, glue-sniffing, and the otherswere not-very-common phenomena to which no one paid muchattention. So far as can be determined, gasoline sniffing at theend of the 1960s was neither more nor less popular than at thebeginning. The same was true of the sniffing of other readilyavailable organic solvents. Only glue-sniffing was the target ofa nationwide campaign-and only gluesniffing became a popularyouth pastime. It seems clear that the damage done by the arrestsand imprisonments of children for glue-sniffing during the 1960sfar exceeded the damage done by glue-sniffing during that sorrydecade-and served to popularize rather than to discourage thepractice. Just how popular it became, many recent surveys reveal. In 1969, 1,348 high-school seniors in Montgomery County,Maryland, filled out a drug-use questionnaire. Of these, 7.4percent stated that they had sniffed glue, and 1.0 percentdescribed themselves as current gluesniffers. Similarly, among1,429 Montgomery County junior-high-school students, 6.6 percentreported that they had sniffed glue.43 Among 781 sophomores,juniors, and seniors in five high schools in Madison, Wisconsin,filling out a questionnaire in 1969, 5.1 percent stated that theyhad sniffed glue. The replies indicated that 0.8 percent sniffedglue frequently, 1.0 percent sniffed glue infrequently, and theremaining 3.3 percent had sniffed glue only once or twice .44Among 47,182 students in Utah high schools and junior highsanswering a questionnaire in 1969, 7.1 percent reported that theyhad at some time sniffed glue; 9.5 percent of the boys and 4.8percent of the girls had sniffed. Among the boys, 3.5 percent hadsniffed only once, 3.8 percent had sniffed several times, and 2.2percent had sniffed more than 10 times. The returns indicatedthat 1.8 percent of the boys and 0.9 percent of the girls hadsniffed glue within the past few weeks.45 Among 1,379 high-schoolseniors in 11 selected Michigan high schools in 1968, 8.1 percentin one school reported glue-sniffing, as compared with 7.0percent in another, 4.7 percent in a third, and none at all intwo small high schools.46 Among 1,225 students at Mamaroneck (NewYork) Senior High School answering a questionnaire in 1967, 6.1percent reported having sniffed glue and 2.0 percent had sniffedglue more than once. Among 1,294 Mamaroneck junior High Schoolstudents, 8.3 percent reported having sniffed glue, and 1.4percent had sniffed glue more than once .47 These and othersimilar surveys suggest that at a rough estimate, at least 5percent of all young Americans graduating from high schoolperhaps 150,000 in each annual cohort-have sniffed glue at leastonce. This level of use can be contrasted with the level before1959, when glue sniffing was essentially unknown andunpublicized. On July 20, 1971, the New York Times heralded yet anothernationwide campaign against yet another inhalant menace with afront-page headline: AEROSOL SNIFFING: NEW AND DEADLY CRAZE The story, by Grace Lichtenstein, echoed closely the kickoffof the antiglue-sniffing campaign a decade earlier:"Physicians, government officials, drug experts and chemicalmanufacturers are growing increasingly worried about a deadly andrelatively new drug-abuse problem among the nation's children:the inhalation of aerosol sprays." As in the earlier storiesabout glue-sniffing, precise details were sup- plied on how to get high on aerosols: "The aerosolproduct-hair spray, deodorant, household cleaners or someother-is sprayed into a paper bag or balloon and then inhaledbecause the propellant produces a strange, floating kind ofhigh." There followed the usual warnings of disastrouseffects: According to the Food and Drug Administration, more than 100youths have died from deliberate aerosol sniffing since 1967,with an average of four deaths a month currently being recorded.. . . It appears that death occurs after a youngster deeplyinhales an aerosol spray for a prolonged period, either on asingle occasion or on several occasions. The fluorocarbonpropellant Freon, the best-known brand of fluorocarbon, can makethe heart beat irregularly and then stop. An expert was quoted as adding: "Once the final eventbegins, it's quick, sudden, and irreversible." 48 An earlier round of aerosol inhaling by children, the storynoted, had centered around a spray-on product used to chillcocktail glasses. This product had therefore been removed fromthe market. Little was accomplished, however, for "expertsstress that any of the 300 kinds of aerosol products now on themarket can be equally abused because all use similarpropellants." Like the glue industry in the earlierglue-sniffing campaign, the aerosol industry entered theaerosol-sniffing campaign through an "Inter-IndustryCommittee on Aerosol Use." "The campaign includes afilmstrip, 'Rap On,' that has been distributed to 3,000 schooldistricts. The industry has also put out a booklet, 'Will DeathCome Without Warning?' which declares that aerosol products aresafe when used as directed." "They're really tryingawfully hard," said B. J. Burkett, spokesman for theInter-Industry Committee and public relations manager of theFreon Products Division of E. I. du Pont de Nemours & Co.There was as yet no suggestion that aerosol sniffing be made acriminal offense; but laws were being proposed to require awarning-perhaps even a skull-and-crossbones-on the label of allaerosol products. Such measures, however, had been decidedagainst as of this writing. But, one might wonder: Here we goagain?' * The first effort to repress the recreational use of nitrousoxide (laughing gas) was also instituted in 1971. PsychiatricNews reported: "Strict regulations have been placed on thedistribution and sale of nitrous oxide in Maryland by Dr. NeilSolomon, state following reports that the gas is being used bysome young people as an inhalant to produce an exhilaratingeffect. This is the first regulatory action in the nationconcerning improper use of nitrous oxide, according toinformation from the Food and Drug Administration. . . ." 49 Contents | Feedback | Search DRCNet Library | Schaffer Library | Major StudiesWT02-B01-152IA086-000614-B044-309http://206.61.184.43:80/schaffer/Library/studies/cu/cu12.htm 206.61.184.43 19970122021529 text/html 41122HTTP/1.0 200 OKDate: Wednesday, 22-Jan-97 02:15:24 GMTServer: WebSitePro/1.1f (S/N wpo-0deb)Allow-ranges: bytesContent-type: text/htmlLast-modified: Saturday, 28-Dec-96 07:13:59 GMTContent-length: 40904 The "heroin overdose" mystery and otheroccupational hazards of heroin addiction Contents | Feedback | Search DRCNet Library | Schaffer Library | Major Studies The Consumers Union Report on Licit and Illicit Drugs Chapter 12 The "heroin overdose" mystery andother occupational hazards of addiction Chapter 4 of this Report reviewed in detail the effects ofheroin and other opiates on addicts, including deleteriousphysiological effects traceable to the drugs themselves.Narcotics addicts today face other physiological hazards that aretraceable to the narcotics laws, to the adulteration,contamination, and exorbitant black-market prices that those lawsfoster, and to other legal and social (as distinct frompharmacological) factors. Dr. Jerome H. Jaffe has described someof these risks in Goodman and Gilman's textbook (1970):"Undoubtedly, the high cost and impurities of illicit drugsin the United States exact their toll. The high incidence ofvenereal disease reflects the occupational hazard of the manyfemales who earn their drug money through prostitution. Theaverage annual death rate among young, adult heroin addicts isseveral times higher than that for nonaddicts of similar age andethnic backgrounds. . . . The suicide rate among adult addicts islikewise considerably higher than that of the generalpopulation." 1 Because "the preferred route of administration isintravenous," Dr. Jaffe continues, "there is sharing ofimplements of injection and a failure to employ hygienictechnics, with a resultant high incidence of endocarditis, andhepatitis, and other infections." 2 The exorbitant price of black-market heroin, Dr. Jaffe mighthave added, is one of the factors that makes intravenousinjection "the preferred route of administration," for"mainlining" is the cheapest way to forestallwithdrawal symptoms. And the laws restricting possession ofinjection equipment, under penalty of imprisonment, increase therisk of needleborne infections by encouraging the sharing ofimplements. There remains to be considered yet another risk of heroinaddiction, the most publicized hazard of all-death from"heroin overdose." Because these deaths are a source ofsuch widespread concern, and also because they are so widelymisunderstood, even by authorities on heroin addiction and byaddicts themselves, we shall examine the data in detail. Much ofthe discussion that follows is focused on New York City, sincethe deaths attributed to heroin overdose are most numerous thereand since the New York City data are published in convenientform. "Prior to 1943, there were relatively few deaths amongaddicts from overdosage. " 3 By the 1950s, however, nearlyhalf of all deaths among New York City addicts were beingattributed to "acute reaction to dosage or overdosage." 4 In 1969, about 70 percent of all New York addict deathswere assigned the "overdose" labels and in 1970, theproportion was about 80 percent.- The number of deaths sodesignated by New York City's Office of the Chief MedicalExaminer increased from very few or none at all before 1943 toabout 800 in 1969 and 1970 .7 During this same twenty-eight-year span, addict deaths fromall other causes-infections, violence, suicide, and soon-increased very little. The enormous increase in number ofdeaths among addicts shown in Figure 2 was attributed almostentirely to "overdose" deaths. The number of deaths throughout the United States attributedto heroin overdose from 1943 to date must total many thousands.In New York City it was reported that narcotics, chiefly heroin,were the leading cause of death in 1969 and 1970 in all malesaged fifteen to tbirty-five,8 including nonaddicts. This canproperly be characterized as an epidemic; the general alarm overthese deaths is thoroughly warranted. There are two relatively simple ways, however, to preventdeaths from heroin overdose. First, addicts can be warned to take only their usual dose ofheroin rather than risking death by taking too much. Second, even in cases where an addict takes a vastly excessivedose despite the warning, death usually can be readily prevented,for death from an overdose of opiates is ordinarily a slowprocess. "in cases of fatal poisoning with morphine, thetime of death may vary roughly from one to twelve hours." 9The first signs are lethargy and stupor, followed by prolongedcoma. If, after a period of hours, death does ensue, it isusually from respiratory failure. During the minutes or hoursfollowing the injection of a potentially fatal overdose, deathcan be readily forestalled by administering an effectiveantidote: a narcotic antagonist known as nalorpbine (Nalline).10Nalorphine brings a victim of opiate overdose out of his stuporor coma within a few minutes. Since there is plenty of time andsince nalorphine is stocked in pharmacies and hospital emergencyrooms throughout the country, the death of anyone due to heroinoverdose is very rarely excusable. But alas, the two standard precautions againstoverdose-warnings against taking too much and administration ofan antidote-are in fact wholly ineffective in the current crisis,for the thousands of deaths attributed to heroin overdose are notin fact due to heroin overdose at all. The evidence falls underthree major rubrics. (1) The deaths cannot be due to overdose. (2) There has never been any evidence that they are due tooverdose. (3) There has long been a plethora of evidence demonstratingthat they are not due to overdose. Let us review these three bodies of data in detail. (1) Why these deaths cannot be due to overdose. The amount ofmorphine or heroin required to kill a human being who is notaddicted to opiates remains in doubt but it is certainly manytimes the usual dose (10 milligrams) contained in a New York Citybag. "There is little accurate information," Drs. A. J.Reynolds and Lowell 0. Randall report in Morphine and AlliedDrugs (1967). "The figures that have been reported show widevariation." 12 This ignorance no doubt stems from the rarityof morphine or heroin overdose deaths. The amounts of morphine orheroin needed to kill a nonaddict have been variously estimatedat 120 milligrams (oral),13 200 milligrams, 14 250milligrams," and 350 milligrams16-though it has also beennoted that nonaddicts have survived much larger doses .17 Thebest experimental evidence comes from Drs. Lawrence Kolb and A.G. Du Mez of the United States Public Health Service; in 1931they demonstrated that it takes seven or eight milligrams ofheroin per kilogram of body weight, injected directly into avein, to kill unaddicted monkeys." On this basis, it wouldtake 500 milligrams or more (50 New York City bags full,administered in a single injection) to kill an unaddicted humanadult. Virtually all of the victims whose deaths are falsely labeledas due to heroin overdose, moreover, are addicts who have alreadydeveloped a tolerance for opiates-and even enormous amounts ofmorphine or heroin do not kill addicts. In the Philadelphia studyof the 1920s, for example, sonic addicts reported using 28 grains(1,680 milligrams) of morphine or heroin per day."' This isforty times the usual New York City daily dose. In onePhiladelphia experiment, 1,800 milligrams of morphine wereinjected into an addict over a two-and-a-half-hour period. Thisvast dose didn't even make him sick.20 Nor does a sudden increase in dosage produce significant sideeffects, much less death, among addicts. In the Philadelphiastudy, three addicts were given six, seven, and nine times theircustomary doses-"mainlined." Far from causing death,the drug "resulted in insignificant changes in the pulse andrespiration rates, electrocardiogram, chemical studies of theblood, and the behavior of the addict." 21 The addictsdidn't even become drowsy.22 Recent studies at the Rockefeller Hospital in New York City,under the direction of Dr. Vincent P. Dole, have confirmed theremarkable resistance of addicts to overdose. Addicts receivingdaily maintenance doses of 40 milligrams to 80 milligrams ofmethadone, a synthetic narcotic (see Chapter 14), were given asmuch as 200 milligrams of unadulterated heroin in a singleintravenous injection. They "bad no change in respiratorycenter or any other vital organs ." 23 (2) There is no evidence to show that deaths attributed tooverdose are in fact so caused. Whenever someone takes adrug-whether strychnine, a barbiturate, heroin, or some othersubstance-and then dies without other apparent cause, thesuspicion naturally arises that he may have taken too much of thedrug and and died of poisoning an overdose. To confirm or refutethis suspicion, an autopsy is performed, following awell-established series of procedures. If the drug was taken by mouth, for example, the stomachcontents and feces are analyzed in order to identify the drug andto determine whether an excessive amount is present. If the drugwas injected, the tissues surrounding the injection site aresimilarly analyzed. The blood, urine, and other body fluids andtissues can also be analyzed and the quantity of drug presentdetermined. Circumstantial evidence, too, can in some cases establish withreasonable certainly that someone has died of overdose. If aPatient fills a prescription for a hundred barbiturate tablets,for example, and is found dead the next morning with only a fewtablets left in the bottle, death from barbiturate poisoning is areasonable hypothesis to be explored. Similarly, if an addictdies after "shooting up," and friends who were presentreport that he injected many times his usual dose, thepossibility of death from heroin overdose deserves seriousconsideration. Further, in cases where an addict has died following aninjection of heroin, and the syringe he used is found nearby orstill sticking in his vein, the contents of the syringe can beexamined to determine whether it contained heroin of exceptionalstrength. And there are other ways of establishing at least aprima facie case for an overdose diagnosis. A conscientious search of the United States medical literaturethroughout recent decades has failed to turn up a singlescientific paper reporting that heroin overdose, as establishedby these or any other reasonable methods of determining overdose,is in fact a cause of death among American heroin addicts. Theevidence that addicts have been dying by the hundreds of heroinoverdose is simply nonexistent. At this point the mystery deepens. If even enormous doses ofheroin will not kill an addict, and if there exists no shred ofevidence to indicate that addicts or nonaddicts are in fact dyingof heroin overdose, why is the overdose myth almost universallyaccepted? The answer lies in the customs of the United Statescoroner-medical examiner system. Whenever anyone dies without a physician in attendance tocertify the cause of death, it is the duty of the local coroneror medical examiner to investigate, to have an autopsy performedif indicated, and then formally to determine and record the causeof death. The parents, spouse, or children of the dead person canthen ask the coroner for his findings. Newspaper reporterssimilarly rely on the coroner or medical examiner to explain anewsworthy death. No coroner, of course, wants to be in aposition of having to answer "I don't know" to suchqueries. A coroner is supposed to know-and if he doesn't know, heis supposed to find out. At some point in the history of heroin addiction, probably inthe early 1940s, the custom arose among coroners and medicalexaminers of labeling as "heroin overdose" all deathsamong heroin addicts the true cause of which could not bedetermined. These "overdose" determinations rested ononly two findings: (1) that the victim was a heroin addict who"shot up" prior to his death; and (2) that there was noevidence of suicide, violence, infection, or other naturalcause.24 No evidence that the victim had taken a large dose wasrequired to warrant a finding of death from overdose. Thiscurious custom continues today. Thus, in common coroner andmedical examiner parlance, "death from heroin overdose"is synonymous with "death from unknown causes afterinjecting heroin." During the 1940s, this custom of convenience did littleapparent harm. Most deaths among heroin addicts were due totetanus, bacterial endocarditis, tuberculosis, and otherinfections, to violence, or to suicide, and they were properlylabeled as such by coroners and medical examiners. It was only anoccasional death which baffled the medical examiner, and whichwas therefore signed out as due to "overdose." But,beginning about 1943, a strange new kind of death began to makeits appearance among heroin addicts .25 The cause of this newkind of death was not known, and remains unknown today-though itis now quite common. A striking feature of this mysterious new mode of death is itssuddenness. Instead of occurring after one or more hours oflethargy, stupor, and coma, as in true overdose cases, deathoccurs within a few minutes or less-perhaps only a few secondsafter the drug is injected. Indeed, 11 collapse and death are so rapid," one authorityreports, "that the syringe was found in the vein of thevictim or on the floor after having dropped out of the vein, andthe tourniquet was still in place on the arm ." 26 Thisexplains in part why nalorphine and other narcotic antagonists,highly effective antidotes in true opiate overdose cases, areuseless in the cases falsely labeled overdose. An even more striking feature of these mysterious deaths is asudden and massive flooding of the lungs with fluid: pulmonaryedema. In many cases it is not even necessary to open the lungsor X-ray them to find the edema; "an abundance of partlydried frothy white edema fluid [is seen] oozing from the nostrilsor mouth " 27 when the body is first found. Neither of thesefeatures suggests overdose-but since "overdose" hascome to be a synonym for "cause unknown," and since thecause of these sudden deaths characterized by lung edema isunknown, they are lumped under the "overdose" rubric. Not all of the deaths attributed to heroin overdose arenecessarily characterized by suddenness and by massive pulmonaryedema, but several studies have shown that a high proportion ofall "overdose" deaths share these twocharacteristics.28 (3) Evidence demonstrating that these deaths are not due tooverdose is plentiful. This evidence has been summarized in aseries of scientific papers, beginning in 1966, by New YorkCity's Chief Medical Examiner, Dr. Milton Helpern, and hisassociate, Deputy Chief Medical Examiner, Dr. Michael M. Baden.At a meeting of the Society for the Study of Addiction held inLondon in 1966, Dr. Helpern explained that the most conspicuousfeature of so-called "overdose" deaths is the massivepulmonary edema. When asked the cause of the edema, he cautiouslyresponded: This is a very interesting question. To my knowledge it is notknown why the pulmonary edema develops in these cases.... Thisreaction sometimes occurs with the intravenous injections ofmixtures, which as far as is known, do not contain any heroin,but possibly some other substance. The reaction does not appearto be specific. It does not seem to be peculiar to one substance,but it is most commonly seen with mixtures in which heroin is thesmallest component. In a paper published in the New York State Journal of Medicinefor September 15, 1966, Dr. Helpern again cast doubt on the myththat these deaths are due to overdose. "Formerly such acutedeaths were attributed to overdose of the heroin contained in thesample injected," Dr. Helpern reported-but he went on tocite several lines of evidence arguing against the overdosetheory: ... Unexpected acute deaths may occur in some addicts whoinject themselves with heroin mixtures even though others whotake the same usual . . . dose from the same sample at the sametime may suffer no dangerous effect. In some fatal acute cases,the rapidity and type of reaction do not suggest overdose alonebut rather an overwhelming shocklike process due to sensitivityto the injected material. The toxicologic examination of thetissues in such fatalities, where the reaction was so rapid thatthe syringe and needle were still in the vein of the victim whenthe body was found, demonstrated only the presence of alkaloid,not overdosage. In other acute deaths, in which the circumstancesand autopsy findings were positive, the toxicologist could noteven find any evidence of alkaloid in the tissues or body fluids.Thus, there does not appear to be any quantitative correlationbetween the acute fulminating lethal effect and the amount ofheroin taken. . . .30 Dr. Helpern's associate, Deputy Chief Medical Examiner Baden,went on to further discredit the already implausible overdosetheory at a joint meeting of two American Medical Associationdrug-dependency committees held in Palo Alto, California, inFebruary 1969. "The majority of deaths," Dr. Baden told the AMAphysicians, "are due to an acute reaction to the intravenousinjection of the heroin-quinine-sugar mixture. This type of deathis often referred to as an 'overdose,' which is a misnomer. Deathis not due to a pharmacological overdose in the vast majority ofcases." 31 At the same AMA committee meeting and at a meeting of theMedical Society of the County of New York, Dr. Baden cited sixseparate lines of evidence overturning the "heroinoverdose" theory. First, when the packets of heroin found near the bodies ofdead addicts are examined, they do not differ from ordinarypackets. "No qualitative or quantitative differences"are found.32 This rules out the possibility that some incrediblystupid processor may have filled a bag with pure heroin insteadof the usual adulterated mix. Second, when the syringes used by addicts immediately beforedying are examined, the mixture found in them does not containmore heroin than usual. Third, when the urine of addicts allegedly dead of overdose isanalyzed, there is no evidence of overdose. Fourth, the tissues surrounding the site of the fatalinjection show no signs of high heroin concentration. Fifth, neophytes unaccustomed to heroin rather than addictstolerant to opiates would be expected to be susceptible to deathfrom overdose. But "almost all of those dying" ofalleged overdose, Deputy Chief Medical Examiner Baden reported,"are long-term users." Sixth, again according to Dr. Baden, "addicts often'shoot' in a group, all using the same heroin supply, and rarelydoes more than one addict die at such a time." 33 These definitive refutations of the heroin overdose theoryshould, of course, have led to two prompt steps: a warning toaddicts that something other than overdose is causing thesehundreds of addict deaths annually -and an intensive search forthe true cause of the deaths. But neither of these steps has beentaken. Hence the news media go right on talking about"heroin overdose" deaths. "Death from acutereaction to heroin overdose" and other complicated phrasesare also used; these phrases similarly conceal the fact thatthese deaths are not due to overdose. How can the "heroin overdose" myth not only survivebut flourish even after these repeated scientific debunkings? Twostenographic transcripts provide an answer. The first is the transcript of a press conference held at theRockefeller University on October 27, 1969, in connection withthe Second National Conference on Methadone Treatment. In thecourse of his remarks to the assembled reporters, Deputy ChiefMedical Examiner Baden there discussed at some length a case ofwhat he described as an "addict who died of an overdose ofheroin." 34 The reporters present naturally referredthereafter to this death as a "heroin overdose" case. At the scientific meeting held in the same room on the sameday, however, Dr. Baden described the same death in quitedifferent terms. To the scientists he stated that the addict inquestion "died of acute reaction to injection of heroin, aso-called overdose." When even this description waschallenged by a fellow physician, who pointed out that addictsdon't die following even enormous doses,35 Dr. Baden went on toexplain that whenever I say 'overdose,' it is in quotationmarks." 36 The reporters, of course, could not see those invisiblequotation marks when they listened to Dr. Baden at his pressconferences and interviews. They quite naturally took himliterally-and continued to inform the public that addicts weredying of overdose.* Even Chief Medical Examiner Helpern eventually becameconvinced that the "heroin overdose" publicityemanating from his office was "dangerously wrong." Intestimony before the Select Committee on Crime of the UnitedStates House of Representatives on June 27, 1970, Dr. Helpernstated: A difficulty has been that people have considered these fatalreactions the result of overdose. Now, to some people thedesignation overdose means [taking] more than usual with theimplication that if you are careful of how much is taken there isno danger of anything other than the usual effect. Thisimpression which many addicts have is dangerously wrong. 38 Yet a full year after Dr. Helpern testified, neither he norDr. Baden nor anyone else had yet ventured to correct the"dangerously wrong" view that was being foisted on theNew York and national news media. Almost everyone who did notread Dr. Helpern's and Dr. Baden's papers in the medical journalsstill believed that heroin addicts by the hundreds were dying ofoverdose. Worse yet, nobody had as yet even begun to investigateseriously the crucial question: If these hundreds of addicts ayear aren't dying of overdose, what are they dying of? Fortunately, enough is already known to suggest some promisingdirections for immediate research. Most deaths from so-called overdose, as noted above, arecharacterized by suddenness and by pulmonary edema. No othercause of death-such as tetanus, bacterial endocarditis,hepatitis, or a knife or gunshot wound -is found. Inapproximately 60 percent of autopsies, a 1970 study indicates,there is also cerebral edema (accumulation of fluid in the brain)along with widespread fragmentation of the astrocytes(star-shaped cells) in the brain.39 A death with thesecharacteristics, occurring in a heroin addict, constitutes adramatic and readily identifiable syndrome which Dr. Helpern hascalled "acute fatal reaction to the intravenous injection ofcrude mixtures of heroin and other substances." We shallhere apply a less cumbersome label: "Syndrome X." 1 Thus in the New York Times for December 16, 1969, a reporterwas led to state without qualification: "About 800 addictsof all ages died this year from overdoses, according to Dr.Baden." 37 One clue to the true cause of Syndrome X is its initialappearance about 1943, its relative rarity for the next fewyears, and its recent rapid increase in frequency. The timesequence obviously suggests that the cause of Syndrome X must besome factor introduced about 1943 and affecting a vastlyincreased number of addicts during 1969 and 1970. Heroin clearlydoes not qualify; it was widely used long before 1943. Indeed, ahighly significant fact about Syndrome X is that it has becomemore and more frequent as the amount of heroin in the New YorkCity bag has gone down and down. These deaths are, if anything,associated with "underdose" rather than overdose. One theory sometimes advanced is that Syndrome X deaths arecaused by the quinine in the bag. Quinine was introduced as anadulterant of heroin sometime after 1939, when an epidemic ofmalaria spread by contaminated injection needles hit New YorkCity addicts 40 thus the time of introduction fits the Syndrome Xtimetable. Some addicts discovered that the quinine contributedto the sensation known as a "rush" immediately afterinjection. Heroin traffickers also discovered that the bittertaste of the quinine makes it impossible for addicts to gauge theconcentration of heroin in the bag by tasting the mixture. Forthese and possibly other reasons, quinine has remained a standardadulterant of New York City heroin ever since. Perhaps the first suggestion that quinine might be causing NewYork City's Syndrome X deaths came from Dr. F. E. Camps, theUnited Kingdom Home Office pathologist in charge of investigatingopiate deaths in England. At a conference of the Society for theStudy of Addiction held in London in September 1966 (which ChiefMedical Examiner Helpern attended), Dr. Camps stated: "Theonly comparable drug to heroin which causes rapid death withpulmonary oedema is quinine. In this case patients start off withdiscomfort in their chest, and then rapidly die. It isconceivable that this could have some relation to [New York City]heroin deaths ." 41 At the same conference an American pathologist, the late Dr.Rudolph J. Muelling of the University of Kentucky Medical School,added that a type of lung lesion similar to that found inSyndrome X deaths "is found to occur when one studies purequinine cases. In the United States this kind of lesion has beenfound in several nurses attempting to induce abortions onthemselves. They take the quinine orally and the condition comeson quite rapidly. The patients die of quinine alone." 42 A second possible cause of Syndrome X deaths can best beillustrated by two examples. One is the case of "C. G.," a heroin addict longaccustomed to mainlining his drug, who one day got drunk, tookhis "customary injection of heroin and collapsed shortlythereafter." Subsequent X-rays showed lung edema.43 Another is the case of a heroin addict whose death wasrecently reported by Dr. George R. Gay and his associates at theHaight-Ashbury Medical Clinic, San Francisco. This addict first"shot some reds" (that is, barbiturates) and then"fixed" with heroin following the barbiturates. He diedof what was diagnosed as "overdose of heroin ." 44 Cases such as these have given rise to the question whetherSyndrome X deaths may result from injecting heroin (with orwithout quinine) into a body already laden with acentral-nervous-system depressant such as alcohol or abarbiturate. Addicts themselves would seem to deserve credit for firstsuspecting that so-called "heroin overdose" deathsmight in fact result from the combined action of alcohol andheroin. Back in 1958, a team headed by Dr. Ray E. Trussell andMr. Harold Alksne interviewed more than 200 New York Cityaddicts-alumni of the Riverside Hospital addiction treatmentprogram (see Chapter 10). In this as in other pre-1960 studies,few addicts drank alcohol while on heroin, and they did not drinkmuch. When asked why, the addicts commonly gave two reasons. One was that the effect of alcohol is "offensive" toa man on heroin. "The narcotic alone has an analgesic effectwhich tends to quiet the individual. Alcohol, on the other hand... has the capacity to agitate the individual in hisrelationships with other people. This generally is offensive tothe addict." 45 The other reason given by addicts in 1958 for not drinkingwhile on heroin is the first extant clue to the possiblerelationship between alcohol and death from "heroinoverdose." Addicts, the Trussell-Alksne team noted,"believe that the use of narcotics and alcohol incombination is dangerous and might possibly lead to the death ofan individual." 46 By the 1960s, this awareness of thehazard of shooting heroin while drunk had disappeared from theaddict scene. Addicts, like others, were evidently convinced bythe official announcements that those deaths were indeed due toheroin overdose. If the theory is sound that even an ordinary dose of an opiateinjected while drunk can produce death, then death could occurwhen an ordinary drunk who is not addicted is brought into ahospital emergency room with a painful injury and is given aroutine (10 milligram) injection of morphine to ease his pain.Drs. William B. Deichmann and Horace W. Gerarde report in theirToxicology of Drugs and Chemicals (1969 edition) that death mayin fact occur under such conditions. "The ordinary safe therapeutic dose of morphine,"they warn, in italics, in their textbook, "may be fatal topersons who have been drinking alcoholic beverages. Morphine intherapeutic doses [similar to the doses commonly injected byaddicts] resulted in fatalities in individuals whose bloodalcohol levels ranged from 0.22 to 0.27%. Morphine is alsosynergistic with barbiturates and related drugs." 47 Thusthe hazard of death from shooting an opiate while drunk onalcohol or a barbiturate is familiar to some toxicologists eventhough it has been ignored by authorities on drug addiction-andby coroners and medical examiners-through the years. If this alcohol-heroin and barbiturate-heroin explanation iscorrect, the fact is of the utmost practical importance-forhundreds of deaths a year might be prevented by warning addictsnot to shoot heroin while drunk on alcohol or barbiturates. The alcohol-barbiturate hypothesis fits the Syndrome X timeschedule. Throughout the nineteenth century and well into thetwentieth, opiate addicts were known for their dislike of alcoholwhile on opiates. As noted earlier, they turned to alcohol onlywhen deprived of their opiate supply or when trying to "kickthe habit." This remains generally true today; an addictrarely drinks while on heroin. He often drinks, however, when hisheroin supply runs out and withdrawal symptoms set in. DuringWorld War 11, many heroin addicts were abruptly deprived of theirheroin supply for longer or shorter periods. If some of themturned to alcohol, then connected with a fresh heroin supply and"shot up" while still drunk, the first few identifiedSyndrome X deaths might have occurred. The recent sharp increasein Syndrome X deaths might similarly be explained by an increasedtendency to alternate alcohol or barbiturates with heroin as aresult of high heroin prices. As the amount of heroin in the NewYork City bag went down and down, according to this theory, moreand more addicts got drunk-and died of Syndrome X following theirnext "fix." Evidence in recent years for the use of alcohol by addictsshortly before their death has been assembled from the New YorkCity files by Drs. Jane McCusker and Charles E. Cherubin. Theyreviewed 588 city toxicology reports found in the files onaddicts who died in 1967. In 549 of these cases, tests foralcohol had been run-and in 43 percent of the cases tested,alcohol was in fact found .48 (Barbiturates were not reportedon.) Their findings led Drs. McCusker and Cherubin to suggestthat further research be promptly launched into the possible roleof alcohol and the barbiturates in so-called "heroinoverdose" cases. The same suggestion has been tentatively made by Dr. Gay ofthe Haight-Ashbury Medical Clinic. Thirty-seven percent of theaddicts attending the clinic, Dr. Gay states, report usingbarbiturates "for sedation and sleep" when heroinwithdrawal symptoms set in; and 24 percent report using alcoholsimilarly.49 Thus the stage is set for shooting heroin whiledrunk on one or the other-and, perhaps, for sudden death fromoverdose." Two of the most publicized "overdose deaths" of1970, Dr. Gay informed the National Heroin Conference in June1971, fit precisely this pattern. These were the deaths of therock musician Jimi Hendrix and the singer Janis Joplin. Hendrixwas known to use both alcohol and barbiturates-and possibly alsoheroin. Janis Joplin "drank [alcohol] like an F. ScottFitzgerald legend," Dr. Gay adds-and also used narcotics.50The magazine Time reported on October 19, 1970, shortly afterJanis Joplin's death: The quart bottle of Southern Comfort [whiskey] that she heldaloft onstage was at once a symbol of her load and a way oflightening it. As she emptied the bottle, she grew happier, moreradiant, and more freaked out.... Last week, on a day that superficially at least seemed to beless lonely than most, Janis Joplin died on the lowest andsaddest of notes. Returning to her Hollywood motel room after alate-night recording session and some hard drinking with friendsat a nearby bar, she apparently filled a hypodermic needle withheroin and shot it into her left arm. The injection killed her.51 Janis Joplin's death, of course, was popularly attributed to"heroin overdose." If the alcohol-barbiturate-herointheory is correct, her fatal injection of heroin while drunk onalcohol was the prototype of many other deaths similarlymislabeled "overdose." The British experience with deaths attributed to heroinoverdose is consistent with the alcohol-barbiturate hypothesis.Dr. Ramon Gardner of the Bethlem Royal Hospital and MaudsleyHospital in London studied the records of 170 deaths known tohave occurred among addicts in Britain during the five-yearperiod 1965 through 1969. Twenty of these deaths were deemedsuicides, 24 were traceable to infections, 12 were from naturalcauses, 11 were drownings, falls, murders, or other accidents,and 6 occurred during treatment (of which two followed abruptwithdrawal of narcotics when the addicts were imprisoned). Eightmore were due to overdose of barbiturates or other nonopiatedrugs. This left a maximum of 89 mysterious deaths out of 170which might have been caused by accidental opiate overdose-or bysomething else.52 Dr. Gardner then went on to study in more detail 47 of thesedeaths possibly due to heroin overdose. In a number of cases, hefound that the addicts bad been confined in a hospital, prison,or detention center or had for other reasons been abstinent fromopiates for a week or longer, and had thus lost at least aportion of their tolerance for opiates. They had then injected anopiate-some of them on the day of discharge, others within thenext day or two. Thus these deaths might have been due tooverdose-though evidence was lacking that the victims had in facttaken fatally large doses. (Merely doubling or quadrupling thedose, it will be recalled, will not kill even nonaddicts.) But in at least 21 of the 47 cases, there had been nowithdrawal from opiates prior to death, so that tolerance had notbeen lost. And in some cases, the dose preceding death was sosmall-as little as 20 or 30 milligrams of heroin, for example-asto establish beyond question that overdose was not the cause .53 These British deaths, accordingly, remain mysterious, likedeaths from Syndrome X in the United States. Among several likelyexplanations, Dr. Gardner himself noted, is the possibility thatthese addicts may have taken some other drug, perhaps acentral-nervous-system depressant, at the same time. Since thereis no quinine in British opiates, that drug must be exonerated inthe British deaths. Another British drug authority adds that in Britain as in theUnited States, "many of those who die, in fact, have takenbarbiturates as well [as opiates] at the same time." 54 It might prove absurdly easy to confirm thealcohol-barbiturate hypothesis. All that might be necessary wouldbe to addict a few monkeys or other primates to heroin,intoxicate them on alcohol or barbiturates, and then injectmodest doses of heroin. If the monkeys drop dead of Syndrome X, awarning against shooting heroin while drunk on alcohol orbarbiturates might save many hundreds of lives a year throughoutthe world. Several other possible explanations of Syndrome X deaths havebeen offered. No theory has yet been proved. Worse yet, no theoryhas ever been experimentally tested. The time has surely come todetermine the cause (or causes) of Syndrome X and bring to aclose this tragic series of deaths. If 800 respectable citizensinstead of heroin addicts had dropped dead in New York City of amysterious syndrome in 1970, a gargantuan research program wouldno doubt have been promptly launched. If the Syndrome X deaths are due to quinine or to any otheradulterant or contaminant in the bag, the responsibility clearlyrests with the American heroin black market for selling unsafemixes. If the cause of these deaths is the shooting of heroinwhile drunk on alcohol or barbiturates, the black-marketdistribution system remains at least indirectly responsible, forit is largely the high cost of black-market heroin that makesheroin users turn to alcohol and barbiturates on occasion-andthus, perhaps, to risk death from Syndrome X. The two steps which must now be taken are (1) to stop sweepingthese mysterious deaths under the carpet by falsely labeling them"overdose" and (2) to launch an intensive clinical andexperimental search for what is in fact killing these addicts. Contents | Feedback | Search DRCNet Library | Schaffer Library | Major Studies WT02-B01-153IA086-000615-B001-120http://206.61.184.43:80/schaffer/Library/studies/ota/ch3.htm 206.61.184.43 19970122024038 text/html 54349HTTP/1.0 200 OKDate: Wednesday, 22-Jan-97 02:40:30 GMTServer: WebSitePro/1.1f (S/N wpo-0deb)Allow-ranges: bytesContent-type: text/htmlLast-modified: Saturday, 28-Dec-96 06:50:57 GMTContent-length: 54131 CHAPTER 3 BIOLOGY AND PHARMACOLOGY TECHNOLOGIES FOR UNDERSTANDING AND PREVENTING SUBSTANCEABUSE AND ADDICTION US Government Office of Technology Assessment October 18, 1994 CHAPTER 3 BIOLOGY AND PHARMACOLOGY Substance abuse and addiction are complex phenomena that defysimple explanation or description. A tangled interaction offactors contribute to an individual's seeking out, use, andperhaps subsequent abuse of drugs. Since more individualsexperiment with drugs than eventually develop substance abuseproblems, great interest persists in understanding whatdifferentiates these groups. Factors that can play a role in drugabuse susceptibility include a person's psychological makeup(e.g., self-esteem, propensity to take risks, impulsivity,depression), biological response to drugs, environmentalsituation (e.g., peer groups, family organization, socioeconomicstatus), and the availability of drugs. The exact combination ofelements that lead to substance abuse varies among individuals. Underlying all substance use, abuse and addiction are theactions and effects that drugs of abuse exert. For a completeunderstanding of drug abuse and addiction one must address howdrugs affect the brain, why certain drugs have the potential forbeing abused, and what, if any, biological differences existamong individuals in their susceptibility to abuse drugs. Whilemany other factors ultimately contribute to an individual'sdrug-taking behavior, understanding the biological components iscrucial in understanding substance abuse, addiction, anddependency. Two biological factors contribute to substance use, abuse,and addiction: the effects drugs of abuse exert on a person; andthe biological status of the individual taking drugs. The formerrelates to the acute mechanisms of action of drugs in the brainand the long-term effects that occur after chronic exposure. Thelatter pertains to an individual's biological constitution, mostimportantly the presence of inherited characteristics that affectthat person's response to a drug. The biological mechanisms of substance abuse are complex andinteractive. A previously published background paper by theOffice of Technology Assessment (OTA) entitled BiologicalComponents of Substance Abuse and Addiction thoroughly discussesthe basic concepts, neuropharmacology, and genetics of drugabuse. This chapter is a synopsis of the background paper. DRUG ACTION Acute Actions Drugs of abuse alter the brain's normal balance and level ofbiochemical activity (see box 3-1). In order to have theseaffects, a drug must first reach the brain. This is accomplishedby the drug diffusing from the circulatory system into the brain.The routes of administration, methods by which a drug enters thebloodstream, affect how quickly a drug penetrates the brain. Thechemical structure of a drug plays an important role in theability of a drug to cross from the circulatory system into thebrain. The four main routes of administration for drugs of abuseare oral, nasal, intravenous, and inhalation. With oralingestion, the drug must be absorbed by the stomach or gut whichresults in a delay before effects become apparent. When the nasalroute of administration is used, effects are usually felt within3 minutes, as the capillary rich mucous membranes of the noserapidly absorb substances into the bloodstream. Intravenousadministration usually produces effects in 1/2 to 2 minutes andis slowed only by the detour back through the lungs that venousblood must take to reach the brain. Lastly, the inhalation methodbypasses the venous system completely because the drug isabsorbed into the pulmonary circulation which goes directly fromthe lungs to the heart and then to the brain. As a result,effects are felt within 5 to 10 seconds, making inhalation thefastest route of administration. The route of administration candetermine the drug's potency and the efficacy the drug will haveon affecting brain activity, thereby contributing to the abusepotential of the drug. Distinct from other psychoactive agents, drugs of abuse, inpart, affect those areas of the brain that mediate feelings ofpleasure and reward (see box 3-2). Evidence is accumulating thatpositive sensations experienced during these activities aremediated by the brain reward system. Studies have shown thatdirect stimulation of the areas of the brain involved in thereward system, in the absence of any goal-seeking behavior,produces extreme pleasure that has strong reinforcing propertiesin its own right (48,60). Animals with electrodes implanted inthese areas in such a way that electrical impulses produce apleasurable sensation will repeatedly press a bar, or do anyother required task, to receive electrical stimulation. The factthat animals will forego food and drink or will willinglyexperience a painful stimulus to receive stimulation of thereward system attests to the powerful reinforcing characteristicsof the reward system. Most drugs of abuse, either directly orindirectly, are presumed to affect the brain reward system. Inducing activity in the brain reward system gives drugs ofabuse positive reinforcing actions that support their continueduse and abuse. Drug reinforcement is defined as increasing thebehavior that led to the taking of the drug. Put more simply,individuals who use drugs experience some effect, such aspleasure, detachment, or relief from distress which initiallyestablishes and then maintains drug self-administration. Theconsequence of taking the drug enhances the probability that itwill continue to be used for some real or perceived effect and,hence, tends to lead to continued compulsive self-administration.In fact, the ability of a drug to support self-administration inexperimental animals is a measure of the drug's strength as areinforcer. While growing evidence suggests that the brain reward systemplays a role in the reinforcing properties of most drugs ofabuse, the precise mechanisms involved are complex, vary amongsubstances, and have yet to be completely described (41,42,43).For example, while some drugs of abuse directly affect thechemical release of dopamine (see box 3-3), the interactions ofother neurotransmitters such as gamma amino butyric acid (GABA),opioid peptides, and serotonin may also be important. Chronic Actions Chronic, long-term exposure to drugs of abuse can causechanges in the brain that may take weeks, months, and possiblyyears, to reverse once drug use has stopped. Most drugs of abuse have complex actions in the brain andother parts of the body resulting in a variety of behavioraleffects. In general, tolerance develops to many of the effects ofdrugs of abuse and a withdrawal syndrome occurs on cessationafter prolonged use. However, the details of these phenomena varyfrom drug to drug, and the specific details of the biologicalmechanisms that underlie these phenomena are not completelyunderstood. Recent advances in neuroscience research have begunto unravel how neuroadaptive responses manifest themselves forvarious drugs of abuse. Tolerance to a drug develops when, following a prolongedperiod of use, more of the drug is required to produce a giveneffect (33,38). This response occurs with many types of drugs. Itis a common, but unnecessary, characteristic of drug abuse (seebox 3-4). For example, while tolerance develops to some of theeffects of cocaine and amphetamines, sensitization can also occurto some of their other effects. Also, while it is unclear fromavailable data whether tolerance develops to cocaine'sreinforcing effects, the notion is supported by some experimentalevidence and anecdotal reports from cocaine users that the drug'seuphoric action diminishes with repeated use. In a recent study,it has been shown that acute tolerance to dopamine response isinduced by binge patterns of cocaine administration in male rats(51). Tolerance develops to most of the effects, including thereinforcing properties, of opiates, barbiturates, and alcohol. Sensitization, the opposite of tolerance, occurs when theeffects of a given dose of a drug increase after repeated, butintermittent, administration. Sensitization to a drug's effectscan play a significant role in supporting drug- taking behavior. Dependence is a type of neuroadaptation to drug exposure.With prolonged use of a drug, cells in the brain adapt to itspresence such that the drug is required to maintain normal cellfunction. On abrupt withdrawal of the drug, the cell behavesabnormally and a withdrawal syndrome ensues. Generally, thewithdrawal syndrome is characterized by a series of signs andsymptoms that are opposite to those of the drug's acute effects.For example, withdrawal of sedative drugs produce excitation andirritability. Conversely, withdrawal of stimulants producesprofound depression. The magnitude of the withdrawal syndrome varies from drug todrug. Although the severity varies, withdrawal is associated withthe cessation of use of most drugs of abuse. Opiates, cocaine,amphetamines, barbiturates, alcohol, and benzodiazepines producepronounced and sometimes severe withdrawal symptoms(20,24,56,68,74) while those for nicotine and caffeine are lessintense (1,31). A mild withdrawal episode is associated withdiscontinued cannabis use, while none is associated with lysergicacid diethylamide (LSD) use (12,63). No matter the severity ofthe physical withdrawal syndrome, its existence can create acraving or desire for the drug and dependence can play a verystrong role in recurrent patterns of relapse and maintainingdrug-seeking behavior to forestall withdrawal. At one time, withdrawal was believed to peak within severalhours after drug-taking was discontinued and then dissipate;similarly, common knowledge held that tolerance to most drugs wasthought to dissipate gradually with time, as the brain readaptedto the drug's disappearance. Substantial evidence now indicatesthat persistent, residual neuroadaptations are present, which canlast for months or possibly years, and may or may not beassociated with the pathways that mediate physical dependence(33,44,45,77). An important component of this phenomena may bethe learning which takes place during drug-taking behavior.Moreover, with repeated cycles of abstinence and reinitiation ofdrug use, the time required to elicit drug dependence growsshorter and shorter. Evidence also indicates that theadministration of naloxone, a drug that blocks the actions ofopiates, may elicit a withdrawal syndrome in individuals who haveabstained from use for extended periods of time. These dataindicate the existence of long-lasting, drug- inducedneuroadaptive changes that persist for as yet undefined periodsof time. Although information explaining this effect is lacking,these changes may help account for the relapses that sometimesoccur in long-term abstinent, drug-dependent individuals. Abuse Liability The Comprehensive Drug Abuse Prevention and Control Act(Public Law 91-513) and the Psychotropic Substances Act of 1978(Public Law 95-633) gives exclusive authority to the Secretary ofthe Department of Health and Human Services to determine theabuse liability of substances and to make recommendationsconcerning substance regulation and other drug policy decisions.Although the Secretary receives advice from the Drug EnforcementAdministration (DEA), the Food and Drug Administration (FDA), andvarious other regulatory agencies, these laws explicitly statethat the National Institute on Drug Abuse (NIDA) must provide tothe Secretary information relevant to the abuse potential ofsuspected drugs of abuse and all facts key to an assessment oftheir abuse potential. On the basis of this information fromNIDA, and input from FDA and DEA, the Secretary makes a judgmentas to the dependence potential of new drugs. NIDA supports avariety of activities in commercial and private laboratoriesaround the country to provide this information. A drug's abuse liability is measured by the likelihood thatits use will result in drug addiction. Many factors ultimatelyplay a role in an individual's drug-taking behavior;nevertheless, the abuse potential of a drug is related to itsintrinsic rewarding properties and/or the presumed neuroadaptivemotivational effects that result from its prolonged use. Drugscan be tested and screened for their abuse liability in animals.Four criteria can be evaluated to classify a drug as havingsignificant abuse potential: o pharmacological equivalence to known drugs of abuse, o demonstration of reinforcing effects, o tolerance, and o physical dependence. The capacity to produce reinforcing effects is essential toany drug with significant abuse potential, whereas tolerance andphysical dependence often occur but are not absolutely requiredto make such a determination. Testing new pharmaceuticals for their abuse potential is animportant step in new drug development. Many major pharmaceuticalfirms today emphasize the development of new and safer drugs forpain reduction and in the development of psychoactive compoundsfor treatment of brain disorders. In particular, scientificstrides in understanding the brain, neurological disease,psychiatric disturbances, and aging are fueling research intotreatment of brain disorders. As psychoactive compounds becomeavailable, they must be screened for abuse potential. The abuseliability assessment of new products is not simply at thediscretions of the manufacturer. Various federal regulatory lawsmandate such testing and federal regulatory agencies are chargedwith seeing that testing is carried out. The College on Problemsof Drug Dependence (CPDD), and, specifically, its Drug EvaluationCommittee (DEC), provides the majority of abuse liability testinginformation to NIDA. Animal models are generally used to screen for the abusepotential of new drugs in earlier stages of drug development orto evaluate abuse potential in drugs that cannot be readilystudied in humans (2). Laboratory methods for abuse potentialevaluation in humans are also well developed and is an area ofactive research (21). However, factors such as the heterogeneityof drug-using populations, the use of multiple drugs, and theother biological, social, and environmental factors involved inhuman drug use make human studies complex. In terms of the validity of animal models as a means ofstudying human drug addiction, an excellent correlation existsbetween predicting the abuse liability of specific classes ofdrugs in animals and humans (34). However, it is recognized thatanimal models are imperfect and, in fact, there are examples ofdrugs that proved to have significant abuse potential in humans,whereas the preclinical testing in animals revealed relativelyminimal abuse potential (9,33,38). The ultimate answer to theissue of whether a drug has significant abuse potential islong-term experience with the drug once it has become available,either legally or illegally. Nevertheless, animal models serve asthe only practical means of initially screening drugs for abuseliability and have proven to be the most effective means ofdetecting whether there is likely to be a problem in humans. Self-Administration The predominant feature of all drugs with significantaddiction-producing properties is that they are self-administered. In fact, self-administration of a drug to the pointwhen the behavior becomes detrimental to the individual is theprimary criterion for classifying a drug as having significantabuse potential for addiction. In addition toself-administration, another contributing factor to abuseliability is the notion of craving (9,33,38). Although craving isa difficult term to quantify, once a drug is voluntarily orinvoluntarily withdrawn, the increased desire to take the drugcan play a role in the relapse to substance abuse. As previouslymentioned, the reinforcing properties of the drug may shift thepattern of administration established during the initial, earlyphase of drug?addiction. Specifically, the drug may haveinitially been self-administered for its pleasurable effects butmay eventually be self-administered to relieve the discomfortassociated with withdrawal. Animals can be readily trained to self-administer drugs in avariety of settings (9). Animal models of self- administrationprovide a powerful tool that can give a good indication of theabuse liability of new or unknown drugs. These models also permitexamination of the behavioral, physiological, and biologicalfactors leading to sustained self-administration. Drug Discrimination Another tool in the assessment of abuse liability of drugs isdrug discrimination, which refers to the perception of theeffects of drugs (3,9). Specifically, animals or humans trainedto discriminate a drug from a placebo show a remarkable abilityto discriminate it from other drugs with different properties.These procedures also permit a determination of whether thesubject considers the drug to be the pharmacological equivalentof another drug. Pharmacological equivalence refers to the factthat drugs of particular classes, such as opiates, stimulants,and depressants cause a series of affects on the brain and otherorgans which collectively constitute their pharmacologicalprofile. Drug discrimination provides a useful measure in animalsto assess the subjective effects of drugs in humans. Dependence and Tolerance Physical dependence and tolerance to drugs of abuse canreadily be induced in animals by chronic administration of thesedrugs (37,38). Following abrupt cessation of these drugs, awithdrawal syndrome will often develop and, if given theopportunity, self-administration rates will be increased.Furthermore, since the understanding of the biological changeswhich take place during the development of physical dependenceand tolerance are poorly understood in humans, with the possibleexception of opiate dependency (45), animal models offer a uniqueopportunity to carry out experiments designed to address theseissues. GENETIC FACTORS Why does one person abuse or become dependent on drugs whileanother, exposed to a similar environment and experiences, doesnot? To date, the majority of biomedical research has focused onthe role, if any, that genetics plays in individualsusceptibility to substance abuse and dependence. There isgrowing interest, however, in researching other factors thateffect a person's biological status. For example, nutrition,biological development, in utero experiences, early exposure toenvironmental lead, head injuries, and other environmentalcomponents, can modify individual neurophysiology. Thus, whilethis section features genetics, there are many other factors thatcan influence individual biological susceptibility to the effectsof a drug. Progress in understanding the genetics of various conditionsand diseases has brought with it a realization that substanceabuse and addiction probably involve a genetic component. Thatis, hereditary biological differences among individuals may makesome more or less susceptible to drug dependency than others.However, a genetic component alone is undoubtedly insufficient toprecipitate substance abuse and addiction. Unlike disorders suchas Huntington's disease and cystic fibrosis that result from thepresence of alterations in a single gene, any genetic componentof substance abuse is likely to involve multiple genes thatcontrol various aspects of the biological response to drugs,individual temperament, and the propensity to engage inrisk-taking behaviors, or physiological predisposition to becomean abuser. In addition, the involvement of many behavioral andenvironmental factors indicates that any genetic component actsin consort with other nongenetic risk factors to contribute tothe development of substance abuse and addiction. Thus, thepresence or absence of a genetic factor neither ensures drugaddiction nor precludes it. Two questions arise when consideringa genetic component to substance abuse and addiction. Doinherited factors exist? If so, what are they? To date, most ofthe work done in this field is related to alcoholism; much lessis known about the genetics of other drugs of abuse. Do Inherited Factors Exist? Results from family, twin, and adoption studies as well asextensive research on animal models indicate that there areheritable influences on patterns of alcohol use. Animal studiesusing selective breeding techniques have established that alcoholpreference, the reinforcing actions of alcohol, alcoholtolerance, and alcohol physical dependence can be affected bygenetic factors. Although fewer studies have examined the geneticcomponent of vulnerability to the addictive properties of otherdrugs of abuse, evidence from animal studies confirms the role ofa genetic influence on the use and abuse of drugs other thanalcohol. To study nonalcoholic drug abuse in humans has beendifficult because of substantially lower population prevalenceand marked changes in availability and, hence, exposure to thesesubstances. Investigation in this area is further hampered by thecomplexity of subjects' drug use--most drug abusers have used(and had problems from using) multiple substances. This has ledresearchers either to concentrate on one class of drug or totreat all illicit drug use as equivalent. The tendency to lumpall illicit drugs into one category makes results difficult tointerpret or compare. Family Studies: Alcoholism References to a familial tendency or hereditary"taint" of alcoholism date back to classical times(23). Family studies have repeatedly confirmed that the risk ofalcoholism is higher among first-degree relatives (i.e., parents,siblings, children) of alcoholics as compared with the generalpopulation (54). Moreover, while family studies can establishthat a disorder (or liability to a disorder) is transmitted, ingeneral they fail to distinguish between biological andenvironmental transmission. This issue, however, can be evaluatedin large family studies by analyzing multiple classes ofrelatives with differing degrees of genetic relatedness. Results of numerous family studies indicate that alcoholismsegregates within families, with male first-degree relatives ofalcoholics having a higher incidence (ranging from 27 to 54percent) than female first-degree relatives (6 to 17 percent) ascompared to first-degree relatives of nonalcoholics (20 percentof males, 4 percent of females) (26,66,76). In fitting models ofinheritance to family data, researchers concluded that observedpatterns of inheritance were consistent with the hypothesis thatfamilial factors predisposing to alcoholism were the same in menand women, but that nonfamilial environmental factors exertedmore influence in the development of alcoholism in women (14).However, a review of drug abuse research on women presentedseveral comparative studies of men and women showing thatalcoholism among some women appeared more highly correlated witha family history of alcohol problems. Compared to alcoholic menin various studies, alcoholic women had a greater likelihood ofhaving an alcoholic father and/or parents, as well as alcoholicsiblings (47). Additionally, while perhaps not geneticallyinfluenced, familial alcoholics (those with at least one relativewith alcoholism) appear to have earlier onset, more antisocialsymptoms, more social complications of alcohol use, and worsetreatment outcome than nonfamilial alcoholics (22,62,70). Familial is not identical to genetic, and in the case ofalcoholism, the familial patterns of inheritance are notconsistent with those of a purely genetic condition (36,79). Inaddition, researchers suggest that the transmissibility ofalcoholism has increased over time (65). Thus, any geneticfactors promoting the development of alcoholism are significantlymoderated by nongenetic influences. Family Studies: Other Drugs Although fewer family studies have been conducted on thegenetic transmission of liability to other drugs of abuse,researchers suggest that, as in the case of alcohol, addiction toother psychoactive substances appears to run in families. One study found evidence of drug use running in families,based on family history obtained from individuals admitted forsubstance abuse treatment (53). However, this study combined useof all illicit drugs into one category and relied on self-reportsby the subject on his or her drug use as well as that of familymembers. A large family interview of opiate addicts found thatthe relatives of opiate users had elevated rates of drugaddiction as compared with the controls (67). In addition, anassociation was found between opiate use and the presence ofantisocial personality disorder (ASPD). Further analysis of thesedata revealed that the incidence of both drug abuse and ASPD washigher among the siblings of the opiate subjects than among theirparents (49,50). A familial association between opiate addiction andalcoholism has been noted in some studies (46). However, anotherfamily history study found that while both opiate addiction andalcoholism clustered within families, co- occurrence of thedisorders within families occurred only as frequently as expectedby chance, thus supporting the hypothesis of independenttransmission (29). Little has been done to test hypotheses regarding familialtransmission of liability to addiction to specific substancesother than opiates or alcohol. One study examining treated drugabusers and their relatives found that alcoholism was equallycommon among relatives of individuals who preferentially abusedopiates, cocaine, or sedative-hypnotics (27 percent, 31 percent,and 24 percent of male relatives, respectively), whereasrelatives of sedative-hypnotic users were subject to diagnoses ofother substance abuses (2 percent of male relatives, versus 11percent of male relatives of opiate abusers and 16 percent ofmale relatives of cocaine abusers) (55). Twin and Adoption Studies Twin and adoption studies provide information to distinguishbetween biological and cultural transmission. Twin studiesobserve siblings raised in the same environment, but compare howoften identical twins, who are genetically identical, andfraternal twins, who have the genetic similarity of nontwinsiblings are concordant for a trait. A high concordance rate fora trait among identical twins versus fraternal twins usuallyindicates a genetic component for the trait. Adoption studies, bycontrast, compare the presence of a trait among biological versusadoptive family members or other control groups. In this wayindividuals sharing the same environment but having differentgenetic heritages, or vice versa, can be compared. Evidence from twin studies suggests genetic influences ondrinking patterns as well as alcohol-related problems. Resultsfrom twin studies demonstrate genetic influences on measures ofalcohol consumption such as abstention, average alcohol intake,and heavy alcohol use (28,39,61). Twin studies also indicate aninherited risk for smoking (16). When evaluating the development of alcoholism, twin studieshave generally supported the existence of genetic influences overthe disorder's development. One early study found a higherconcordance rate for alcohol abuse between identical twins (54percent) than in fraternal twins (28 percent) (35), while twoother studies did not find such a relationship (25,61). A 1991study examined male and female identical twin pairs, and male andfemale fraternal twin pairs, with one member of the pair meetingthe criteria for alcohol abuse or dependence (64). Researchersfound that identical male twins differed from fraternal maletwins in the frequencies of both alcohol abuse and dependence aswell as other substance abuse and/or dependence. On the otherhand, female identical and fraternal twins were equally likely toabuse alcohol and/or become dependent on other substances, butidentical female twins were more likely to become alcoholdependent. Another study of 356 twin pairs also found higheridentical than fraternal rates of concordance for problemsrelated to alcohol and drug use as well as conduct disorder (52).The same study also noted that among men, heritability played agreater role in the early rather than late onset of alcoholproblems, whereas no such effect was seen among women. However, astudy of 1,030 female twin pairs found evidence for substantialheritability of liability to alcoholism, ranging from 50 to 60percent (40). Thus, twin studies provide general agreement that geneticfactors influence certain aspects of drinking. Most twin studiesalso show genetic influence over pathological drinking, includingthe diagnosis of alcoholism, which appears (like many otherpsychiatric disorders) to be moderately heritable. Whethergenetic factors operate comparably in men and women, and whetherseverity of alcoholism influences twin concordance is less clear.How psychiatric comorbidity may affect heritability of alcoholismalso remains to be clarified. Adoption studies have supported the role of heritable factorsin risk for alcoholism (6,11,71). The results from a series ofstudies conducted in Denmark during the 1970s are typical.Researchers studied male adoptees, later comparing them withnonadopted brothers; female adoptees, later comparing them withnonadopted daughters of alcoholics, comparisons were also madewith matched control adoptees. Sons of alcoholic and nonalcoholicparents who were put up for adoption were compared for thedevelopment of alcoholism. Sons of alcoholic parents were foundto be four times as likely as sons of nonalcoholic parents tohave developed alcoholism; evidence also suggested that thealcoholism in these cases was more severe. The groups differedlittle on other variables, including prevalence of otherpsychiatric illness or "heavy drinking." Being raisedby an alcoholic biological parent did not further increase thelikelihood of developing alcoholism; that is, rates of alcoholismdid not differ between the adopted-away children and theirnonadopted brothers. In contrast, a study of daughters ofalcoholics revealed no elevated risk of alcoholism (23). Another analysis examined factors promoting drug abuse aswell as alcoholism (10). In this study, all classes of illicitdrug use were categorized into a single category of drug abuse.Most of the 40 adopted drug abusers examined had coexisting ASPDand alcoholism; the presence of ASPD correlated highly with drugabuse. Among those without ASPD, a biological background ofalcoholism (i.e., alcoholism in a biological parent) wasassociated with drug abuse. Also, turmoil in the adoptive family(divorce or psychiatric disturbance) was associated withincreased odds for drug abuse in the adoptee. Finally, results from other adoption studies suggest twoforms of alcohol abuse (7,13). The two forms were originallyclassified by C.R. Cloninger as "milieu-limited" ortype 1 alcohol abuse and "male-limited" or type 2alcohol abuse (15). Type 1 alcohol abuse is characterized bymoderate alcohol problems and minimal criminal behavior in theparents, and is generally mild, but occasionally severe,depending on presence of a provocative environment. Type 2 isassociated with severe alcohol abuse and criminality in thebiological fathers. In the adoptees, it is associated withrecurrent problems and appears to be unaffected by postnatalenvironment. While the appropriateness of the biological and environmentalparameters used in the Cloninger study have been challenged, thediscriminating characteristics used to classify individuals astype 1 or 2 alcohol abusers have not been--until recently. A newstudy of familial and nonfamilial male alcoholics hasinvestigated the type 1 and 2 classifications by analyzing theimportance of age differences and cohort distributions (19). Theresearchers showed that among the male alcoholics, there was nota clear distinction between familial and nonfamilial basedalcohol abuse problems and type 1 or 2 characteristics, asreported in previous studies. Additionally, another recentpublication discusses the absence of paternal sociopathy in theetiology of severe alcoholism, and the possibility of a type 3alcoholism (30). This type of research raises obvious questionsas to the validity of the discriminating characteristicsoriginally outlined by Cloninger and currently used in theclassification of individual alcohol abusers. In summary, adoption studies of alcoholism clearly indicatethe role of biological, presumably genetic, factors in thegenesis of alcoholism. They do not exclude, however, a possiblerole for nongenetic, environmental factors as well. Moreover,researchers have suggested more than one kind of biologicalbackground may be conducive to alcoholism. In particular, onepattern of inheritance suggests a relationship between parentalantisocial behavior and alcoholism in the next generation. Thus,adoption studies, like other designs, suggest that even at thegenetic level, alcoholism is not a homogeneous construct. What Is Inherited? While study results indicate a probable genetic component toalcoholism and probably other drug abuse, they lack informationabout what exactly is inherited. For example, do individuals witha family history of drug abuse have an increased susceptibilityor sensitivity to the effects of drugs with reinforcingproperties? If a susceptibility exists, what are its underlyingbiological mechanisms? To understand what might be inherited,both individuals who have a substance abuse problem and animalsmodels of substance abuse are studied. Various types ofinformation can be derived from these studies. As with family,twin, and adoption studies, much more information is availableabout alcoholism as compared with other drugs of abuse. First, it may be possible to identify specific inherited riskmarkers for alcoholism and other substance abuse. A risk markeris a biological trait or characteristic associated with a givencondition. Thus, if an individual is found to have an identifiedmarker for substance abuse, he or she is at risk for developing adrug dependency. To date, no biological characteristic has beenclearly identified as being a risk marker for either alcoholismor substance abuse, although evidence suggests some possiblecandidates. The identification of a valid and reliable riskmarker could provide important information about the fundamentalmechanisms underlying substance abuse and addiction and would bean invaluable aid in diagnosis and treatment. Second, inherited differences in biochemical, physiological,and anatomical processes related to differences in drug responsesmight be identified and studied. Animal models of substance abuseallow thorough biological assays to be carried out. Animalgenetic models of substance abuse consist of strains of animals(usually rodents) that have been selectively bred to eitherexhibit a preference for taking or refusing a drug, or to differin some way in their behavioral or physiological response to adrug. In the case of alcohol, studies suggest that low doses ofalcohol are more stimulating and produce a stronger positivereward in rats bred to have a high preference for alcohol ascompared with normal rats. Experimental data indicate that thismay be due to inherited differences in the dopamine, GABA, andserotonin systems (27,32, 57,73). These differences representinherited traits related to drug taking behavior, and theseanimals can be examined to determine what biological mechanismsare involved in the expression of these traits. Third, the genetic technique of linkage analysis can narrowthe area on a chromosome where a gene may be located. It can leadto the identification of the gene itself which in turn canimprove the understanding of the molecular events that underliethe expression of the gene. There have been few genetic linkagestudies related to substance abuse since few specific biologicaltraits associated with drug dependency have been identified. Somestudies in humans have been carried out related to alcoholism butthe findings of these studies are contradictory and inconclusive. Several studies have reported an association betweenalcoholism and a gene that regulates the number of a type ofdopamine receptor in the brain; other studies have found no suchlink (4,5,8,18,58). The reason for this discrepancy is unclear.One study revealed a relationship between the presence of thegene not only in alcoholics, but in other disorders such asautism, attention deficit hyperactivity disorder, and Tourette'ssyndrome (17). Thus, the presence of this particular gene, whilenot uniquely specific for alcoholism, may cause an alteration inthe brain's dopamine system that somehow exacerbates orcontributes to alcohol abuse. Few studies have examined possible inherited biologicalmechanisms associated with the abuse of other drugs. For example,strains of rats and mice that differ in their sensitivity to thereinforcing effects of cocaine and in their cocaine-seekingbehavior have been observed to also have differences in theactual number of dopamine-containing neurons and receptors incertain brain areas. Also, a comparison of one strain of rat thatself-administers drugs of abuse at higher rates than anotherstrain, found that the higher self-administering strain exhibiteddifferences in the intracellular mechanisms that control activityin some of the neurons in the brain reward system (see box 3-2)as compared with the low self-administering strain. Additionalstudies exploring the role of genes in drug response are neededto more fully understand the full range of biological factorsassociated with drug abuse. The recent development of new andmore sensitive techniques to analyze brain activity and processeswill facilitate these studies. ROLE OF LEARNING The learning that occurs during drug-taking activities is animportant force in the continued use and craving of drugs(59,72). Drugs of abuse often produce feelings of intensepleasure in the user. In addition, such drugs produce changes innumerous organ systems (e.g., cardiovascular, digestive,endocrine). Both the behavioral and physiological effects of adrug occur in the context of the individual's drug-seeking anddrug-using environment. As a result, environmental cues arepresent before and during an individual's drug use that areconsistently associated with a drug's behavioral andphysiological effects. With repetition the cues becomeconditioned stimuli, that on presentation, even in the absence ofthe drug, evoke automatic changes in organ systems and sensationsthat the individual reports as drug craving. This is analogous toPavlov's classical conditioning experiments in which dogssalivated at the cue of a bell following repeated pairing of foodpresentation with a ringing bell. Evidence for this effect isseen in numerous studies showing that animals seek out placesassociated with reinforcing drugs and that the physiologicaleffects of drugs can be classically conditioned in both animalsand humans (72). Conditioning also occurs in relation to the withdrawaleffects of drugs (75). It was observed that opiate addicts whowere drug free for months and thus should not have had any signsof opiate withdrawal, developed withdrawal symptoms (e.g.,yawning, sniffling, tearing of the eyes) when talking about drugsin group therapy sessions. This phenomenon, termed conditionedwithdrawal, results from environmental stimuli acquiring theability, through classical conditioning, to elicit signs andsymptoms of pharmacological withdrawal. Conditioned withdrawalcan also play a role in relapse to drug use in abstinentindividuals. The emergence of withdrawal symptoms as a result ofexposure to conditioned cues can motivate an individual to seekout and use drugs. These associations are difficult to reverse. In theory,repeated presentation of the environmental cues, without the drugshould extinguish the conditioned association. Animal studiesindicate that stopping the conditioned response is difficult toachieve and does not erase the original learning. These types ofstudies examining drug conditioning have found that variousaspects of extinguished responses can either be reinstated with asingle pairing of the drug and environmental cue, can bereinstated with a single dose of drug in the absence of theenvironmental cue, or canspontaneously recover (72). Thus, exposure to environmental cues associated with drug usein the past can act as a stimulus for voluntary drug- seekingbehavior. If the individual succeeds in finding and taking thedrug, the chain of behaviors is further reinforced by thedrug-induced, rewarding feelings and the effects of the drug onother organ systems (59). The effects of the environmentalstimuli can be similar to the priming effects of a dose of thedrug. The complexity of human responses to drugs of abuse, coupledwith the number of drugs that are abused, complicatesunderstanding of the role of biology in drug use and abuse.Nevertheless, scientists know the site of action of many drugs inthe brain, and sophisticated new devices are expected to improvethat understanding. A genetic component to drug use and abuse islikely, but it has not been fully characterized. SUMMARY Underlying all alcohol and drug problems are the actions andeffects that drugs of abuse exert. It is important to understandhow drugs work in the brain, why certain drugs have the potentialfor being abused, and what, if any, biological differences existamong individuals in their susceptibility to abuse drugs. Two biological factors contribute to substance abuse andaddiction: the effects drugs of abuse exert on the individual,and the biological status of the individual taking drugs. Theeffects the drugs exert can be either acute or chronic and willvary depending on the drug and its route of administration. Mostdrugs of abuse influence the brain's reward system. Thepleasurable sensations that drug use can produce reinforcedrug-seeking and -taking behaviors. These actions differ withdifferent drugs: and, thus, some substances have greaterpotential for abuse and addiction than others. Prolonged or chronic use of a substance or substances canproduce both biological and behavioral changes (some long-lasting). Biological changes can include sensitization and/ortolerance and, if use is discontinued, withdrawal. The behavioralchanges from continued drug use are directly related to thesebiological changes. An individual's drug- craving, -seeking, and-taking behaviors are amplified through the neuroadaptive changesin the brain reward system that occur with chronicadministration. Environmental cues also play a large role in drug-seeking and-taking behavior. On encountering certain environmental stimuli(i.e., specific locations, smells, tastes), drug- craving anddrug withdrawal symptoms have been reported by former drug userswho have been drug-free for months, even years. Through family, twin, and adoption studies, most researchersagree that genetic factors play some part in the heritability ofalcohol problems and, although less clear, other drug problems.No conclusive evidence has been found to explain precisely whatis inherited or the overall importance of this inheritedmaterial. It has been hypothesized that there are probablynumerous genes (as opposed to one) that interact in complex ways,and whose expressions are affected by a myriad of environmentalfactors. Thus, the presence or absence of a genetic factorneither ensures nor protects against drug dependency. BOX 3-1: Neuropharmacology Neurons are the cells that process information in the brain.Neurotransmitters are chemicals released by neurons tocommunicate with other neurons. When a neuron is activated itreleases a neurotransmitter into the gap between two neurons (seefigure 3-1). The molecules of the neurotransmitter move acrossthe gap and attach to proteins, called receptors, in the outerwall of an adjacent cell. Once the receptor is activated, theneurotransmitter is removed from the gap, either by reabsorptioninto the neuron that released it or by being broken downchemically. For each neurotransmitter in the brain, there are specificreceptors to which it can attach. Receptors and receptor subtypescan activate a variety of membrane and cellular mechanisms. Inthis way, one chemical can have diverse effects in differentareas of the brain. Many chemicals have been identified asneurotransmitters. Some particularly relevant to the reportedpleasurable sensations associated with drug abuse includedopamine, norepinephrine, serotonin, opioids and otherneuropeptides, gamma amino butyric acid (GABA), and glutamate. A neuron can have thousands of receptors for many differentneurotransmitters. Some neurotransmitters activate neurons(excitatory neurotransmitters), while others decrease neuronactivity (inhibitory neurotransmitters). Some receptors arebiochemically coupled: the activation of one modulates thefunction of the other, either increasing or decreasing itsactivity. A neuron can also have receptors for the chemical itreleases. In this way, neurons can regulate their release of aparticular neurotransmitter. Thus, these so-called autoreceptorsact as a feedback mechanism. The activity of a neuron will bedetermined by the cumulative activity of all its variousreceptors. Drugs that work in the brain, including drugs of abuse, alternormal neuropharmacological activity through a variety ofdifferent mechanisms. They can affect the production, release, orreuptake of a chemical, they can mimic or block the action of achemical at a receptor, or they can interfere with or enhance theactivity of a membrane or cellular mechanism associated with areceptor. Prolonged drug use has the potential to alter each ofthese processes. SOURCE: Office of Technology Assessment, 1994. BOX 3-2: The Brain Reward System Eating, drinking, sexual, and maternal behaviors areactivities essential for the survival of the individual and thespecies. Natural selection, in order to ensure that thesebehaviors occur, has imbued them with powerful rewardingproperties. The brain reward system evolved to process thesenatural reinforcers. The reward system is made up of various brain structures. Akey part of this system for drug reward appears to be themesocorticolimbic pathway (MCLP). The MCLP is composed of theaxons of neuronal cell bodies in the middle part of the brain(i.e., ventral tegmental area) projecting to areas in the frontpart of the brain (i.e., the nucleus accumbens, a nucleus in thelimbic system, a network of brain structures associated withcontrol of emotion, perception, motivation, gratification, andmemory; medial prefrontal cortex, part of the front of the braininvolved with higher ordered thinking) (see figure 3-2). Ventraltegmental neurons release the neurotransmitter dopamine toregulate the activity of the cells in the nucleus accumbens andthe medial prefrontal cortex. Other parts of the reward systeminclude the nucleus accumbens and its connections with otherlimbic structures, and other regions in the front part of thebrain (i.e., substantia innominata-ventral palladium). Thenucleus accumbens also sends signals back to the ventraltegmental area. Finally, other neuronal pathways containingdifferent neurotransmitters regulate the activity of themesocorticolimbic dopamine system and may also be involved inmediating the rewarding properties of drugs of abuse. SOURCE: Koob, G.F., "Drugs of Abuse: Anatomy,Pharmacology, and Function of Reward Pathways," Trends inPharmacological Sciences 13:177-184, 1992; Koob, G.F.,"Neural Mechanisms of Drug Reinforcement," P.W. Kalivasand H.H. Samson (eds.), The Neurobiology of Drug and AlcoholAddiction, Annals of the American Academy of Sciences654:171-191, 1992. BOX 3-3: How Drugs of Abuse Affect the Chemical Release ofDopamine The rewarding properties of stimulant drugs such as cocaineand amphetamines are due directly to the effects of the chemicaldopamine. Opiates, on the other hand, indirectly stimulatedopamine by activating other chemical pathways, which in turnincrease dopamine activity. Similarly, alcohol, barbiturates, andbenzodiazepines likely have an indirect action which increasesdopamine activity. All of these drugs have reinforcingproperties. Phencyclidine (PCP) is also a strong reinforcer butits relationship, if any, to activity in the dopamine pathway hasyet to be established. Other drugs are either weak reinforcers orhave not been shown to support self-administration in animalexperiments. Nicotine stimulates dopamine neurons; however, itseffect is modest when compared with cocaine or amphetamine.Likewise, caffeine is a weak reinforcer, but the precisemechanisms of its reinforcement are unclear. Finally, cannabisand lysergic acid diethylamide (LSD) also produce positiveeffects that clearly support their use. SOURCE: Office of Technology Assessment, 1994. BOX 3-4: The Two Types of Tolerance The two types of tolerance are: dispositional(pharmacokinetic) and pharmacodynamic. Dispositional tolerancedevelops when the amount of drug reaching active sites in thebrain is reduced in some way. Generally, this arises from anincreased breakdown of the drug or a change in its distributionin the rest of the body. Thus, more drug must be taken to achievethe same blood levels or concentrations at the active sites inthe brain. Pharmacodynamic tolerance represents a reduced response ofthe brain to the same level of drug. It develops during thecontinued and sustained presence of the drug. It may be that themechanism of adaptation may differ from drug to drug and dependon the original mechanism of action of a given drug. The neteffect is that more drug is required to overcome this newneuronal adaptation to produce an equivalent pharmacologiceffect. Although dispositional tolerance represents a component oftolerance to some drugs (e.g., alcohol, barbiturates), in mostcases much or all of the tolerance which develops to drugs withsignificant abuse potential can be attributed to pharmacodynamictolerance. Tolerance can contribute to drug- taking behavior byrequiring that an individual take larger and larger doses of adrug to achieve a desired effect. SOURCES: Jaffe, J.H., "Drug Addiction and DrugAbuse," The Pharmacological Basis of Therapeutics, A.G.Gilman, T.W. Rall, A.S. Nies, and P. Taylor (eds.), (New York:Pergammon Press, 1990). Kalant, H., "The Nature ofAddiction: An Analysis of the Problem," Molecular andCellular Aspects of the Drug Addictions, A. Goldstein, (ed).,(New York, NY: Springer Verlag, 1989). _ CliffSchaffer's Home Page WT02-B01-154IA086-000615-B001-284http://206.61.184.43:80/schaffer/Library/studies/ota/ch8.htm 206.61.184.43 19970122024307 text/html 88784HTTP/1.0 200 OKDate: Wednesday, 22-Jan-97 02:42:52 GMTServer: WebSitePro/1.1f (S/N wpo-0deb)Allow-ranges: bytesContent-type: text/htmlLast-modified: Saturday, 28-Dec-96 06:49:47 GMTContent-length: 88566 COMMUNITY ACTIVITY SETTINGS TECHNOLOGIES FOR UNDERSTANDING AND PREVENTING SUBSTANCEABUSE AND ADDICTION US Government Office of Technology Assessment October 18, 1994 CHAPTER 8 COMMUNITY ACTIVITY SETTINGS This chapter reviews substance use and abuse-related researchon factors and interventions in homes, schools, workplaces,recreational and other developmental settings, and community-widesettings. These community activity settings are the majorphysical and social arenas in communities where individualsinteract and learn their values, attitudes, and behaviors, someof which can increase or reduce the likelihood that individualswill use and abuse substances. The addition of treatment settingsof all types and correctional settings would provide a fairlycomprehensive and systematic overview of all the major settingsin communities. Those settings are not discussed at length inthis report, however, because of its focus primarily onprevention, even though comprehensive prevention strategies willalmost always want to include treatment and correctionalcomponents as well. By focusing on any one of these settings, researchersinterested in substance use and abuse can study the interplay ofmultiple factors in a context, and practitioners can implementprograms designed for specific settings. By examining all ofthese settings together, policymakers and practitionersinterested in substance abuse and the healthy development ofindividuals and communities can identify and, within availableresources, implement concrete, systematic, and comprehensivepreventive interventions for communities as a whole. Thedevelopment and strengthening of community-wide norms against theuse of substances may well be one of the more important ways toprotect individuals against the use of substances. The section oncommunities discusses some of the issues and tools forcommunity-wide prevention planning and coordination. HOMES AND FAMILIES Although American society expects families in their homes totake the lead in dealing with substance abuse and other problembehaviors (69), families in this country generally receive onlylimited outside support in protecting themselves againstsubstance abuse. This situation may result in part from thebelief that most nuclear families can raise their childrenlargely independently and therefore do not need outside support,and in part from the belief that teens and young adults are moreinfluenced by their peers. The first belief, however, is notsupported by long- standing practices in most societies, whereextended families and life-long neighbors have traditionallyhelped raise children (although in the United States many parentsdo not have access to these additional child-rearing resourcesbecause of urbanization, high technology, and family mobility).And the second belief is being questioned by growing evidencethat certain parenting practices and family intervention programscan significantly reduce the risk of substance abuse amongadolescents and young adults. An extensive and growing body of research strongly suggeststhat many families do need, and can benefit from, support fromoutside the family, and can often protect their children fromsubstance abuse, even into adolescence and adulthood. While someof the findings reported here may appear to be commonsensical,they are presented because they have been addressed byresearchers as part of a growing body of increasingly rigorousresearch. Some of the studies focus on risk and protectivefactors that are known or thought to be associated with substanceuse and abuse, while others focus directly on substance use andabuse. To reduce redundancy, factors and programs discussedelsewhere in this report are for the most part not consideredhere. Protective Factors Families can protect against substance use and abuse byproviding close family relationships, sufficient monitoring,clear messages about substance use and abuse, and attractivealternatives to substance use and abuse. Close Family Relationships Family relationships can help protect against substance useand abuse when they are characterized by closeness and warmth,effective and positive discipline, and successful problem solvingand communications. For example, young people who report feelingclose to their families are less likely to abuse substances thanthose who report not feeling close to their families. Parents insuch families are more likely to comfort their children when theyare afraid, have two-way communications, and give children somesay in what happens to them (83,86,152). Because such parentsspend more time with their children, there can be more conflict,but the time spent together can also lead to greater mutualunderstanding and acceptance (23,59). Parents can better channel their children away from substanceuse and abuse if they have routinely used effective,age-appropriate discipline methods, including clear expectationsand rules about homework, television, curfews, and drugs andalcohol. Such methods are particularly effective when they areenforced by praise and encouragement, instead of by threatening,nagging, and blaming (42,47). In contrast, ineffective orprovocative family management practices, including overly harshor reluctant discipline practices and inconsistent followthrough,are associated with early sampling of substances and later abuse(8,115). Unruly behaviors in childhood can lead children to poorachievement in school, social rejection by more conventionalpeers, and greater association with other children with behaviorproblems (46). Skillful handling of problems by families helps childrenlearn how to distance themselves from problems and address themwith specific problem-solving strategies (77). Such skills canhelp children later avoid the use and abuse of substances. Bycontrast, families where children eventually abuse substances donot make decisions and solve problems as well as other families(97). Positive caregiving and discipline can prevent negativeoutcomes even for highly stressed, minority, low socioeconomicstatus (SES), urban families (177). When the birth parents arenot available, effective parenting by a surrogate, relative, orneighbor can also be protective (173). Sufficient Monitoring When parents or parent surrogates know how their children arespending their time, the risk of substance abuse is low (47).Such monitoring may prevent abuse by reducing access tosubstances, preventing use of substances, or allowing parents toidentify substance use earlier and to apply sanctions. Monitoringmay also entail greater involvement by parents in theirchildren's lives, which may help render substance use and abuseless appealing by enhancing feelings of trust, warmth, andcloseness in the family. Such monitoring prevents substancesampling across ages, ethnicities, and settings. Single parents and working parents are often less able tomonitor their children thoroughly, because they can be in onlyone place at a time. However, grandmothers, aunts, after-schoolpersonnel, and other caring and supportive adults can alsomonitor children and help reduce deviant behaviors (59,88). Earlyautonomy and unsupervised leisure time apparently increase therisk of substance use and abuse by children. Clear Messages About Effects of Substances, IncludingSanctions Children are more likely to avoid the use of substances ifthey know that use will bring negative outcomes, such as adversephysical and psychological effects, disapproval, and penaltiesimposed by parents. Many children develop expectations about theeffects of substances as early as the preschool years (100),influenced primarily by their parents. Frequent parental use evenof aspirin, cold pills, prescribed psychotropic medications (85),and cough medicine can give children positive expectations aboutthe effects of substances (61). When parents apply reliable penalties, such as revokingprivileges, and coach their children about the adverse effects ofsubstances, use is likely to discontinue (6). By contrast, if thepossible adverse effects (e.g., illness and depression) are notemphasized and few negative sanctions are applied whenadolescents first use marijuana, while the immediate experiencesare to feel pleasantly stoned and potent (87), then continued useand adult drug problems are more likely (37). Parentaldisapproval of children's alcohol use has been found to beprotective across ethnic groups (33). Increased appreciation ofrisks and social disapproval of substance use is credited withthe recent downturn in cocaine and marijuana use nationally (5). Attractive Alternatives to Substance Use and Abuse Participation in religious and other conventional andchallenging activities can protect against substance use andabuse (26,81,111,173). Especially important are activities aboutwhich youth are passionate. Parents are more likely to guide their children away fromsubstance use and abuse if parents have instilled hope in theirchildren to succeed as adults (172). By contrast, some childrendo not look forward to and plan for adulthood, but learn onlyshort-term thinking (see box 8-1) and have been encouraged bytheir parents to believe they cannot succeed. Parents of inner-city African American children face specialdifficulties in holding out hope for their children's successthrough traditional opportunities. Unemployment among AfricanAmerican men is almost 50 percent (24) and the marriage rateamong African American women is low and still declining (10),with substance use and abuse among African Americans increasingas they reach 26 to 34 years of age, instead of decreasing aswith other racial and ethnic groups (164). Risk Factors Families also face risk factors, such as parental neglect andrejection, behavioral problems and crime, physical and sexualabuse, substance abuse in the family, failure in school,emotional problems, negative life events, early use ofsubstances, substance abuse in the neighborhood, and poverty,unemployment, and homelessness. Because some of these factors arediscussed elsewhere in this report, this section will focus onlyon parental neglect and rejection, physical and sexual abuse,substance abuse in the family, negative life events, and drugtrafficking in the neighborhood. Parental Neglect and Rejection Children who are neglected anytime, but especially fromearliest childhood, are at greater risk of substance abuse(17,142). When children have been continually rejected, theybecome immune to parental guidance. Such children fail to formclose relationships, get along with others, solve problems, andregulate impulses. Physical and Sexual Abuse Physical or sexual abuse in childhood leads to greatervulnerability to substance abuse in adolescence and adulthood(38). Rape victims, particularly those with Post Traumatic StressDisorder (PTSD) symptoms, are 20 times more likely to havesubsequent substance abuse problems (165). Substance abuserehabilitation programs report that as many as 60 to 70 percentof the female patients and 25 percent of the male patients havebeen sexually victimized, while 43 percent have been beaten(45,99,92). Victims of sexual or physical abuse often reportwishing to avoid unpleasant memories, including flashbacks to theabuse (126). The use of substances may help some victims forgetfor awhile (see box 8-2). Substance Abuse in the Family The biological children of alcoholics have a higher thanaverage chance of abusing alcohol, even if they are reared awayfrom their alcoholic parents (40,63). Thus, a part of thevulnerability to alcohol abuse, at least for some, may beinherited. Children of alcoholics, for example, may experiencemore positive effects or fewer negative effects from the use ofalcohol. Either of these responses could result from individualdifferences in experienced pharmacological effects of drugs (135)or differences in temperament that can be modified by the use ofalcohol and other drugs (154). In addition to friends and acquaintances, relatives are acommon source of alcohol and other drugs for teens. Familymembers and other relatives can be very persuasive when theyoffer such substances to teens. One study, that included bothabstainers and heavy users, found that young people refusedavailable substances, mainly alcohol, 46 percent of the time whenfriends offered them, but only 18 percent of the time whenrelatives outside the family offered them. When their own parentsoffered such substances, the young people never refused (9).Family members who use substances can also inadvertently makethem available to teens by leaving family cabinets containingalcohol or pills unlocked (35). Family members can learn how to use alcohol and other drugsby watching and listening to abusing family members; they canalso adopt the abusing members' expectations about the effects ofthese substances. For example, children of alcoholics are morelikely to think that the purpose of drinking is to get drunk(107). They also have greater expectations for the use of alcohol(143), and sometimes believe they can do things better after afew drinks. Families with a substance abusing parent experiencesignificant disruptions in many aspects of their lives, includingchild rearing (160). Substance abusing parents and spouses oftenhave difficulties guiding their children, especially away fromsubstances, because of inconsistent nurturing, monitoring, anddisciplinary practices (36,47). Their abuse of substances canalso rob children of stability in life and of competent adultrole models. Even a nondrinking spouse can become so involvedwith the drinking spouse and so depressed and isolated fromsocial support that children feel neglected (13). Marital qualitycan be affected (160), and the level of conflict and verbal andphysical aggression can be high (151). In addition, adolescentand adult children of substance abusers are less influenced bytheir parents and have lower parental attachment, lessinvolvement with other people, more difficulty getting along withother people (84), lower self- esteem, lower academicachievement, higher depression (128), and a greater number ofother psychiatric symptoms (143). Major Negative Life Events Substance use and abuse often increase as children experiencemore negative events (106,174) (see table 8-1). Adult alcoholicsreport a significantly higher number of severe life events justbefore their alcohol dependency begins (65), with seven out ofeight of them reporting disruptions in important personalrelationships, such as with friends, lovers, or spouses. Amongthe elderly, late- onset alcoholism is reportedly preceded by newfeelings of loneliness and depression, perhaps also due to recentlosses of important relationships (120,134). Such negative life events may heighten vulnerability tosubstance abuse by increasing depression (174). For instance, onestudy found that children who had lost a parent to death had a7.5 times greater risk of developing a depression than otherchildren (60). Negative life events may also occasion perceptionsof helplessness and decreased personal control; these too can beoffset, at least for awhile, by some drugs (91). Families are likely to have the greatest difficultypreventing substance abuse if friends abuse substances (86,109)or if substance use is rampant in the neighborhood(39,44,51,124). Such conditions encourage substance use andreduce the barriers against use by making drugs continuouslyavailable and socially acceptable (even appealing) and byproviding temporary escape from the frequent hassles andtragedies of life among highly transient and troubled (ratherthan stable and helpful) neighbors (146). Programs To Enhance Protective Factors This section discusses some of the numerous programs thathave been developed for families with infants, school-agedchildren, and young adults. Few of these programs specificallytarget substance abuse and addiction, but many have been found toenhance family-based protective factors and/or reduce riskfactors that can be associated with drug abuse. Unlike someschool-based programs, methodologically rigorous studiescorrelating the efficacy of these programs to the level ofsubstance abuse and addiction have yet to be done. Families With Infants Parent education, prenatal and infant care, and socialsupport programs help strengthen involved and responsiveparenting (4), which in turn can significantly reduce substanceabuse risk factors such as child abuse and neglect and childhoodaccidents. Parents who had participated in such programs attained moreeducation, had fewer other children, and were less likely to beon welfare by the time their children were 10 years old, thanparents who had not participated in such programs. Participatingparents reported less stress and more confidence in theirparenting (175). Most importantly, children were dramaticallyless likely to experience attendance, behavior, or academicproblems in school (112,138,139). These programs can take many forms: o a neighborhood house where parents and their infants cancome during the day for companionship, child care advice, socialservices, and health care from a stable professional staff (139); o twice-a-week home visits by the same nurse, from pregnancyuntil the child is 2 years old (112); o home visits, with child development advice, help inacquiring other services, and time-limited family counseling tolower conflict and increase support from the extended family; o a public school dedicated to pregnant teens and new mothersand that provides health and child care education, socialservices, and intensive high school education (138); and o parent meetings in the hospital where the baby was born(175). Families With School-Age Children Parent training and support programs can help parents ofschool-aged children motivate their children to more willinglypay attention to and accept parental guidance and to developskills for success outside the family. A parent training programcalled WINNING, provided through a Texas school system, increasedpositive and corrective feedback from parents to children,increased parent-child interactions, and decreased the attentionparents gave to inappropriate child behavior. Concomitantly, theportion of their children's behavior that was inappropriatedecreased (43). Another parent training and support program, "How toHelp Your Child Succeed in School," was offered throughSeattle, Washington schools to increase protective factors andreduce risk factors for substance use and abuse. After theprogram, parents spent more time reading with their children andprovided more consistent positive and negative consequences forbehavior (70,71, 72,73,74). Involving parents more in schools can furthersupportparenting and prevent it from being undermined by peersand by school environments. In the School Development Program inNew Haven, Connecticut, for example, parents serve as members ofthe School Advisory Council and as employees or volunteers inclassrooms. Significant improvements have been seen in studentattendance, language skills, math scores, and social competence,and virtually all classroom behavior problems have beeneliminated (34,41). A community grassroots effort to provide these and otherresources for parents began 17 years ago in the Ravendale sectionof Detroit, Michigan. The "Joy of Jesus" programs nowsupport families living in more than 30 contiguous blocks. Everyday after school about 250 youth of all ages participate inscheduled activities such as tutoring, music, dance, gym,writing, teen sex education, cultural field trips, universitytours, and an entrepreneur's club (for 30 teens who are startingtheir own businesses). This program provides several substanceabuse protective factors and prevents the risk factor of schoolfailure, by monitoring report cards and enrolling students in anindividualized after-school motivational learning program, ifnecessary. In Los Angeles, California, an after-school tutoring andactivities program has been developed in a for profit apartmentbuilding. The program, called EEXCEL, provides a room in thebuilding and live-in counselors and tutors who offer children a"sanctuary for education [and]...incentives forlearning." When report cards come out, good grades arerecognized at parties. Only those families that want thisresource for their children are accepted as tenants in thebuilding (108). Atlanta, Georgia-based Inner-City Families in Action has beenpresenting comprehensive information in a series of 2- hoursessions about how specific drugs, such as alcohol or crack,affect every system in the body, to residents in two Atlantahousing projects. The curriculum is called "You Have theRight to Know." After 2 years of using the curriculum inmany locations, the narcotics arrests in both housing projectsare down (52). Through flyers, personal invitations from schools, and a 1-hour television special, parents were recruited to 87 local sitesaround Seattle, Washington, for workshops on "Preparing forthe Drug (Free) Years," led by trained parents. Surveysshowed that parents' attitudes and behaviors were changed in thedirection of providing protective factors. Parents also ratedhighly the workshops' content, process, and leaders (71). The Midwestern Prevention Project (Project STAR) in KansasCity, Missouri, used the local media to recruit parents to becomeinvolved in a school and parent substance abuse education courseand to repeat the messages for more than one year. This intensiveeffort reduced the rate of increase in initiation of alcohol,tobacco, and marijuana use among seventh and eighth graders whohad participated in the program, as compared to those who had notparticipated (116). Families With Young Adults Job Corps, Peace Corps/VISTA programs, American Conservationand Youth Service Corps, National and Community Service Programs,universities, and the military all provide young people shelteredwork experiences, educational training if necessary, andopportunities to live away from home with other young people instructured environments. Research shows that such experiencesenhance the confidence of participants in their ability to workhard (48). Programs To Reduce Risk Factors Reducing Drug-Trafficking and Substance-Using Peers Operation Clean Sweep, now being run by the Chicago,Illinois, Housing Authority, is designed to reduce drug dealingand other crimes in housing projects. Staff approach onehigh-rise building at a time, spending at least a whole day atthe building. State and local law enforcement officers andhousing authority security officers search apartment units (ifthere is reasonable cause) for illegal weapons and unauthorizedresidents. Authorized residents are given photo I.D. cards, whileothers are put on the lease, given a 2-week pass, or asked toleave. The maintenance staff makes repairs, cleans graffiti,encloses lobbies, and builds a security station for 24-hour-a-daysurveillance and review of photo I.D.'s and passes foradmittance. The program is being replicated in cities across thenation, with funding and technical assistance from the U.S.Department of Housing and Urban Development (HUD). Reducing Physical and Sexual Abuse Physical and psychological security is important for theemotional well-being of children (30) and may well reduce theirrisk of later substance abuse. Mandatory arrest and briefincarceration for physical and sexual abuse of children ormothers has been shown to deter more repeat offenses than dowarnings or counseling alone (144), and court-mandated treatmentfor convicted offenders seems to reduce later abuse even further(50). Since 40 to 87 percent of adult sexual or physical abusersalso report alcohol or drug abuse, individuals treated for familyviolence should perhaps also be screened and, if appropriate,treated for substance abuse (176). Reducing Substance Abuse in the Family Substance abuse treatment for the family can reduce substanceabuse in the short-term and maintain those reductions in thelong-term (27,75, 101,147,149,153,). Substance abuse treatmentfor married adults is more effective when both spouses areinvolved (96), and especially with a behavioral approach tomarital problems (110). Clearly, families can help rehabilitatesubstance abusers, thereby reducing the risk of substance abusefor other family members. Reducing Impact of Negative Life Events Linking people with modest community supports during crisesor adjustments can reduce risk factors and enhance protectivefactors. For example, when widows were contacted individually bytrained, previously widowed persons to discuss grief anddecisions to be made, 61 percent accepted the widow-aide services(145) and one month after bereavement were less depressed andless preoccupied with the past than widows who had received nointervention. One year later, the intervention group wassignificantly more resocialized in their roles as singles; twoyears later, the health of the intervention group members wassignificantly better than that of control group members (168). Also, a 6-month program for newly separated or divorcedpeople in Colorado (which included both one-to-one counseling bytrained volunteers and group meetings about practical problems,such as career planning and child- rearing) significantly reducedthe participants' problems and their anxiety, nervousness, andfatigue. It also improved their psychological adjustment (lessguilt and self-blame, more competence), as compared with arandomly selected control group (18). More indirect approacheshave also been tried. For example, socially isolated and lonelyindividuals, who were provided a free blood pressure station inthe lobby of their innercity single room occupancy hotel, wereintroduced to each other by the nurse and later formed a"Senior Activities Club." In another example, a surplusfood distribution service, that required individuals to worktogether to get their food, produced new friendships (117). Reducing Parental Neglect Parents whose children failed to maintain gains after parenteducation or family therapy are often socially isolated andsubject to seemingly insurmountable daily problems (49). Anexperimental program--with weekly follow-up sessions withisolated parents, to discuss environmental problems that affectedhow parents saw their children's behavior--reduced maternalcriticisms of children, negative responses by children tomothers, and child problem behaviors (170). When the weeklydiscussions stopped, however, the negative interactions resumed. In a more comprehensive program for low SES parents believedby Child Protective Services to be at high risk for child abuseor neglect, Project 12-Ways held meetings with parents in theirhomes (95). Treatment goals were developed and, as needed,behavioral training was provided in stress reduction,assertiveness, self-control, leisure time planning, maritalcounseling, and job finding. Social support groups, alcoholtreatment referral, homemakers, physicians, and mental healthworkers were also involved. Parent compliance and involvement inthis 5- to 6-month program were high. Twenty months aftertreatment, only 2 percent of Project 12-Ways parents abused orneglected their children, while 10 percent of a nonprogramcomparison group did. Families on the verge of having children placed in foster-care, group homes, or psychiatric hospitals can benefit fromfamily preservation programs. Children have fewer behavioral andacademic problems when they are raised by birth-parents in safehomes (130). Thus, the goal of a family preservation counselor isto help the family out of the crisis and learn how to retain thechild safely at home. The interventions are typically intensiveand brief--for example, a counselor is available for meetings inthe home 24 hours a day, 7 days a week, for about 6 weeks. Thecounselor deals with any relevant problems, helping the familyclarify values, set goals, and solve problems, and helps connectfamily members with community resources (see box 8-3). Many families, especially those with substance abuseproblems, need more prolonged help. A family support program thatprovides such longer term support is Camden House, in theRavendale section of Detroit, Michigan. A rundown house waspurchased, renovated, and made the center of an outreach anddrop-in program for about 10 local families with multipleproblems that included substance abuse, lack of skills, chronicunemployment, early pregnancy, and crime. After staff had workedwith the families for one to two years, taking one problem at atime and actively mentoring the parents, six out of 10 of theoriginal parents were out of the Camden House program, drug-free,trained and employed, and safely and responsibly raising theirchildren. SCHOOLS AND PEERS Millions of school-age youth in the United States experimentwith alcohol, tobacco, and other drugs annually, often(especially with alcohol) in ways that can cause overdose deaths,accidental injuries or deaths, and permanent impairments. Manyschool-age youth continue to use substances and later developlong-term addictions. To address these substance abuse problems,schools provide the most important settings for reaching youngpeople with standardized, broadly applied educational andpreventive messages. Because school-age youth are especially likely to initiatethe use of alcohol and other drugs, much of the research hasfocused on use, rather than on abuse and dependency. Suchresearch is nevertheless relevant to an understanding of abuseand dependency, since use is a precondition and contributor toabuse and dependency and even experimental use can be harmful.For example, nearly half of all youth who experiment withcigarettes develop long-term smoking habits, and alcohol andmarijuana use by youth with no chronic problems still contributesto highway deaths, crime, and violence. This section summarizesresults from an analysis of survey research on the causes ofschool-age substance use and discusses school-based preventionprogramming. Analysis of Survey Research on Causes of School-Age SubstanceUse OTA commissioned a review of the survey research literatureon school-aged substance use that compiled, classified, andexamined 9,930 statistical analyses from 242 separate studies.This is by far the most extensive systematic examination of thisbody of research conducted so far. Most of the studies dealt withschool-based populations, but some focused on school-age armyrecruits, dropouts, children of alcoholics, and individualsinvolved in clinics. The studies reported statisticalrelationships between substance use and its postulated causes.Statistical findings from the study reports were sorted into 11major categories and 50 subcategories (see table 8-2), and thenanalyzed to identify strong, moderate, and weak statisticalrelationships, as well as those that had been insufficientlystudied. Characteristics of Database The studies tended to focus on so-called gateway substances,with tobacco, alcohol, and marijuana analyses accounting for 82percent of the completed analyses (see figure 8-1). Cocaine,inhalants, heroin, and prescription drugs, which have recentlyreceived extensive social attention, have been relatively ignoredby quantitative researchers to date; none of these lattercategories of substance use accounted for more than 5 percent ofthe analyses in the research reports examined. Gateway drugs areindeed important, since they may lead some individuals to laterabuse. Nevertheless, the literature has gaps. Inhalants, forinstance, may well be one of the most commonly used and abusedsubstances among some youth, but they have received almost noattention from survey researchers. Although the primary measures were of use, not abuse, thedatabase included some measures of alcohol abuse (e.g., drunkdriving and impairment from alcohol use). Abuse of cocaine,heroin, and analgesics was not measured. The percentages ofanalyses in the database for each of the 11 major types ofindependent variables is displayed (see figure 8-2). The types ofindependent variables most studied were personality, use byothers, and cognitive factors (including attitudes, beliefs, andvalues). Results of Analysis After being sorted into the 11 major categories and 50subcategories, the average of all the correlations in eachsubcategory was calculated. Then, each subcategory was ranked byits average correlation and the rankings were divided into threegroups, defined by ranges of correlations: primary (withcorrelations over .30), secondary (with correlations betweenabout .20 and .30), and tertiary (with correlations under about.20) (see figure 8- 3). Primary correlates The four variables that dominate as correlates of andpossible contributors to substance use are: 1) prior andconcurrent use of substances, 2) substance use by peers andfriends, 3) perceived peer attitudes about substance use, and 4)offers to use substances. The prominence of prior and concurrentuse is consistent with the reinforcing nature of substance useitself. The prominence of the other three variables emphasizesthe importance of the social environment in contributing to andreinforcing substance use among school-age youth. Secondary correlates Of the 15 variables judged to be of secondary importance,seven are social variables: 1) susceptibility to peer pressure,2) resistance skills, 3)??perception of social pressure to usesubstances, 4)? beliefs that such pressure can be effectivelyhandled, 5) beliefs about social consequences of use, 6)bondedness (especially to school), and 7) peer groupcharacteristics. With the exception of parent attitudes aboutsubstance use, other parental variables--such as parentalsupervision, monitoring, and relations--are notably missing asprimary or secondary correlates. Tertiary correlates Of the 38 variables found to have no more than a minor rolein substance use, 10 were included in at least 100 of thecorrelational analyses in the database for this review. They are:1) substance use by parents, 2) personality traits, 3)intelligence, 4) social personality traits, 5) parentalrelations, 6) affect, 7) participation in structured activities,8) bonding with the peer group, 9) beliefs about healthconsequences of using substances, and 10) self-esteem. Variables requiring further study Several of the secondary and tertiary variables in thestudies reviewed here were insufficiently examined to allowgeneral conclusions to be drawn. However, they may later prove tobe useful to the field. For example, religious affiliation andthe development of substance use-specific values, while notextensively studied as separate variables, both address issuesrelated to social norms and influences that have often been foundto be associated with substance use; thus, an association betweenthese two variables and the onset of substance use might beexpected. Also, availability may prove to be important,especially if it is defined in future studies more broadly (e.g.,as physical and social availability, as discussed in ch. 5)rather than as potential availability (that is, how easy itappears to be to get a substance, if motivated), as many currentsurveys define it. Preventive Interventions Schools can seek to prevent substance use and abuse throughcurriculum-based drug prevention programs and through other, morenovel approaches, such as school-based clinics, studentassistance programs, and holistic environmental interventions.School-based prevention efforts have been hampered, however, by alack of good evaluation data on the most widely marketed programsand by insufficient information about and dissemination of themore promising programs. Numerous studies of the effectiveness of curriculum-baseddrug prevention programs have been completed and reviewed (67).Studies of prevention programs focusing on tobacco have beenextensively reviewed (16,20,54,58,94,132,155) and alcohol studieshave been reviewed several times (62,64,102). Reviews ofschool-based prevention curricula that specifically targetmarijuana or cocaine do not exist. However, several reviews haveexamined studies of programs designed to prevent the use ofmultiple substances (7,25,102,131,156). Even these reviews,however, typically focus primarily on tobacco and alcohol. Effectiveness of Drug Abuse Resistance Education Program Three merchandised curriculum programs have captured asizable share of the prevention program market: DARE (Drug AbuseResistance Education); Quest: Skills for Living; and Here'sLooking at You 2000. Of these, evaluations only of DARE have beenreported in sufficient numbers to allow conclusions to be drawn. The DARE program is delivered in schools by uniformed policeofficers who have been trained in any of five regional trainingcenters. It was designed by the Los Angeles, California, UnifiedSchool District, which borrowed from research-based programsdeveloped in the early 1980s. DARE is delivered annually to about5 million students in all 50 States, at a total cost of about $50million (an average annual cost of about $10 per student) (93).DARE is thus one of the better funded drug prevention programs inschools. One research team examined 17 published and unpublishedevaluations of DARE (53). For the 11 studies that met minimalstandards of methodological rigor, the average reductions insubstance use were very small. Use among control schools and DAREschools was roughly equal. The few studies that were longitudinalfound neither short-term nor long-term reductions. DARE has important strengths, including favorable reactionsamong students who have participated in DARE programs, widespreadpolitical support, substantial funding, uniformly reportedimprovements in school-police relations, highquality of programimplementation, and expert marketing. However, these strengthshave not guaranteed that DARE is always effective as a drugprevention program. A scientific advisory group has beenestablished to review research and evaluation of the DARE programand to consider changes in the curriculum. The General Accounting Office (GAO) estimated that aboutone-fourth of the funds given to the States and local schoolsunder the Drug-Free School and Communities Act went towardpurchasing and delivering school curricula (163). However, widelyadopted curriculum packages (such as Quest: Skills for Living;Here's Looking at You 2000; Project Adventure; BABES; ProjectCHARLIE; and Children Are People) have presented no adequateevaluation results that allow program effectiveness to be judged.Evaluations conducted to date have been primarily short-termreviews for dissertations and theses, and they lack interpretablebehavioral end-points. Given the widespread dissemination ofthese curricula, quality evaluation studies would be important. Conclusions About Curriculum-Based Prevention in Schools Curriculum-based drug prevention efforts to date can becharacterized as showing promise (67,156), but critics point outthat the effectiveness of these programs, especially those thatare being commercially marketed, has not yet been proven and thatsignificant difficulties remain (102). Some of these aremethodological difficulties intrinsic to all field trialresearch, while others relate to the possibly intrinsiclimitations of curriculum approaches when used alone. Individualstudies suggest that curriculum-based prevention programs in theschools may ultimately be proven to be effective for preventingsubstance use among some youth, especially when used ascomponents in more comprehensive substance use preventionefforts. However, school-based prevention technologies currentlyin use have not been refined and tested enough to demonstratetheir effectiveness for reducing substance use for students ingeneral, and especially not for multiproblem youth, who are athigher risk of substance abuse. Clearly, for DARE and for theother major school-based curriculum prevention programs,resources must be set aside to properly evaluate program results. Noncurricular Approaches to School-Based Prevention Curriculum-based efforts have dominated the field, largelybecause they are relatively simple to understand, implement, andreplicate, and because methods to evaluate them have becomestandardized. However, curriculum-based prevention programs havenot been demonstrated to be effective, and several noncurricularapproaches have recently emerged, including student assistanceprograms, school-based clinics, and more holisticschool-community collaborations and alterations of psychosocialenvironments in schools. These approaches have been evaluatedonly rarely, but interest in them has been growing. For example,although student assistance programs remain largely unevaluated,they accounted for about half of the spending, under the Drug-Free Schools and Communities Act, in six recently evaluated urbanschool districts (163). Student assistance programs try to identify substance-usingstudents early on and then provide social support, build skillsfor dealing with life problems, or refer to treatment, asappropriate. Peers often help as crisis managers, small groupfacilitators, and referral agents, while adults often act asprogram facilitators and counselors. Programs typically counselstudents who are children of alcoholics, who use alcohol or drugsabusively, and who are performing poorly at school. Programs canalso help parents address their children's needs. Only three evaluations of student assistance programs werefound by OTA for this review. Two focused on process issues only(89,118), while one addressed program outcomes (90). The outcomestudy focused on interventions for students in six residentialfacilities, including a locked correctional facility. Althoughthe sites are atypical for student assistance programs, theprogram otherwise resembled student assistance programs inschools. The outcome study found that marijuana and tobacco usedeclined among program participants in five of the sixfacilities. Alcohol use declined in half of the sites, whilealcohol use in two sites remained unchanged and in one site roseslightly. The declines in use were observed at about nine and 15months after participation in the program. Although these resultsare promising, one study (especially a study conducted innonschool settings) cannot support general conclusions about theeffectiveness of student assistance programs in schools. Many schools, either directly or through community agencies,are bringing services into schools to help deal with social andhealth problems that are often interrelated, such as depression,violence, substance use, and sexually transmitted diseases.School-based clinics and youth service centers are being set upto provide comprehensive and integrated health and socialservices. This new wave of programming has been supported byState governments, local school districts, and privatefoundations. School-based clinics have been developing in response togrowing poverty, widespread lack of insurance, and increases inhealth and social problems among youth. One study indicates thatthe percent of adolescents defined as living in poverty increasedfrom 15 percent in 1979 to 19 percent in 1986 (22). Not all youthliving in poverty are covered by Medicaid or other healthinsurance, and millions of other youth (e.g., in near-poor orrecently unemployed families) also lack health insurance.Violence, teen pregnancy, and substance use and abuse remain highor are increasing in many communities, and these problems oftenrequire direct one-on-one medical or social interventions, ifthey are to have a chance of being resolved. Self-referral and other data suggest that school-basedclinics are providing health care and social support. Forexample, a survey of 306 such clinics in 33 States and PuertoRico (22) found that about half the visits were for medicalproblems, such as injuries and illnesses, with 40 percent of thevisits for counseling and 10 percent for birth control suppliesor counseling about reproductive issues more generally. Noevaluations seem yet to have focused on the effectiveness ofschool-based clinics for assisting with the treatment andprevention of substance use and abuse. School-based clinicsperhaps should not focus primarily on these problems, but asclinics expand in numbers questions will naturally and morefrequently arise about their role in addressing substance use andrelated problems. Several notable collaborations between schools and othercommunity agencies and resources have been supported and, atleast in part, studied. For example, the Community PartnershipProgram, administered by the Center for Substance AbusePrevention, has supported more than 250 local partnerships forthe prevention of substance use and abuse, with over 60 percentactively involving schools as coalition members. Each site musthave a local evaluator that will monitor primarily programactivities, and a national evaluation to monitor programactivities and outcomes has begun. The local evaluations areexpected to vary widely, in part because uniform, acceptedstandards for community-wide program evaluation have yet to bedeveloped. Outcome findings are expected by 1997. The Midwest Prevention Project (116) provides and studiesschool-based interventions in the greater Kansas City, Missouri,metropolitan area and in Marion County (Indianapolis), Indiana.Due to constraints in the study design, the evaluation results todate speak directly only to the impact of the school-basedcurricular interventions; the impact of community organization,parental, and media components cannot be evaluated. Nonetheless,this approach suggests the potential for communities to supportschool- based prevention efforts. Cities-in-Schools is a national nonprofit organizationdevoted to preventing students from dropping out, throughpartnerships among schools, local governments, and businesses.Cities-in-Schools operates in 122 communities in 21 states with384 schools participating in the program. The nationalorganization strives to bring health, social, and employmentservices into schools across the nation, to help youth find jobs,tutors, and counseling and to motivate them to stay in school. Anational staff assists local boards. A prominent person inbusiness presides over each local program, directs fund-raising,and organizes a team of professionals to help potential dropouts.In most programs, a case manager is assigned to each high-riskchild. Beyond these basics, programs vary greatly, focusing on adiversity of prevention and intervention strategies. SeveralCities- in-Schools sites have achieved national attention.Although little concrete evaluation data are available about theeffects of these programs in general or on substance use, themodel appears promising and warrants further study. Changing the social or physical climate in schools may alsohelp reduce substance use and abuse. Future research andevaluation studies could focus on the impacts on substance useand abuse of this and other holistic models, such as open versusclosed campuses, alternative schools, and after- school careprograms. These models may be especially promising for high riskyouth suffering from multiple risk factors and limited protectivefactors, many of which are rooted in problematic (often substanceusing and abusing) homes, neighborhoods, peer groups, and othersubcultures, which cannot easily be influenced by more limitedschool- based prevention approaches alone. WORKPLACES Workplaces can also contribute to and protect against alcoholand drug abuse. This section reviews literature on factors andinterventions associated with substance abuse in the workplace,with a special focus on the role of workplace settingsthemselves. Researchers have investigated the causes of substanceabuse among workers for nearly four decades, and U.S. managementand labor have been concerned about workplace substance abuse forover a century (150,158,159). Alcohol has been the drug moststudied in workplaces and appears to be the drug most commonlyused. Magnitude of Problem The prevalence of substance abuse among the employed remainsinadequately documented, based on a small number of flawedstudies. For American workers more information exists on theextent of alcohol use and dependence (although gaps remain) thanon the use and abuse of illegal substances (57, 68,114). The 1988 National Health Interview Survey found that about 13percent of employed men and 6 percent of employed women werealcohol dependent (68). This nationwide household survey ofalmost 27,000 individuals found that, for both men and women, thepercentage of white-collar workers who drank was greater than thepercentage of blue-collar workers who drank. However, among thosewho drank, blue-collar workers drank more than white-collarworkers. Consistent with an earlier survey in Detroit, Michigan,alcohol-related disorders were also found to be greater amongblue-collar workers, with the rates highest for men who werecraftsmen, laborers, and service workers, and for women who weremachine operators, laborers, and service workers (114). Anotherinvestigator has reported that the rate of on-the- job substanceuse among young men in the 6 months prior to the study was about28 percent (105). Substance abuse contributes to workplace problems, such asaccidents, injuries, absenteeism, turnover, lost productivity,compensation claims, and insurance costs (11). The total cost tothe American economy related to substance abuse has beenestimated to be more than $144 billion a year, with about 60percent due to alcohol abuse and 40 percent due to the abuse ofother drugs (121). Costs to the economy include costs due tomedical care, prevention, law enforcement, and lost productivity.The 1985 National Household Survey on Drug Abuse found thatsubstance-using employees were 3.6 times more likely to haveaccidents than nonusing employees. They had 2.5 times moreabsences of 8 days or more. They were three times more likely tobe tardy than nonusing employees and were 2.2 times more likelyto ask for early dismissal. They requested sick leave three timesas much as nonusing employees. They were five times as likely tofile for worker compensation. The total cost of lost productivitydue to alcohol and other drug abuse has been estimated at morethan $33 billion in 1985 and a little more than $43 billion in1988 (122). Factors Affecting Individuals in Workplaces Substance abuse in workplaces can be affected by nonworkplacefactors and workplace factors. Nonworkplace Factors Early research attributed drinking and other drug problems onthe job to factors outside the workplace. Substance abuse wasseen as a problem brought to the workplace but not caused by theworkplace, and some believed that substance abusers selectedworkplaces where they could conceal their problems. This viewassumed that substance abusers had the knowledge and freedom tochoose jobs on this basis, an assumption unlikely to apply toall, given the limits of education and work experience among manysubstance abusers, especially blue-collar workers (113). In anycase, family and community experiences interact with workplaceexperiences (2), and workers from families and other subgroupsthat drink may find that drinking influences their work lives aswell. As noted earlier, drinking problems are more common amongthose with lower SES, although drinking occurs more frequentlyamong higher SES individuals (31). Workplaces that employ morelower SES employees may therefore be expected to have morealcohol abusers (157). The acceptance of alcohol and other drugs in the largersociety outside the workplace can also influence substance useand abuse in the workplace. This can be seen in the new attitudesin American society toward smoking. Consumers used to be assailedconstantly by advertisements presenting smoking in a positivelight, but are now more informed about its negative effects onhealth. As a result, smoking has been banned from many airplaneflights, restaurants, stores, and public and private workplaces. The availability of alcohol in the local community from whicha work organization derives its employees can also influenceworkplace drinking (157). Higher rates of drinking problems existin communities where alcohol is cheaply and widely available andalcohol outlets remain open for long hours. Workplace Environment Factors Several decades ago, researchers distinguished fourcategories of workplace factors that place employees at risk forexcessive drinking (127). They are: o lack of work visibility, o absence of job structure, o lack of social controls that discourage alcohol use, and o job stress. A more recent review (157) of risk factors internal toworkplace environments identified the following elements: o alienation and powerlessness, o work stress, o structural features of the workplace, o influence of administrative subcultures, o poorly implemented intervention programs, and o union-management conflict. It has also been suggested that individual factors andperceived work situations may be more important for alcohol usethan objective work situations (136). Those with boring androutine jobs, or jobs over which they have little control, may bemore likely to drink (3,76). For example, a study of auto factoryassembly line workers found that 40 percent drank alcohol at work(129). Other research found a consistent relationship betweenpowerlessness and alcohol use, and no evidence that workexperience or social support moderated alcohol use (137). Workplace subcultures, whether administrative oroccupational, may also encourage drinking or the use of otherdrugs at work. Administrative support for heavy drinking canexist throughout the work organization or can be limited tospecific sites or occasions. Subcultures that can support theheavy use of alcohol, but strongly discourage the use of illicitdrugs, are found in the military (28,119). Anecdotal reportssuggest that other occupational settings have encouraged the useof cocaine (e.g., entertainment industry). Although availableresearch does not support the conclusion that workplacesubcultures are the primary cause of substance abuse, there isevidence that at least alcohol problems vary widely according tooccupation (148). Workplaces can offer protective factors as well. For some,the fact of being employed, with the income and stability andstatus that employment can convey, may offer protection againstsubstance use and abuse. If unemployment and underemployment areviewed as risk factors, then employment by itself, at a decentwage in a decent job, may offer protection. In addition, thespecific characteristics of a workplace can be protective. Forexample, the risk factors listed above could be viewed as theextremes on a continuum, the other end of which could be expectedto offer protection. Thus, work visibility, job structure,manageable stress, worker involvement and empowerment, supportiveadministrators, well implemented treatment and preventionprograms, and union-management harmony could be expected to beprotective factors. Interventions Two primary ways of dealing with employee substance abuse andhealth have emerged: traditional employee assistance programs(EAPs), which seek to help employees with identified problems,and health promotion programs, which seek to prevent illness andpromote health (56). Employee Assistance Programs EAPs help employees with personal problems at the employer'sexpense, by providing services directly (through the workorganization) or indirectly (through a provider in the community)(140). In some workplaces, for example, EAPs are located inmedical departments, which generally provide emergency medicalcare and may also provide preventive or rehabilitative care.Medical departments, however, appear to be declining as sites forEAPs (141). EAPs rely on a strategy of constructive confrontation, whichassumes that supervisors or coworkers of substance abusers willhelp refer them to the EAPs. In addition, workers are encouragedto refer themselves to EAPs for assistance. A review of what works in fighting substance abuse in theworkplace stresses that an employee assistance program is a keyto a good workplace program (167). It also recommends a writtendrug-free workplace policy, management and supervisory training,drug testing in workplaces where appropriate (one example ofwhich is when substance abuse may be dangerous to self orothers), and employee education programs focused on substanceabuse. Testing may well prevent substance use and abuse inworkplaces. Some studies suggest that EAPs can be cost-effective forbusiness. The Department of Labor has reported thatemployersgenerally find that for every dollar invested in an EAP, savingsof from $5 to $16 are achieved (167). Other reviews of thelimited evaluations of the economic and other benefits of EAPshave found that health care costs and absenteeism, for example,decline after employees have been served by EAPs (178). However, EAPs have also been criticized in some cases, fortheir inability to reach those at greatest risk, their incompletecoverage of lower status employees, their failures to identifyproblem drinkers early enough, their inadequate handling ofsituation-dependent drinking problems, and their uncertaineffectiveness in rehabilitating problem drinkers (140). Therelative lack of EAPs in medium and small workplaces is animportant constraint on the ability of EAPs to offer morewidespread protection to the employed. Health Promotion Programs Health promotion programs seek to prevent illness and promotewellness through behavior change. For example, they provideinformation and support activities to help individuals increaseexercise, quit smoking, change diets, and manage stress andhypertension. There are several advantages to using such generalworkplace health promotion programs to prevent substance abuse inthe context of promoting positive life-style changes for allemployees. These include: o little or no stigma; o the use of positive, optimistic approaches; o ease in selling to employees and generating enthusiasm;and, o generous corporate financing of health promotion programs(103). The use of health promotion programs to prevent substanceabuse can also present problems, however. For example, preventionhistorically has been one of the lowest priorities for Federalfunding (104). When implemented by businesses, health promotionprograms may inadequately deal with the needs of a particularwork organization's employees, since the programs often come fromoutside and have not been tailored to fit the needs of aparticular group of employees. Decision makers within a workplacemay decide on the basis of intuition, whim, or trendiness to buya health promotion program from the increasing number ofpurveyors of programs (140). Furthermore, many of the proponentsof marketed health promotion programs have failed to adequatelyevaluate their programs. Unfortunately, this has beenparticularly true of activities intended to prevent substanceabuse. Environment-Oriented Approaches to Substance Abuse Prevention A third approach, often associated with Scandinavia, focusesless on changing employee behaviors and more on alteringworkplace factors that influence worker health. The Swedish WorkEnvironment Fund, established in 1972, supports research,workplace innovations, information dissemination, and training toachieve better working environments. Grants that supportoccupational health centers and research programs in Sweden arefinanced through a combination of employer fees, payroll taxes,and government financial assistance. By contrast, the goal of alcohol policy in the workplace inthe United States has for centuries been to change individualdrinking behavior (1). Researchers have recently begun to focuson how the workplace environment influences problem drinking. TheHarvard School of Public Health, jointly funded by the NationalInstitute on Alcohol Abuse and Alcoholism and the Robert WoodJohnson Foundation, is surveying thousands of managers and workgroups in up to 10 large multinational corporations (171). Thestudy will determine corporate and work site patterns ofdrinking, levels of work site drinking problems as they relate toattitudes and practices of management, how corporate cultureaffects managerial behavior and drinking problems in theworkplace, and what role the work group plays in promoting orpreventing problem drinking. RECREATIONAL SETTINGS Recreational and other developmental activities and settingsmay also contribute to the prevention of substance use and abuse,or by their absence increase the risk. Examples of suchrecreational and other developmental activities and settingsinclude Boys and Girls Clubs, Boy and Girl Scouts, organizedsports, cultural activities, and local park and recreationdepartment programs. Organized Activities and Drug Abuse Research on the impact of organized youth activities onsubstance use and abuse is limited, and only a few studies haveaddressed the issue directly, while others have addressed it moreindirectly. One study (which relied extensively on reports from employeesof Boys and Girls Clubs) found that public housing developmentsserved by Clubs had 22 percent less drug activity thandevelopments not served by Clubs. The presence of crack inparticular was 25 percent lower, and even lower in developmentsserved by new Clubs with SMART Moves, a substance abuseprevention program (133). A more extensive investigation has been conducted by theSearch Institute, which has surveyed 180,000 6th through 12thgrade youth in 430 school districts since 1988. Analysis of thedata found that as developmental assets increased (includinginvolvement in music, school team sports, nonsport school-basedcocurricular activities, nonschool clubs or organizations, andchurches) at-risk behaviors decreased, including the use ofalcohol, tobacco, and illicit drugs (12). Specifically, thecorrelations: o tend to be small; o are strongest for tobacco use and weakest for alcohol use;and, o are slightly higher for church involvement than for otheractivities. Involvement in youth programs and activities has been foundto be associated with fewer at-risk behaviors among youth. Onestudy found that higher levels of four youth assets (perceivedpositive school climate, family support, involvement instructured youth activities, and involvement in church orsynagogue) were associated with lower levels of 20 at-riskindicators, contained mainly in eight at-risk domains (alcohol,tobacco, illicit drugs, sexuality, depression/suicide, antisocialbehavior, school, and vehicle safety) (12). High school studentswho listed no assets, for example, reported an average of 5.6at-risk indicators, while students listing all 4 assets reportedonly 1.7 at- risk indicators. A study of different communities found that 55 percent of theyouth in the healthier communities (defined by fewer at- riskbehaviors among youth) were involved in structured activities,whereas only 39 percent of the youth in the least healthycommunities were involved in such activities (19). Qualitative assessments across prevention disciplines supportthese findings. For example, although a review and analysis ofdelinquency, adolescent pregnancy, substance abuse, and schoolfailure and dropout prevention programs did not directlyinvestigate connections between youth development programs andsubstance abuse prevention, its authors concluded that theelements in youth development organizations can play a criticalrole in preventing each of these problem behaviors (48). The Carnegie Council on Adolescent Development has identifiedseveral successful prevention efforts launched by nationalyouth-serving organizations, including the adolescent pregnancyefforts of the Association of Junior Leagues and of Girls, Inc.,and found that participation in such programs was associated withfewer at-risk behaviors (32). The Carnegie Council's Task Forceon Youth Development and Community Programs concluded that, takentogether, current social science theory and field evaluationsprovide a solid rationale for strengthening and expanding therole of community-based programs in promoting healthy adolescentdevelopment, since unsupervised after-school hours represent aperiod of significant risk, with young adolescents standing agreater chance of engaging in substance abuse. Another study tested whether inactivity or boredom wasassociated with substance abuse. It compared adolescents who hadbeen clinically diagnosed as substance abusers with a comparisongroup of nonsubstance abusers, and found that the substanceabusers experienced their leisure activities as more boring, eventhough they had participated in more leisure activities(including such activities as going to concerts and going for adrive). Available leisure activities may, for some youth, fail tosatisfy "their need for optimal arousal," leaving themmore vulnerable to the appeal of drugs (78). Thus, being active does not by itself protect againstsubstance abuse. Some activities, such as those that areunstructured and unsupervised, may even increase the risks ofsubstance use and abuse through association with a wider range ofpeers, some of whom are using substances. In addition, activitiesperceived as boring may not protect against substance use andabuse. More research is needed, to clarify the aspects ofrecreational and other leisure activities that may protectagainst substance use and abuse. Research might profitably focuson whether activities that are supervised, structured, drug-free,empowering, skills- building, self-esteem-promoting, active,shared, and nonboring (or some combination of those) areassociated with lower levels of substance use and abuse. Elements of Notable Programs Several of the most important elements of notable substanceabuse prevention programs are provided by youth developmentprograms as well. These include: o Promoting social and life skills. Programs that relyexclusively on transmitting information about the health, legal,and social risks of substance use and abuse are generallyineffective (79). If, as the author of a recent longitudinalstudy contends, substance use is a symptom rather than a cause ofpersonal and social maladjustment, promoting social andpsychological well-being may help prevent substance abuse (66).Many alcohol and other drug prevention programs focus on thedevelopment of social and life skills, as a way to help youthunderstand their emotions, control their anger, curbaggressiveness, and presumably reduce their inclination to turnto substances (66,166). o Strengthening families. Increasingly, alcohol and otherdrug prevention programs are recognizing and addressing familyfactors. Youth development organizations afford opportunities forinvolving parents in recreational and other nonschool, nonfamilyactivities. o Promoting healthy peer interactions. Several studies haveshown the value of using peers as role models in preventionprograms. One study conducted a meta-analysis of 143 adolescentdrug prevention programs and collapsed prevention programs into 5strategies or types: knowledge only, affective (i.e., addressingfeelings) only, peer programs, knowledge plus affective, andalternatives. Peer programs that highlight peer influences andemphasize skill building were found to be the most successful(156). Peers are often the best positioned to help others buildresistance skills and bring about significant results in reducingsubstance use, as compared to teachers or other adults. Peercounseling and student assistance programs, for example, offerunique opportunities for youth to cope with difficult issues anddevelop skills to resist peer pressure (33). o Indirect and participatory approaches to substance use.Substance prevention programs are more likely to be effective ifthey develop creative ways to reach and connect with theirparticipants. Many programs incorporate lessons concerningsubstance use into activities such as games, theatricalperformances, creative arts, and sports. Some programs avoidstating in their names that they are focusing on substance useprevention, and in this way often attract more youth and precludethem from feeling stigmatized (161). Because youth spend so muchtime in school, where didactic, lecturing approaches so oftenpredominate, these approaches may well be less effective innonschool activities. GAO has recommended that programs engageyouth in activities that are more motivational and participatory,such as support groups, dramatic productions, leadershiptraining, and role- playing (161). o Alternative activities. Communities are beginning to createhealthy, substance-free alternative activities, such as teencenters or drug-free parties, for youth who may feel there isnothing else to do. This alternatives approach grows from theidea that youth who turn to substances to meet certain social andpsychological needs can meet those needs in more positive andhealthy ways without chemicals. In its guide book, PreventionPlus III, CSAP stresses the importance of incentives for youth toparticipate in such alternative activities. At a minimum,activities should reflect the interests and preferences of theyouth involved. A 10-year study with over 500 subjects found thatthe largest percentage (67 percent) of assuredly recoveredsubstance abusers, defined as those who have been clean for fiveyears, used alternative activities to cope with or improve theirmoods (169). However, although it remains a promising strategy,many agree that more substantial research is needed. The elements of notable programs suggest that youthdevelopment organizations may be able to play a greater role inthe prevention of substance abuse. First, they can providespecific information about substances and training in refusalskills. Second, they can address life skills development,emotional issues, and academic remediation. Further, they caninvolve both youth and their families, as well as peers, insettings for collaborative, substance-free interactions. Researchhas shown the importance of building supportive communitiesthrough such networks of social support that can diminishsubstance use and abuse and promote healthy youth development(14,19,133). PLANNING, IMPLEMENTING, AND EVALUATINGCOMMUNITY-WIDE PROGRAMS If substance abuse and addiction problems in a particularcommunity affect individuals via multiple risk and protectivefactors interacting in multiple settings, then efforts to preventthese problems may require multipronged efforts involvingschools, parents, media messages, and other community resources(116). While it is possible that an assessment of problems may becarried out by relatively few individuals, it is extremelyunlikely that the planning, implementation, and evaluation ofcommunity-wide efforts can be achieved without participation ofresidents and leaders throughout the community. Widespreadcoordination and cooperation are intrinsic to community-wideefforts. To help achieve such community-wide coordination andcooperation, several different types of community coalitions havebeen created. The CSAP has studied the ability of 7 pilot testcommunities, under Community Partnership grants, to gatherinformation on 15 community-wide indicators of alcohol and otherdrug abuse (see table 8-3). Some of these indicators are directlyrelated to and measure the extent of substance abuse andaddiction among subpopulations in a community (e.g., number ofdrug positive urine samples from pregnant women at time ofdelivery). Some of the indicators measure the extent of behaviorsor outcomes that may be directly related to substance abuse(e.g., number of single vehicle nighttime accidents and number ofdeaths due to alcohol and other drugs). Some of the CSAPindicators relate to community activity settings, such asworkplaces and schools. CSAP has recently supported, through the CommunityPartnership program and the High-Risk Youth program, the use ofnonquantitative techniques to gain insights into substance abuseand addiction and related problems in communities. Thisinformation can be garnered by ethnographers and citizeninformants, who can report on the values, attitudes, purposes,behaviors, and experiences of individuals in the subcultures ofcommunities. The Robert Wood Johnson Foundation has funded 13 communitycoalitions in its "Fighting Back" program to reducesubstance abuse and addiction. About 600 coalitions now belong toa national organization, Community Anti-Drug Coalitions ofAmerica (CADCA). Some coalitions have been formed to addressother health and social issues, including the ASSIST and COMMITcommunity tobacco control programs, funded by the NationalInstitutes of Health, and the Planned Approach to CommunityHealth (PATCH) program, funded by the Centers for Disease Controland Prevention to encourage local coalitions for community healthplanning and implementation (29). HUD now has funds to supportCommunity Coalitions Against Crime, which also address substanceabuse and addiction. And CSAP has supported numerous activitiesconducted by approximately 250 coalitions through its CommunityPartnership program (see table 8-4). A recent review of some of the Community Partnershipsrevealed the wide range of activities they have so farimplemented, including general prevention programs, publiceducation, alternative activities, community organizing andempowerment, advocacy for policy change, and other communityactivities. Although coalitions have not been extensively evaluated asyet, and although the evaluations that are now in process willnot produce outcome results for several years, there is reason tobelieve that community coalitions offer promise forcommunity-wide efforts to prevent substance abuse and addiction.First, as documented by this report, the factors contributing tosubstance abuse and addiction are multiple and interactive.Second, these factors interact in subcultures and communityactivity settings that can encourage or inhibit substance abuseand addiction and are widely dispersed. Thus, especially incommunities severely impacted by these problems, multiple effortsaddressing multiple factors in multiple settings may be required.A recent report from the General Accounting Office concluded that"preliminary research results indicated that acommunity-based approach may hold promise in preventing druguse," and went on to emphasize the need for comprehensiveevaluations of such efforts (162). Community coalitions could make use of the framework in thisreport to develop plans for preventive interventions addressingtargeted populations in selected community activity settings.Building on a systematic quantitative and nonquantitativeassessment of needs, a coalition could identify optionalpreventive interventions that address selected populations andsettings, and then phase them in as resources permit. However,some community coalitions may need additional support andtechnical assistance to help them resolve conflicts, formconsensus on goals and plans, and sustain cooperative,coordinated efforts that are subject to more rigorous evaluationsand midcourse corrections. Each community coalition needs to takea critical look at what works and what does not work, and needsto be flexible enough to try promising and proven analytical andprogrammatic technologies, even if they are somewhat new to thecoalition. SUMMARY This chapter has reviewed research on factors andinterventions relevant to the onset and prevention of substanceuse, abuse, and addiction in the four principal communityactivity settings--homes and families, schools and peers,workplaces, and recreational and other community settings.Research indicates that families may influence whether familymembers, especially (but not limited to) the young, initiatesubstance use and progress to abuse and dependency, and can bethe target of a wide range of increasingly tested preventiveinterventions that can help family members resist the use ofsubstances. Similarly, schools, especially through peer groupnorms and behaviors related to substance use, can also beimportant locations for the onset of substance use (includingalcohol use) and for preventive interventions, especially thosethat focus on social influences, including peers. Factors inworkplaces, although less studied, can also contribute to andprotect against substance use and abuse, and workplaceinterventions that focus on individuals and environments provideopportunities for prevention. Finally, an emerging literature onthe role of recreational settings and activities, especially foryouth, suggests that the availability of attractive andcompelling substance-free activities can play a role indissuading youth from becoming heavily involved in the use andabuse of substances. BOX 8-1: Example of Short-Term Thinking Eighteen-year-oldLyle is a senior at an inner-city highschool. In four weeks, hewill receive his high schooldiploma. In six months, he willbecome a father.Lyle has a significant history of delinquentbehavior,including assault, drug dealing, and grand larceny. Hehasrecently withdrawn from a gang because "it's gottencrazyand it's gotten really out of hand" and "I don'twant todie." However, he adds, "I still hang with thefellows andstuff like that."Because he "feels likeworking," Lyle is looking forward togetting out of highschool. He has no plans for college,which he regards as "toomuch hassle, to tell you thetruth." His plans for the futureare vague--to "work, makemoney, you know"--but he triesnot to think about it muchbecause, "you know, you mightdie." For Lyle, "the wayeverything's happening now, youcan't really think about thefuture...the way things happen now,you can get shot comingout of your house. You can be shot in thewindow, you know."Lyle is a daily smoker of ten or morecigarettes, a habit hedescribes as "like a everydayroutine--whenever I can gettime to smoke one, I'll smokeone." He drinks a couple beersalmost daily, and also smokesmarijuana "most likely" everyday.But Lyle avoids harderdrugs, like cocaine, because "I don'twant to killmyself." By way of explanation, he adds "I'drather killmyself slowly than fast."SOURCE: H. Stauber, "I've GotPlenty of Cells to Waste:"Perceptions of danger andinvulnerability among reckless-behaving adolescents, Unpublishedpaper, Harvard GraduateSchool of Education, in progress. BOX 8-2: Janice Janice, a 28-year-old, white, married female,was inoutpatient treatment for bulimia nervosa, abinge-purgepattern of eating that began when she was 18 yearsold. Shealso had an intermittent history of alcohol abusedatingfrom midadolescence. Janice appeared to be well-motivatedintreatment. She used the psychoeducational approach taught byhertherapist to increase her knowledge of how her binge-eating andmoodiness were related to her restricted dailycaloric intake. Shemade progress quickly, using cognitivebehavioral techniques tochallenge her distortions andunderstand her behavior; she beganto eat consistent mealsin adequate amounts. These changes led toa decrease in herbinge-eating and self-induced vomiting. However,along withthis progress she became increasingly anxious, fearful,andagitated about weight gain (despite the fact that littleornone had occurred). At the same time, she became overwhelmedbythe intensity of the feelings she experienced, was havingbaddreams, and withdrew from her support system in waysthat angeredher friends. She once more resorted toinconsistent meal patterns,dieting, poor nutrition, and--inevitably--binge-eating andvomiting. Her alcohol useincreased.Janice's symptomatologyshifted once she significantlydecreased her bulimic behavior.Instead of dealing witheveryday feelings, behavior, and thoughts,she began torelive memories from her unresolved traumatic past.Thesememories started with vague feelings of uneasiness,whichgrew more intense as she binged less. She then begantoremember her dreams, which, as they came into clearerfocus,caused her to be suspicious of her friends, andparticularlyof the men around her. Janice reported feeling fineoneminute and then very frightened the next. Whereas she usedtobe flattered by any male attention, she now felt fearfulwhen menlooked at her. She started to remember multiplesexual assaults inher past, both by persons known to herand by strangers. She feltincreasing urges to suicide, andobserved the reality of herinternal suffering as being "tooawful." As she said,"If this is what recovery is all about,I don't think it'sworth it; I'll take my chances andstruggle with addictions. If Ican't stand that, there'salways suicide."SOURCE: M.P. Root,"Treatment Failures: The Role of SexualVictimization inWomen's Addictive Behavior," AmericanJournal ofOrthopsychiatry, 59(4), 543, 1989. BOX 8-3: Dara Dara (20) was the natural mother of Christina(9 months).Christina was in danger of placement in foster caredue tothe cocaine addiction of her mother. Her father, Matt,wasserving time in jail on a drug charge. Christina'solderbrother, Jason, was placed in foster care priortoHomebuilder involvement. Dara's addiction prevented herfromproperly caring for herself and the children. Dara rentedtheupstairs apartment in her parent's home. Her19-year-oldboyfriend, Brian, spent a great deal of time with herandChristina.I helped Dara find out about drug treatment centersand aschedule for Narcotic Anonymous (N.A.). She missed herfirstdrug evaluation because of having an abortion. She andBrianwent to one N.A. meeting and then missed many days. TheCPScaseworker met with me and Dara and stressed the importanceofher drug recovery. Dara agreed to complete the evaluationas wellas attend N.A. meetings. Initially I accompanied herto the N.A.meetings for moral support. Sometimes Brianwould go and the restof the time her mother would accompanyher. Dara successfullycompleted her drug evaluation andattended regular counselingsessions with a drug counselor.She volunteered for urinalysis,"just to keep her honest."Dara got involved with otheryoung adults in N.A. They wentto eat together and went out todances and movies. She beganassociating with a new peer group.The CPS caseworkerauthorized maximum day-care to be paid for soshe couldattend her meetings and counseling. Dara'smothervolunteered to baby-sit Christina if Dara was withherfriends from N.A.Dara's husband got out of jail and wanted adivorce. Hefiled for custody of both of their children. I helpedDaraarrange for legal aid. She said she was more determinedthanever to "stay straight so she would look good incourt" overthe custody of the children.Dara asked herboyfriend to move out so she could live byherself. She and Briancontinue to stay in contact from timeto time. Dara retainedcustody of Christina. She and Mattagreed on joint custody oftheir son, Jason, and Dara sawhim every other weekend. Shecontinued drug counseling andattending N.A. Her urinalysis alwaystested negative.SOURCE: J. Kinney, D. Haapala, and C. Booth,KeepingFamilies Together, (pp. 22-23) (New York: Aldine DeGruyter,1991)._ CliffSchaffer's Home Page WT02-B01-155IA086-000615-B001-148http://206.61.184.43:80/schaffer/Library/studies/ota/ch4.htm 206.61.184.43 19970122024111 text/html 43656HTTP/1.0 200 OKDate: Wednesday, 22-Jan-97 02:40:52 GMTServer: WebSitePro/1.1f (S/N wpo-0deb)Allow-ranges: bytesContent-type: text/htmlLast-modified: Saturday, 28-Dec-96 06:50:45 GMTContent-length: 43438 CHAPTER 4 - AVAILABILITY TECHNOLOGIES FORUNDERSTANDING AND PREVENTING SUBSTANCE ABUSE AND ADDICTION USGovernment Office of Technology Assessment October 18, 1994 CHAPTER 4 - AVAILABILITY Availability is a precondition for drug abuse and dependency.A person cannot become a drug abuser unless a drug is availableto be used. Drug availability is often thought of as mere physicalpresence of an abusable substance. In addition, however,availability is affected by social norms (social availability),prices (economic availability), and personal values (subjectiveavailability) (see table 4-1). Marketing techniques for bothlicit and illicit drugs can alter social, economic, andsubjective availability, and thus are addressed in this chapter(see box 4-1). A substantial body of literature addressing the relationshipbetween drug availability and drug demand does exist. However,most of this information addresses tobacco and alcohol, ratherthan illicit drugs. In addition to conducting a literature search(primarily of mass media), the Office of Technology Assessment(OTA) contracted with the National Center for Juvenile Justice(NCJJ) to conduct a survey of juvenile probation officers on theperceived availability of drugs and to conduct a workshop onavailability issues (see appendix F for a list of participants). AVAILABILITY Availability is a concept usually reserved for the supply-side of the substance abuse policy equation (i.e., making drugsavailable to supply an already existing demand). However, theproximity of drugs and drug dealers to potential users, and theease with which these substances can be purchased or otherwiseobtained can affect demand, use, and abuse. This is especiallytrue when one considers aggressive marketing efforts bysuppliers, who seek to create or expand the demand for drugs byconvincing potential consumers of the benefits, acceptability,and availability of these substances. While availability is aconcept that applies to the whole range of drugs, most of what weknow about its role in drug use and abuse comes from research inthe arena of alcohol and tobacco abuse (1,9,10,14) (see box 4-2and figure 4-1). Research has shown that when alcohol is more available, theprevalence of drinking, the amount of alcohol consumed, and theheavy use of alcohol all increase (5). Alternatively, theliterature also suggests that physical conditions that restrictalcohol availability reduce rates of alcohol consumption (1). Areview of alcohol-related literature reveals that availabilitycan be conceptualized in four different, yet related categories. Physical Availability Physical availability refers to a basic element--theproximity and accessibility of an abusable substance. Simplelogic dictates that if a substance is absent, it cannot be used.Government interdiction and law enforcement policies target thephysical availability of illicit drugs. Other policies, such aslimitations on the point-of-sale, hours, or age of purchasers,target the physical availability of other abusable drugs, such astobacco and alcohol products. Responses to the OTA survey of juvenile probationadministrators indicated that respondents perceived two ways inwhich physical availability is increased: through contaminationby outsiders (e.g., youth gangs, tourists, foreigners) bringingdrugs into the community, and through proximity to a source ofdrugs or alcohol. Gangs and organized drug trafficking were mentioned often byrespondents as reasons for increases in the availability ofdrugs. Respondents from all over the country, representing bothrural and urban areas, registered concerns about gangs and theirrole in marketing and trafficking drugs. A respondent fromCanton, Mississippi, for example, attributed the increase in drugavailability simply to "gang leaders from California."A respondent from Waterbury, Connecticut, was more explicit aboutthe age and ethnicity of the gang influences, attributing theobserved increase in drugs to the "emergence of gangactivity for the 12-to-15-year-old age group, particularly in theHispanic and black ethnic groupings." A respondent fromPaducah, Kentucky, said that the "increase in drugs has beenfrom gangs entering the community from Memphis, Tennessee,Arkansas, and Chicago, Illinois." The respondent fromDavenport, Iowa, attributed the increase to attempts by"Chicago gang members to establish crack markets in QuadCities--lots of arrests of Chicago residents includingjuveniles." Even cities with an established history of youthgangs identified gangs as being responsible for increases indrugs. For example, a respondent from Philadelphia, Pennsylvania,attributed the observed increase to the fact that "gangparticipation has become increasingly sophisticated." However, gangs were not the only phenomena associated withincreasing the physical availability of drugs and alcohol. Manyrespondents were concerned with the potential for contaminationdue to proximity to areas thought to be established drug marketsor through proximity to the means for widespread drugdistribution (e.g., major highways and roads, prisons). Physical availability is necessary but not solely responsiblefor drug use. For example, drugs often are physically availablebut are not always used. Also, seeking to prevent or reduce druguse solely by eliminating or reducing physical availability maybe doomed to failure, since it has proven to be very difficult tokeep drugs out of communities. So although the concept ofphysical availability is important, it is limited, both as acause and a cure to drug use and abuse. Economic Availability Economic availability may be increased when a person hasaccess to surplus income or the costs of drugs are low, illegaldrug sales are a key component of the local economy, or the priceper unit of a drug or drugs in general is reduced. In describingthe difference between "private" and"flagrant" drug markets, one article specified some ofthe dimensions of the changing economics of addiction: If cigarettes were sold only by the carton and whiskey onlyby the case, the effect would be to decrease the totalconsumption of tobacco and whiskey. Presumably, few people wouldstart smoking cigarettes if the first experimental purchase werea $20 carton rather than a $1 pack. Similarly, fewer poor peoplewould drink if they were required to buy whiskey by the case. Asimilar effect would, in all likelihood, hold true if open airand flagrant drug markets were eliminated (3). In addition to overall conditions, economic availability ofall substances can be affected by the pricing of products. Forlicit products such as alcohol and tobacco, economic availabilityis also affected by taxes levied by federal, state, and localauthorities. In 1989, federal excise taxes on tobacco, alcoholicbeverages, and motor fuels raised $24.4 billion in revenue--about 2.5 percent of total federal revenues (11). Excisetaxes--taxes on specific products--while representing a smallpart of total taxes, are an important consideration in theeconomic availability of licit substances. Excise taxes are seen by many as having three impacts: o to raise revenue for government programs; o to make certain harmful substances less affordable and,hence, less used and abused; and o to cover societal costs that accrue from the use of varioussubstances (e.g., environmental costs from the use of gasoline,health costs resulting from smoking and drinking). Whether taxation of alcoholic beverages and tobacco productsis an appropriate means of reducing societal costs caused bytheir use is a continuing public debate. Some argue that thepublic health costs and other external costs are so significantas to justify substantial excise taxes. Others counter that suchtaxes are regressive--impacting the poor more than the rich--andreduce the satisfaction experienced by millions of sensibledrinkers without necessarily reducing the harm caused byexcessive drinkers (8). Social Availability Social availability refers to those factors within thecommunity conducive to drug use. One study explored alternativeexplanations for reported declines in cocaine use among highschool seniors, using questionnaire data from annual nationwidesurveys conducted from 1976 to 1988 (2). Results of this analysisindicated that although lifestyle factors showed strong linkswith the use of marijuana and cocaine, these factors had notdeveloped trends in ways that could account for declines in theuse of either drug. Reported physical availability of either drughad not been reduced. Instead, increases in perceived risks anddisapproval appear to have contributed substantially to therecent declines in the use of marijuana and cocaine. The studyconcluded that it was important to lower demand by reducingsocial availability, as opposed to trying to reduce supply byreducing physical availability. Increasingly, grass roots community action groups are workingto diminish both the subjective and social domains ofavailability. These efforts usually entail developing andpresenting public awareness and fact-based education to consumersand potential consumers, decreasing community tolerance for druguse while increasing collective pride in the community, anddeveloping or otherwise demonstrating alternatives to substanceuse and abuse. Subjective Availability Subjective availability encompasses individual differences inhow people perceive their access to substances. For example, anindividual may choose to use one type of abusable substance, butnot another. Or, an individual may choose to use a drug (e.g.,cocaine), but only in certain forms (i.e., a person may choose tosnort a line of cocaine but refuse to smoke or inject it). Theperson who refuses to use illicit drugs has interjected his orher personal values in a way to make illicit drugs unavailable,even if they are physically and economically available. One reviewer identified four components of subjectiveavailability as it relates to alcohol: 1) willingness to go outof one's way to purchase alcohol, 2) perceived convenience ofbuying alcohol, 3) discomfort about buying alcohol, and4)?importance of the price of alcohol. Subjective and socialavailability were demonstrated to have direct influences onalcohol consumption, and subjective and social aspects ofavailability can mediate and outweigh the influence of physicalavailability (1). Subjective availability is likely to increase when anindividual holds attitudes or values favorable toward use; livesin a community that condones, or even celebrates, drug use; andhas ready access to drugs that are highly valued, particularly ifthose agents are addictive. ARE DRUGS READILY AVAILABLE? A number of surveys exists for measuring drug use (seechapter 2). In addressing the question of whether drugs arereadily available, several measures exist (e.g., marketingfigures related to alcohol and tobacco sales, tallies of illegaldrugs seized by law enforcement authorities). In addition toquantitative measures of drug use, many people perceive variousdrugs to be widely available. In an attempt to measure theseanecdotal perceptions, OTA surveyed juvenile probationadministrators randomly selected from a database maintained byNCJJ. The purpose of the survey was to identify communities thathave experienced a sudden, observable change in the abuse ofdrugs or alcohol in the past 12 months and to collect preliminarydata about the events and circumstances leading to the change inabuse. Such anecdotal evidence could be gathered from a number ofgroups; OTA chose to survey juvenile justice officials because oftheir involvement in drug issues and the availability of anationwide database of such officials who could be accessed. Responses were received from 246 juvenile justiceadministrators across 38 States. The data provide a glimpse atsome of the drug and alcohol availability issues being addressedby juvenile courts and probation departments across the UnitedStates. Seven findings resulted from the survey: o Most respondents consider substance abuse to be a seriousproblem in their communities. Using a scale of 1 (not serious) to10 (very serious), the respondents, on average, rated the problemof substance abuse among juveniles in their communities at 7.4.In addition, 85.8 percent of the respondents rated substanceabuse seriousness at six or above. o Almost half of the respondents indicated a dramaticincrease in availability of drugs and/or alcohol in theircommunities. A total of 46.7 percent of the survey respondentsreported a dramatic increase in the availability of drugs and/oralcohol in their communities. Some 50.8 percent of therespondents indicated "no dramatic changes" inperceived availability of drugs and/or alcohol. Only 2.4 percentindicated a dramatic decrease in availability. o Factors affecting physical availability (i.e., sales and/ordistribution of drugs) were selected most often and were ratedhighest in terms of increasing availability of drugs. Given anopportunity to select and rate commonly cited reasons forincreased availability of drugs and alcohol, the respondentsselected items that were strongly associated with the sales anddistribution of drugs and alcohol (see table 4-2). o Crack cocaine and cocaine were much more likely than otherdrugs to show dramatic increases in availability. Respondentswere given an opportunity to report whether they had noticed achange (ranging from a dramatic decrease to a dramatic increase)in the availability of a range of drugs, including alcohol. Crack(24.5 percent) and cocaine (17.8 percent) had the highestpercentage of respondents indicating a "dramaticincrease" in availability. The next closest were inhalantsat 14.6 percent (see table 4-3). o Economic conditions and the perceived lack of realopportunities for many youths were frequently cited as factorscontributing to the increased availability of drugs in manycommunities (see box 4-3). o Survey respondents listed several factors contributing to asense of social availability, including lack of parental/guardiansupervision, consequences for alcohol and drug offenses,alternative activities, as well as portrayals of alcohol and druguse by the mass media as a glamorous and healthy activity (seebox 4-4). o Substance abuse prevention and early intervention effortswere rated highest as important community responses to increasesin the availability of drugs and alcohol. Over 80 percent ofrespondents agreed that an increase in prevention andintervention efforts was an important response to an increase inthe availability of drugs. Trailing behind prevention and earlyintervention were increased law enforcement (68.4 percent),increased treatment (68.2 percent), and stiffer judicialpenalties (68.0 percent). Respondents were also asked to rate therelative effectiveness of the listed responses to availability ona scale of 1 (not effective) to 10 (very effective). Preventionand early intervention (6.4 percent) was rated the highest interms of perceived effectiveness, but not much higher than lawenforcement (6.2 percent), increased treatment (6.0 percent), andstiffer judicial penalties (6.2 percent) (see table 4-4). MARKETING Standard marketing strategies used to increase consumption oflegal goods are used in equally effective ways to increaseconsumption of illicit drugs. Marketing refers to efforts byindividuals interested in the sale or trade of a product tomaintain or increase sales by maintaining market shares andopening new markets. Marketing includes efforts to increase theperceived availability of a product or products by enhancing thesense of both subjective and social availability in prospectiveconsumers. To the extent that those efforts are successful, thenpurveyors of consumer products will attempt to make the supplymatch the demand (physical availability) at a cost that maximizesboth sales to consumers (economic availability) and profits tothe sellers. Illegal Drugs Illegal drugs are marketed aggressively in the United States.Some of the strategies for marketing illicit drugs are verysimilar to those strategies for marketing licit products.Sometimes the distinction between licit and illicit products isdifficult to determine. Take, for example, the case of so-calledhead shops. Drug paraphernalia are items sold specifically topromote the preparation, manufacture, or marketing of drugs. Headshops may sell a wide variety of products that are oftenassociated with specific drugs, for example: o Stash cases, rolling machines, pipes, bongs (marijuana). o Bottles, concert kits, brass straws, spoons (cocaine). o Glass pipes, vials, stems, screens, shaker bottles (crackcocaine). o Testing kits, scales, adulterants (heroin). o Canisters, balloons, tanks (inhalants). Head shops represent the most shrewd form of pro-drugmarketing by targeting mostly young customers and providing thetechnology and products required to increase the ability of usersto procure, prepare, hide, and ingest drugs. Despite Federallegislation prohibiting the sale of drug paraphernalia (18 USCAp4), heads shops continue to flourish. These shops can avoid theintention of the law because the definition of what constitutesdrug paraphernalia is ambiguous and open to interpretation. Headshop owners will simply emphasize the legitimate use of theirproducts. For example, they may sell a scale designed to weighdrugs as a product to weigh food for dieting purposes.Specifically, head shops contribute to the drug abuse problem by: o sending a double message--if drugs are so bad, why is drugparaphernalia sold openly? o operating, in some cases, in the guise of candy stores,exposing children to drug paraphernalia and stimulating curiosityabout drugs; o serving to facilitate the use, marketing, and sale ofdrugs; o selling items designed as conversation pieces which serveto glamorize drug use; and o becoming hubs for drug abusers, indirectly serving toincrease crime in the neighborhoods in which they operate. Another example of a marketing strategy used for licitsubstances and now being adapted for illicit substances is totalmarketing, which consists of four basic strategies-- promotion,product, price, and place--to maximize theexposure of a productin a positive light to the most likely consumer groups (4). A key component of total marketing is promotion, oradvertising particular product lines to appeal to particularsubpopulations of the consuming public. Promotion is a standardpractice in the marketing of legitimate products-- it is also avery powerful force for manipulating consumer habits. Promotion includes activities like advertising andsponsorship of sporting and entertainment events (7). For illicitdrugs, promotional activities may include sponsoring a party inwhich the illegal drug is dispensed free or at a dramaticdiscount along with other attractions (e.g., sex, drugparaphernalia) (15). Total marketing also entails the development of a productline that can be targeted to subpopulations within the largerconsumer community. For example, alcohol and tobaccomanufacturers will produce an array of products targeted atseveral consumer groups--premium beers for one group, winecoolers for another, rugged masculine cigarettes for one group,thin feminine cigarettes for another. Similarly, purveyors ofillegal drugs have begun to develop product lines--powderedcocaine for one group, crack cocaine for another. The use ofbrand names is one technique used by marketers to establish aniche in the larger market, which is one reason people becomeunwilling participants in the marketing wars between Coke andPepsi or Visa and American Express or even Bud and Bud Light. A great deal of uniformity exists in the price, quantity, andquality of drugs sold in the same city, especially in the sameneighborhood or street market. As a result, a dealer willoccasionally try to capture a larger share of the market byincreasing the weight or strength of the product and applying abrand name for recognition (3). In Washington, DC, for example, brand name heroin is soldunder the name of "Smurf," "Mr. T,""Brown Wrapper," and "Black Poison."Phencyclidine (PCP) is occasionally sold under the brand name"Hinkley" (after John Hinkley, the man who shot RonaldReagan), "Gofer" (a reference to a television characteron the "Love Boat," which is a popular street name forPCP), and "Keys to St. E's" (a reference to a localmental institution). Crack cocaine is sometimes hawked under thebrand names of "Conan," "007," and"Baseball." Pricing is the process of assigning a retail cost to eachitem in a given product-line that matches the ability of thetargeted subgroup to pay. By producing a line of products at awide range of prices, the purveyor of the goods can maximize theconsumer population. For example, whether a consumer of tobaccoproducts is smoking low-priced generic cigarettes from thesupermarket or high-priced cigarettes from the tobacconist, thatindividual is included in the range of consumers. Illegal drugsellers also price their particular products to move. Forexample, while powdered cocaine may be too expensive for someeconomically disadvantaged consumers to purchase regularly,almost everyone can afford a $5 vial of crack cocaine. Drugdealers also manipulate the cost for their goods to attractcustomers. Once a product has been developed, promoted, and priced tomove, a place must be found to most effectively sell the product.Legal nonmedical drugs are packaged and made available at retailoutlets in such a way as to make their purchase as convenient aspossible. Wine coolers, for example, are a type of beverage aimedparticularly at women and young people. With its sweet, lighttaste, low prices, and convenient packaging, the wine coolercompetes with beer and soft drinks for occasions such as picnicsand sports events, where traditional wine products are unlikelyto be consumed. Wine cooler ads promote just these types of uses.Packaging has taken on a beer or soft drink look, and theindustry is successfully obtaining access to convenience storesand supermarket outlets to make purchases easier (6). Illicit drugs can also be packaged and made available at"retail" outlets where purchasers can convenientlyobtain the product(s) of their choice. One news account suggeststhat "mass marketing that would have made McDonald'sproud" is responsible for the evolution of crack cocainefrom a drug derided as "garbage rock" just a few yearsago into a national craze. Crack was not invented, it was created by a sharp crowd ofsinister geniuses who took a simple production technique to makea packaged, ready to consume form of the product with low unitprice to entice massive numbers of consumers. Cocaine powderrequired an investment of nearly $75 for a gram, but a hit ofcrack costs as little as $5. Equally alluring was crack'sincredible "high"--an instantaneous euphoria because itwas smoked--that could create addicts in weeks (16). Two kinds of retail drug markets exist in the United States:the private market place and the open-air or flagrant drugmarkets (3). The private drug market involves transactions thatoccur between people who are known to one another or are referredby a trusted acquaintance. Referrals in the private marketplaceare usually not very far removed from the original connection;they may be classmates in college, business associates,relatives, or persons belonging to the same club. The familiarity of the parties in the private drug marketusually means that there is a reduced level of public exposureand violence. The desire to keep the flow of traffic to the siteof transactions at a minimum means that sales in the privatemarketplace tend to be of larger quantities of drugs than thosein street transactions. Because most of the transactions takeplace "behind closed doors" or in some otherclandestine fashion, a high degree of impermeability exists inthe dealer-customer relationship (3). Examples of private drugmarkets include "speak easies" during prohibition andthe "traditional" (i.e., before crack) cocaine markets. Another aspect of the private drug market is the ritualisticaspect of procuring the product. Consider, for example, theritual associated with purchasing cocaine. One author describes"a day in the office" of a street-level cocainedistribution network. The office itself is a highly structuredoperation, complete with receptionists to screen potentialcustomers, guards, a "catcher"--held on retainer toretrieve cocaine thrown out of a window during a bust-- and themerchant who sets prices, arranges to barter goods and services,gives credit, and makes day-to-day decisions regarding sales(15). A typical transaction involves a positive identification ofthe buyer, a greeting and brief social contact (e.g., handshake,hug, kiss) between the merchant and the buyer, a formal requestfor an amount of cocaine, and a discussion of method of payment(e.g., cash, barter). Sometimes the transaction involves a briefdiscussion of the relative quality of the drugs in the street, asample of the drug available from this particular merchant, andpossibly some haggling over price. The public weighing andpackaging of the cocaine is central to this type of transaction.The scale, in fact, becomes a central point of power andauthority in the business; only those with the highest level oftrust and respect can operate the scale (15). Open air and flagrant drug markets, on the other hand, tendto be far more impersonal and much less ritualistic than theprivate marketplace. Many of the concepts used by mass marketersof licit products are used in the flagrant marketplace--targetedconsumer groups, small and widely affordable units of sale,prepackaged goods with fixed prices, convenient retail outlets.One research team describes the mechanics of a typical open-airdrug market transaction: A car drives down a residential street with enormousapartment buildings on either side. Young men wave to the car; afew of the more aggressive dealers step into traffic to signalautos to stop. Even before the wheels have stopped rolling,several young men are at the window; "You looking?"says one. "Smoke, smoke. I've got crack. Whatever youwant" says the other peering over his shoulder. The answerfrom the driver is simple and short: "Two dimes." Twosmall brown glass vials are exchanged for a 20 dollar bill andthe transaction is over in a matter of seconds (3). Although the exact method for conducting a transaction mayvary slightly from place to place around the country, the essenceof the transaction is remarkably similar across the UnitedStates. Flagrant or open-air drug markets have many of the samestructural characteristics as legal marketplaces: demographic andproduct segmentation, brand loyalty, cartel pricing, aggressivesalesmen working on commission, and careful recruitment of loyaland productive employees (3). Alcohol and Tobacco The marketing of legal yet addictive substances, especiallytobacco and alcohol, has become controversial in recent years.Issues stemming from the marketing of licit substances includeadvertising, taxation, and labeling. Advertising Alcohol and tobacco products have long been advertised in theUnited States. In the 1950s and 1960s, these products wereadvertised with minimal restrictions. Following the SurgeonGeneral's report on the hazards of smoking in 1964 (13), publicsentiment against cigarette advertising increased. The mostfamous example of Federal regulation is the ban on broadcastcigarette advertising in January 1971 resulting from the passageby Congress of the Public Health Cigarette Smoking Act of 1969(Public Law 91-222). In recent years, attention has focused onlegislative proposals to ban all forms of cigarette advertising,and to control the advertising of alcoholic products. Taxation The federal government currently levies excise taxes onalcoholic beverages and tobacco products. Excise taxes on alltypes of alcoholic beverages were raised in 1990 to their currentlevels. Currently, for example, beer (six pack 12-ounce cans)carries a 33 cent federal excise tax, a 750 ml bottle of winecarries a 21 cent federal excise tax. A pack of cigarettescarries a federal excise tax of 24 cents. A number of studies in the 1980s focused on the impact offederal excise taxes on cigarette consumption. A 1986 studyconcluded that an 8- to 16-cent increase in the federal cigaretteexcise tax would encourage from 1 to 2 million young persons and8,000 to 1.5 million adults to quit smoking or not to start.Thus, a tax increase could prevent hundreds of thousands ofpremature smoking-related deaths, while a tax decrease wouldcontribute to the disease burden of tobacco (14). The GeneralAccounting Office, in a review of the literature on teenagesmoking and excise taxes, concluded that an increase in thecigarette excise tax would be an effective way to reduce teenagesmoking (12). Labeling Federal law addresses the labeling of both cigarettes andalcoholic beverages. In both cases, Congress declared that thepurpose of such labeling is to make sure the American public isinformed about the potential health hazards that may result fromconsumption (36 USC 1331; 27 USC 213). Manufacturers ofcigarettes must use one of four rotating warnings on eachpackage, while manufacturers of alcoholic beverages must post aprescribed warning (see box 4-5). Proponents of labeling havestated that such warnings do not create legal restrictions, butonly help to inform the consumer about possible health risks.Opponents of labeling have argued that no scientific proof existsto link labeling with reduced use or improved health. SUMMARY The second set of preconditions for drug abuse and dependencyincludes availability and marketing. A person cannot become adrug abuser unless a drug is physically available to be used. Inaddition, however, availability is affected by social norms(e.g., factors within the community conducive to drug use,including level of parental or guardian supervision, lack ofconsequences for alcohol and drug offenses, lack of alternativeactivities, portrayals of alcohol and other drug use by friendsand the media as a glamorous and healthy activity), prices(economic availability), and personal values (subjectiveavailability). The primary focus of U.S. antidrug policy has been to attackthe physical availability of illicit drugs through lawenforcement efforts aimed at disrupting the production,transport, and sale of drugs. While this focus has increaseddrug-related arrests--nearly half of newly sentenced federalinmates in 1991 were imprisoned on drug charges--illicit drugsare still widely available. Marketing techniques for both licit and illicit drugs canalter social, economic, and subjective availability. Keycomponents of marketing include the promotion and advertising ofparticular product lines to appeal to particular subpopulationsof the consuming public; development of a product line that canbe targeted to subpopulations within the larger community ofconsumers; pricing strategies to attract new buyers; andidentification of retail outlets for sales. Federal law regulates the merchandising of licit yet abusablesubstances such as tobacco, alcohol, and prescription drugs byplacing a variety of restrictions on how such products may bemarketed. Despite current restrictions, debate continues as towhether and how a variety of legal drugs should be marketed. BOX 4-1: What Is Marketing? Marketing includes any activity involved in moving goods fromproducer to consumer. In the context of drugs, marketing includesa variety of activities covering a wide range of licit andillicit substances. For licit substances, such as alcohol, tobacco, andinhalants, it includes market research, advertising, pricing, andtaxation. A number of government policies in the marketingarena--taxes, advertising restrictions, point- of-sale controls,and age restrictions on certain products-- directly affects theavailability of licit, yet abusable, substances. For illicit drugs, such as marijuana, cocaine, andhallucinogens, marketing techniques can include street markets,gang activity, and private, closely controlled distribution andsales systems. Government control in this area--prohibiting thepossession, use, and sale of such substances--likewise affectsthe availability of these substances. SOURCE: Office of Technology Assessment, 1994. Box 4-2: Availability and Tobacco The evolution of tobacco from a relatively rare productrequiring preparation, thought, and ritual to a product that isubiquitous, prepackaged, and consumed without much fanfareprovides a graphic illustration of how increased physicalavailability of a product can dramatically increase drug use,abuse, and addiction. Three major developments in the history oftobacco use paved the way for making this drug imminentlyavailable for use by consumers: the invention of the cigarettemanufacturing machine, the invention and perfection of matches,and the proliferation of the use of vending machines to selltobacco products. The first successful cigarette manufacturing machine wasdeveloped in 1881 by James A. Bonsack. This machine had thecapacity to produce more than 200 cigarettes per minute. Prior tothe advent of this machine, smokers had to roll each cigarette byhand, a time-consuming and often ritualistic process. Once rolled, a cigarette must be lit to be consumed. This wasno easy task prior to the introduction of the safety match, firstinvented in 1896 but not perfected until 1912. Without matches,smokers were required to enter cigar stores to light cigarettesfrom gas or oil lamps provided specifically for the purpose oflighting tobacco products. These developments changed forever theway that cigarettes were consumed by making them readilyavailable for consumption at any moment during the day. Insteadof a thoughtful, often ritualistic exercise, cigaretteconsumption has evolved for some into an almost unconscioushabit. Following the invention of the manufacturing machine andthe safety match, the rate of cigarette consumption soared duringthe late 19th and early 20th century. The use of vending machines may be the most revolutionaryaspect of tobacco availability. First introduced in 1926, vendingmachines require no sales person, are not restricted by selectedhours of operation, and are not concerned with the age orlegality of the purchaser. Vending machines make cigarettesavailable almost anywhere, appearing in bars, hotels, train andbus stations, airports, hotels, and restaurants. By 1953, nearlyhalf a million cigarette machines existed and were responsiblefor sales of more than 3 billion packs of cigarettes a year. Theupward trend in sales from cigarette machines continued throughthe mid- 1970s: by 1973 more than 900,000 vending machines werein operation, selling almost 5 billion packs per year. Some earlyresearch indicated that the existence of vending machinesthroughout the physical environment is a major inducement toimpulse smoking. SOURCE: Office of Technology Assessment, 1994, based on J.Mosher, "The Environmental Approach to Prevention," TheCalifornia Prevention Network Journal 3, 42-44 (1990); R. Tenant,The American Cigarette Industry: A Study in Economic Analysis andPublic Policy (New Haven, CT: Yale University Press, 1950); R.Sobel, They Satisfy: The Cigarette in American life (Garden City,NJ: Anchor Press/Doubleday, 1978); Marshall, M.V., AutomaticMerchandising; A Study of the Problems and Limitations of Vending(Cambridge, MA: The Riverside Press, 1954). BOX 4-3: Survey Comments, Economic Availability Economic factors impact on perceptions of availability in anumber of ways. For example, because Sioux Falls, South Dakota,was experiencing a "strong economy . . . juveniles have hadan abundance of cash available for alcohol/drug usage." Morefrequent, however, were comments stating the opinion that a pooreconomy increased the economic availability of drugs and alcohol: Frankfort, Kentucky: "Profit motive due to nationaleconomy and lack of job training/jobs. Lack of hope andopportunity for some causes increased sale of drugs due to highprofit." Barbourville, Kentucky: "Drug dealers that cannot makeit flipping hamburgers, but are successful at selling drugs andhave a lot of material evidence of their success. Law enforcementneeds to confiscate these material items in prosecution of case.Also, involvement of drug dealing by law enforcement andpoliticians is a problem. " Harrisburg, Pennsylvania: "Teenaged drug dealers havestatus, money, jewelry, cars, designer clothes, etc., which manyof their peers cannot afford." Fort Worth, Texas: "Depressed economic conditions--Lackof legitimate means to obtain income. It's easy money withminimal consequences for conviction." SOURCE: Office of Technology Assessment, 1994. BOX 4-4: Survey Comments, Social Availability Conway, New Hampshire: "Our law enforcers are known andmake little inroads towards prosecuting drug traffickers orsellers. Many young adults supply liquor and drugs to underagekids in our area." Mount Holly, New Jersey: "The legal system does notfairly prosecute offenders. It gives some juveniles the messagethat depending upon your circumstances it is OK to use and selldrugs." Muskogee, Oklahoma: "The lack of prosecutive vigor inalcohol-related offenses (Minor in possession, publicintoxication, D.U.I.). District attorney does not vigorouslypursue and law enforcement treats D.U.I. as publicintoxication." Prineville, Oregon: "This community is basically a bluecollar community. There is an attitude of acceptance of juvenilesusing alcohol. Kind of a boys will be boys attitude." South Bend, Indiana: "We have seen an increase inalcohol consumption that appears to be tolerated or evenencouraged by adults (primarily parents)." Hillsboro, Illinois: "Lack of education, interest,cooperation of parents. Not enough interest with higher officials(e.g., school teachers, church members, government officials,businesses, and senior citizens)." Baraboo, Michigan: "Lack of appropriate teen activities.Lack of parental interest." Jacksonville, Illinois: "Decrease in the ability andwillingness of individual family units to educate, instruct, andmonitor juvenile behaviors." Nicholasville, Kentucky: "Alcohol is supplied willinglyto juveniles by a large number of adults. Inhalants are availableat any department store." Brownstown, Indiana: "Children, mostly high school age,come in contact with adults, ages 18-23, who are very willing tobuy alcohol or sell drugs to their younger friends. In addition,these children who do not have money on hand are likely to stealitems and trade them for drugs or cash to buy alcohol anddrugs." SOURCE: Office of Technology Assessment, 1994. BOX 4-5: Cigarette and Alcoholic Beverage Warnings It is unlawful for any person to manufacture, package, orimport for sale or distribution within the United States anycigarettes the package of which fails to bear one of thefollowing labels: SURGEON GENERAL'S WARNING: Smoking Causes Lung Cancer, HeartDisease, Emphysema, And May Complicate Pregnancy. SURGEON GENERAL'S WARNING: Quitting Smoking Now GreatlyReduces Serious Risks to Your Health. SURGEON GENERAL'S WARNING: Smoking By Pregnant Women MayResult in Fetal Injury, Premature Birth, And Low Birth Weight. SURGEON GENERAL'S WARNING: Cigarette Smoke Contains CarbonMonoxide. It is unlawful for any person to manufacture, import, orbottle for sale or distribution in the United States anyalcoholic beverage unless the container of such beverage bearsthe following statement: GOVERNMENT WARNING: (1) According to the Surgeon General,women should not drink alcoholic beverages during pregnancybecause of the risk of birth defects. (2) Consumption ofalcoholic beverages impairs your ability to drive a car oroperate machinery, and may cause health problems. SOURCE: 36 USC 1331; 27 USC 213. _ CliffSchaffer's Home Page WT02-B01-156IA086-000615-B001-225http://206.61.184.43:80/schaffer/Library/studies/ota/ch6.htm 206.61.184.43 19970122024232 text/html 127567HTTP/1.0 200 OKDate: Wednesday, 22-Jan-97 02:41:49 GMTServer: WebSitePro/1.1f (S/N wpo-0deb)Allow-ranges: bytesContent-type: text/htmlLast-modified: Saturday, 28-Dec-96 06:50:25 GMTContent-length: 127348 CHAPTER 6 INDIVIDUAL RISK AND PROTECTIVE FACTORS TECHNOLOGIES FOR UNDERSTANDING AND PREVENTING SUBSTANCEABUSE AND ADDICTION US Government Office of Technology Assessment October 18, 1994 CHAPTER 6 INDIVIDUAL RISK AND PROTECTIVE FACTORS No single or generic set of variables explains the misuse ofsubstances for every individual. Depending on an individual'sbiological makeup, developmental stage, and interaction withvarious environmental forces, individual risk, vulnerability, andresilience to substance abuse and addiction will vary fordifferent factors at different times (3). Much of the research on substance abuse has focused onidentifying factors for drug and alcohol use (see table 6- 1),specifically among adolescents and young adults. Risk factors forsubstance abuse have been identified as those cognitive,psychological, attitudinal, social, pharmacological,physiological, and developmental characteristics that fosterinitiation of drug and alcohol use and abuse by an individual.There is some consensus in the field of risk factor research thatprobably two fairly distinct sets of risk factors affectindividuals differently. Social, situational, and environmentalfactors are likely to be more influential in initial or low-levelsubstance use, while individuals who progress from use to abuseor addiction are influenced to a greater extent by biological,psychological, and psychiatric factors (27). This distinctionbetween risk factors is more thoroughly discussed in chapter 5.Protective factors are those characteristics that reduce the riskof substance abuse and addiction and promote positive developmentsuch as, appropriate role models, involvement in positive peergroups, and a positive self-image and outlook for the future. This chapter focuses on a select group of individual factorsthat has been combined under the three headings: Demographics, Economics, and Psychosocial/Behavioral. Factors not directlydiscussed in this chapter are reviewed in either Part I or III ofthe report. These factors may not appear in every individual withsubstance abuse and addiction problems, nor will all individualsexposed to these factors use or abuse drugs. In addition,unanimous agreement is lacking within the field of substanceabuse and addiction on the importance, number, order ofappearance, or interactive effects of many of these factors. Where applicable, each of the factors has been reviewed inthe following manner: historical perspectives; currentprevalence; psychosocial and cultural antecedents; biological andgenetic antecedents; relevant prevention programs; and areas forfuture research. DEMOGRAPHICS Age The preponderance of substance abuse research points to thefact that children who use drugs and alcohol before the age of 15have a greater likelihood of becoming problem alcohol and otherdrug users, versus those youth who begin use at a later age (28). Highlights from the National Household Survey on Drug Abuse(NHSDA) provide a somber picture of substance use among theNation's children (77). Lifetime and past month substance use,rates for continued substance use, as well as differences inracial and ethnic substance use (see box 6-1) are reviewed inthis section. As part of NHSDA, data on lifetime use of alcohol andcigarettes (whose use is illicit for minors) has been collectedfor youth aged 12 to 17 since 1974; data collection on otherillicit drug use began in 1979 (see figure 6-1). The lifetime usefindings include: o Rates in 1991 for lifetime use of alcohol, cigarettes, orother illicit drugs were the lowest recorded since the surveyseries began 17 years ago. The highest rates for any substanceuse appeared in the late 1970s. o In 1979, 70 percent of youth aged 12 to 17 reported somelifetime use of alcohol compared to 46 percent in 1991. Since1979, lifetime cigarette use has dropped from 54 percent to 38percent. o Since 1979, the use of other illicit substances(methaqualone, inhalants, heroin, cocaine, phencyclidine (PCP),crack, tranquilizers, stimulants, other opiates, barbiturates,nitrites, lysergic acid diethylamide, hallucinogens, andmarijuana) has followed a similar trend with rates decreasingfrom a high of 34 percent to the 1991 rate of 20 percent. A complementary study of adolescents shows 1991 data forsubstance use within the past 30 days among a sample ofapproximately 17,500 eighth graders, 14,800 tenth graders, and15,000 twelfth graders (75). o Any alcohol use within the past 30 days was reported by 25percent of the eighth graders, 43 percent of the tenth graders,and 54 percent of the twelfth graders. Having had more than fivedrinks in the last two weeks was reported by 13 percent of theeighth graders, 23 percent of the tenth graders, and 30 percentof the twelfth graders. o Fourteen percent of the eighth graders, 21 percent of thetenth graders, and 28 percent of the twelfth graders reportedsmoking cigarettes within the past month. Those who smoked morethan one-half pack per day included 3 percent of the eighthgraders, 7 percent of the tenth graders, and 11 percent of thetwelfth graders. o The other most commonly used substance for eighth and tenthgraders was smokeless tobacco with 7 and 10 percent reported,respectively. Eighth graders had the highest percentage of pastmonth inhalant use (4 percent), and of those individuals,approximately 1 percent reported using inhalants on 3 to 5occasions within the past month. o For tenth and twelfth graders, the other most commonly usedsubstance was marijuana and/or hashish with 9 percent of thetenth graders and 14 percent of the twelfth graders reportingpast 30-day use. Of those individuals, approximately 2 and 3percent, respectively, had used marijuana and/or hashish on threeto five occasions. Another important indicator of potential substance abuseproblems among adolescents is the noncontinuation rate for theuse of certain substances. This is an indication of the extent towhich people who try a drug do not continue to use it, and isbased on the number of individuals who reported ever using a drugdivided by the those who have not used the drug in the past 12months (75). Among a sample of twelfth graders in 1991, the data show thatnoncontinuation rates vary widely among the different drugs, withthe highest rates observed for methaqualone and inhalants (62percent). As mentioned previously, inhalant use is higher amongyounger individuals. The noncontinuation of methaqualone may bedue, in part, to the decrease in its availability. A highnoncontinuation rate is also seen for heroin (56 percent),cocaine (55 percent), PCP (52 percent), and crack (52 percent).Marijuana has one of the lowest noncontinuation rates (35percent) in the senior year of any of the illicit drugs;primarily because a relatively high proportion of seniorscontinue to use it at some level over an extended period of time. Additionally, the noncontinuation rates for alcohol andcigarettes are extremely low. In other words, 88 percent of theseniors reported some lifetime use of alcohol, and of thoseindividuals, 78 percent have continued to use it within the pastyear, thus only 12 percent of the seniors reported no alcohol usein the preceding 12 months. Cigarette noncontinuation was definedsomewhat differently, as the percentage of those who said theyhad ever smoked "regularly" and who also reported notsmoking at all during the past month. Of the regular smokers,only 17 percent stopped smoking within the past month. An obvious drawback to these data is the fact that only thoseindividuals who have not dropped out of school are included inthe survey. It is not unrealistic to assume that those studentswith serious drug problems may well have left school before thetwelfth grade. More specific discussion of the factors thatinfluence the risk of adolescent substance abuse, as well asprevention programs targeting youth, are thoroughly reviewed inchapter 8. While the majority of attention is focused on adolescentsubstance use and abuse, young adults and older adults also showsignificant levels of substance use and abuse. The 1991statistics from the NHSDA reveal that heavy drinking (defined asdrinking five or more drinks per occasion on 5 or more days inthe past month) was reported by 2 percent of 12 to 17 year olds,11 percent of 18 to 25 year olds, 7 percent of 26 to 34 yearolds, and 4 percent of those 35 and older (77). For those sameage categories, smoking a pack or more of cigarettes per day wasreported by 1, 13, 17, and 17 percent, respectively. The illicitsubstances reported being used most often in the past month amongall age groups were marijuana and hashish. Individuals 18 to 25had the highest percentage (13 percent) and those 26 to 34 thenext highest percentage (7 percent). The second most commonlyreported illicit substance was the nonmedical use ofpsychotherapeutics, which was again highest among 18 to 25 yearolds (3 percent) followed by those 26 to 34 (2 percent); allother age groups reported less than 2 percent. Clearly then, the heavy use of some substances is notexclusive to adolescents. Young- to middle-aged and older adultscan also be exposed to stressful risk factors, such as loss of ajob, divorce, or death of a child, which could contribute toalcohol or drug problems. The adult population presents uniqueand often overlooked challenges for the planning andimplementation of substance abuse prevention programs. Gender Historically, the vast majority of biological and behavioralsubstance abuse studies were conducted on male participants,although that has begun to change. A distorted picture emerged,in which women were assumed to misuse the same substances, andfor the same reasons, as their male counterparts. It has onlybeen within the past 10 to 20 years that separate research hasbeen conducted on the causes and consequences of alcohol and drugproblems among women. Women have not been immune to the harmful effects of alcoholand other drugs. In the late 1800s twice as many women wereaddicted to narcotics as men. The majority of these women werewhite, middle-aged, and of upper-middle class status. Some hadbecome addicted through the prescription of narcotics for a hostof so-called female problems, while others knowingly misusedopium, heroin, morphine, and cocaine (53). The number of women drinking alcohol and experiencingalcohol-related problems has risen steadily since World War II.At least one-third of the estimated 18 million alcoholics andproblem drinkers in the United States are thought to be women.These figures, which many consider to be conservative, wouldsuggest that close to 6 million women are currently dealing withthe medical, legal, and social problems of alcohol misuse (53). Overall, men report more frequent use of alcohol, cigarettes,and all illicit substances (except nonmedical use ofpsychotherapeutics) than women (79,77). However, this does notmean that there is not substantial alcohol and drug use amongwomen (see table 6-2). Additionally, some gender and ethnicdifferences may be attributable to failure to survey hiddenpopulations. The risk status of women who are not in theworkforce, do not receive prenatal care, and are not visiblethrough arrest, is less reliably known. Neither men, nor women, should be considered homogeneous. Forexample, alcohol use and its misuse can vary widely betweendifferent racial and ethnic groups. Among men, Hispanics (60percent) were slightly more likely to have used alcohol withinthe past month than whites (59 percent) or blacks (52 percent)(77). In general, white women drink more frequently than otherwomen. Large numbers of Native American, Hispanic, black, andAsian women do not drink at all (70). Additionally, poor andminority women appear to come under closer scrutiny for alcoholand drug abuse than do financially secure or white women (see box6-2). These racial and ethnic differences are more fullydiscussed in the following section. Do men and women cite different reasons for the misuse ofalcohol and other drugs? Over the last several decades within theUnited States, the socially defined roles for men and women haveundergone substantial changes. When given a choice, many womenhave opted for the traditional role of a stay-at-home mother andhomemaker, while other women have pursued career paths that mayor may not include marriage and children, and still others haveattempted to combine the two. These fairly recent changes havebrought pressures and risks many women had not been subjected topreviously. Women in the workplace are more likely to encounter drinkingopportunities such as business lunches and office celebrations,where they may feel encouraged or even pressured to drink (53).Women have also been recently targeted by the beer, tobacco, andliquor industries, as well as by small-scale marketing bynightclubs and bars in the form of ladies' nights. In the early 1970s, researcher Sharon Wilsnack postulatedthat some women may abuse alcohol to submerge those aspects ofthemselves that did not conform to the traditional female sexrole, thereby allowing them to feel more acceptably feminine(53). More recently, several studies on female alcoholics haveshown that women, more frequently than men, can pinpoint aspecific traumatic life event that they believe precipitatedtheir problem drinking. The crises identified most often by womenincluded a partner's infidelity, the death of a family member, achild leaving home, postpartum depression, divorce or separation,infertility, gynecological problems, and menopause (39,53). A similar study focused on the impact of various life eventson alcoholic men and women. Alcoholic men placed significantimportance on work-related events, marriage issues, sexualdifficulties, and arguments with spouses. In addition to thoseevents cited by the men, alcoholic women focused on socialactivities, family troubles, stillbirth and adoption, and deathof a close relative (40). While much of the substance abuse research has focused onalcohol issues, various researchers have examined the differencesbetween men and women in their use of illicit substances with orwithout the presence of alcohol. For men and women cocaineaddicts in treatment, the following significant differences werenoted (40,41,35): o Women had started to use cocaine at a younger age than men,conversely to what is generally found among opiate users andalcoholics. o Women had a significantly lower level of social adjustmentthan male patients. o Women patients were less likely to be employed, to holdhigh status jobs, to be self-supporting, and to be financingtheir own drug use. o Women were more likely than men to cite specific reasonsfor their drug use: depression, feeling unsociable, family andjob pressures, and health problems; whereas men more often citedthe intoxicating effects of cocaine as a reason for their druguse. o Men reported experiencing more guilt (47 vs. 23 percent),whereas women noted that one of the desirable effects of cocaineuse was a reduction in their feelings of guilt. o Women were more often diagnosed with depression than men,and their depression took longer to treat, while men were moreoften diagnosed with antisocial personality disorder. o Most men and women reported that they used cocaine to bemore sociable. o Women demonstrated a slower recovery than men, and had moreresidual problems. Gender differences among opiate addicts have also beenexplored. Researchers have shown that female addicts are morelikely than male addicts to have first been introduced to heroinby family members or others close to them, and to haveexperienced severe family disruption (36). The development of thewomen's opiate dependence is also more likely to be linked to thefamily's approval of use or the absence of clear disapproval ofuse, in combination with easy access to the drug (35). Differences in marijuana smoking may also be partiallyattributable to gender. In a recent review, it was shown thatmen's marijuana smoking was tied more to the availability of thedrug, while women's smoking was affected to a greater degree bysocial influences, such as weekday versus weekend smoking, andthe smoking of their male partners. Women have also been shown toincrease their marijuana smoking during periods of anger andother unpleasant dispositions (41). In addition to discovering some socioculturaldissimilarities, gender differences in biological and geneticsusceptibility to substance abuse have been examined. The role ofheritability and genetics in influencing individualsusceptibility is more thoroughly discussed in chapter 3, thusthe discussion in this section will concentrate on biologicaldifferences. Again, a large portion of these studies hasconcentrated on alcohol and its effects. In the late 1970s it was reported that when men and women ofcomparable body weight were given equivalent doses of alcohol,women achieved higher blood alcohol levels. However, thesefindings have been challenged, as more recent studies have shownthat if the blood alcohol level is based on total body waterrather than weight, the difference in levels between men andwomen is insignificant (65). Another avenue that has been explored in explaining thegender difference in blood alcohol levels has to do with themetabolism of alcohol. Based on findings from animal research,Mario Frezza et al. (25) investigated differences in the"first-pass metabolism" between men and women. Datafrom animal studies reveal that a significant amount of ingestedethanol does not enter the circulatory system, but rather isneutralized in the stomach by the enzyme alcohol dehydrogenase.Using a small study sample (6 alcoholic and 14 nonalcoholic men,6 alcoholic and 17 nonalcoholic women) Frezza et al. investigatedwhether the first-pass metabolism and enzyme activity levelvaried between men and women, and alcoholic and nonalcoholicindividuals. They discovered that both gender and chronic alcoholabuse had statistically significant effects on the first-passmetabolism of alcohol, specifically, the first-pass metabolismwas considerably lower among alcoholic women compared toalcoholic men, which in turn was lower than nonalcoholic men.Similar findings were reported for the alcohol dehydrogenaseactivity level; with the highest activity levels (70 to 80percent) found in the nonalcoholic men and women, less activityamong the alcoholic men (37 to 46 percent), and the smallestactivity level among alcoholic women (11 to 20 percent). Tosummarize, the women in general had lower rates of first- passmetabolism and lower levels of alcohol dehydrogenase activity,which both lead to an increase in the amount of ethanol in thecirculatory system. The levels of enzyme activity furtherdecreased among the alcoholic women and the first-pass metabolismwas essentially nonexistent, indicating little neutralization bythe stomach. Researchers have also been studying the effect of hormonalchanges during the menstrual cycle on alcohol absorption rates.Alcohol absorption has been reported to vary during a woman'scycle--specifically, the rate of alcohol absorption increasespremenstrually. However, data from other clinicaland animaltrials have disputed these findings (65). What is clear from this type of biological research is thatfew firm conclusions can be made about gender differences inresponse to alcohol ingestion, and even fewer still aboutbiological responses to drugs other than alcohol. Nevertheless, the psychosocial differences that have beenidentified between the sexes could assist practitioners in thedevelopment of more gender specific substance abuse preventionprograms. For example, because many women can pinpoint specificevents in their lives that they believe contributed to theirheavy alcohol or drug use, it would behoove professionals workingwith women to be cognizant of these factors. General inquirescould be made at yearly physical or gynecological exams, whichcould also serve as informational sessions on the dangers ofalcohol and drug use (39). In addition, special attention shouldbe paid toward adolescent girls whose first experience withalcohol and drugs is often through a male family member orboyfriend. Broadly speaking, there are basic gaps in knowledgeconcerning gender differences and substance use within virtuallyall the parts identified in this report: Part I- necessarypreconditions; Part II-individual factors; and Part III-activitysettings. Until these gaps are addressed, the practice oftransferring data garnered from studies specific for one gender,to the other gender, is inaccurate and misleading. Race and Ethnicity Historically, racial and ethnic minorities have been linkedwith, and often blamed for, many of the drug problems within theUnited States. Throughout the late 1800s and early 1900s, thegeneral public associated the growth in opium addicts with thearrival of Chinese immigrants; although numerous physicians hadbeen freely prescribing narcotic preparations to their patients,many of whom were middle- to upper-class whites. The drug cocainehas long been associated with blacks. A popular image during thistime was one of cocaine-crazed blacks, although use of cocainewas widespread among whites as well (86). Throughout this sameperiod, marijuana was thought to have been brought into thecountry and promoted by Mexican immigrants and later picked up bythe subculture of black jazz musicians. Due in part to publicparanoia, the Marijuana Tax Act of 1937, which was a directattempt to control marijuana use, was born (45). In the minds of many individuals, this derogatory linkbetween minority populations and rampant drug abuse hascontinued. Certainly, many urban areas have high concentrationsof minorities, and within these areas the prevalence of alcoholand drug abuse may be high. Often over-looked, however, is theexistence of alcohol and drug problems in suburban and ruralareas throughout the United States, which have varyingpercentages of minorities. Prevalence rates for past month use of an illicit substancein 1992 (see figure 6-2) are not drastically different betweenwhites, blacks, and Hispanics, although it should be kept in mindthat this statistic does not accurately reflect abuse oraddiction. Even though the prevalence of illicit substance usewas highest among blacks, over three-fourths (76 percent) of thepast month illicit substance users were white. In other words,there were approximately 8.7 million whites, 1.5 million blacks,885,000 Hispanics, and 315,000 individuals of other racial andethnic groups who reported past month use of an illicit substancein 1992 (79). Also for 1992 among individuals aged 12 and older, whitesreported the highest percentage of alcohol use within the pastweek (21 percent), followed by blacks (19 percent), and Hispanics(18 percent) (79). The rates for heavy drinking were notstatistically different by race or ethnicity (5 percent forwhites and blacks, and 6 percent for Hispanics) (78). Until fairly recently, much of the analysis of substance usedata has concentrated on the correlations between the use of asubstance and one or two variables such as race and ethnicityand/or educational level. Often a positive association was foundbetween minority populations and the use of certain substances.While statistically correct, these analyses can be simplistic andmisleading (see box 6- 3). Clearly many risk and protectivefactors interact to produce substance use and abuse. If themajority of these variables are excluded from the analysis, askewed picture may arise as to the importance of certainvariables as risk factors for substance use and abuse.Additionally, to simplify the data collection, racial and ethniccategories are often broad. The most popular groupings areblacks, white non-Hispanic, Hispanic, and other. Though each ofthese categories contains many distinct cultures, grossgeneralizations are commonly made within each category. In recent years, there has been a shift toward analyzing morecarefully the complex relationship between cigarette, alcohol andillicit drug use, and socioeconomic and demographic variables.The previous research had drawn on relatively small databases.However, in 1992, the National Institute on Drug Abuse (NIDA)critically analyzed the national drug use data collected in its1988 and 1990 NHSDA. Predictors of drug and alcohol use includedan extensive array of both individual variables (e.g., age,educational level, marital status) and aggregate variables basedon the attributes of the census block, community, or region inwhich the respondent lived (see table 6-3 for a complete list). The effect of select variables such as race and ethnicitywere measured, while simultaneously controlling for all othervariables (e.g., age, educational level, employment status).Individuals of racial and ethnic minorities were found to be nomore likely than whites to use alcohol heavily (defined as havingfive or more drinks on five or more days in the past month) or touse marijuana, cocaine, or psychotherapeutic drugs (inclusion ofcrack or heroin in the analysis was impossible due to the smallnumber of respondents reporting use). In fact, when socioeconomicstatus was controlled for, both blacks and Hispanics had asubstantially lower likelihood of heavy alcohol use than whites(76). A reanalysis of the 1988 NHSDA data was accomplished by anindependent group of researchers who clustered the respondentdata into neighborhood risk sets. The original analysis on the1988 data revealed that for all ages, blacks and Hispanics weretwice as likely to have ever used crack cocaine than were whites.Once neighborhood clusters were established, the data revealedthat given similar social and environmental conditions, crack usedid not differ significantly for blacks or Hispanics comparedwith whites (9). However, the number of reported crack users inthe study was relatively small (138), and neighborhoods wereidentified as crack neighborhoods with as few as one reportedcrack user, thus the research findings should not be generalized. The new research hypothesized that the previous racialdifferences found in the prevalence of crack cocaine smoking mayhave been due to macrosocial environmental risk factorsincluding: differences in the availability of crack; employmentrates; premature death rates; community contact with the criminaljustice system; socially acceptable mechanisms for coping withlife stressors; distribution of wealth; and access to socialresources. While both studies had specific limitations, the importanceof these types of analyses cannot be understated. Focus should beplaced on the interaction between communities and individuals andthe relative influence on subsequent drug and alcohol use, ratherthan a person's race or ethnicity. Race or ethnicity has not been shown to be either abiological or genetic risk factor for substance use or abuse. Todate, the preponderance of investigative studies has focused onracial and ethnic differences in response specifically toalcohol. Virtually no study has been completed on differences inracial and ethnic biological responses to other licit or illicitdrugs. Individual metabolism of alcohol is essentially controlled bytwo enzymes, aldehyde dehydrogenase and alcohol dehydrogenase. Ifthe enzyme aldehyde dehydrogenase is inactive for any reason,ingestion of even a small amount of alcohol can cause rapid andprominent facial flushing. Continued drinking leads to nausea,dizziness, palpitations, and faintness. This reaction is seenamong many Asians (84,16). A mutant form of alcohol dehydrogenase will effect theefficiency of alcohol metabolism as well. Altered forms of thealcohol dehydrogenase enzyme have also been reported in severalAsian populations. The two enzymes, aldehyde and alcohol dehydrogenase, probablyinteract in some individuals to amplify the adverse reaction toalcohol consumption (57). Since this reaction discourages heavydrinking, the observation that it commonly occurs in somepopulations where alcoholism is relatively rare suggests thatalcohol and aldehyde dehydrogenase mutations might be a majordeterminant of alcohol consumption, abuse, and dependence. Thiswould seem to hold true for Taiwan and Japan where the reactionoccurs in 30 to 50 percent of individuals. Research on these twoenzymes among other racial and ethnic groups is scanty andinconclusive. The role genetics plays in the heritability of alcohol andother drug problems has been studied for the past 30 years. Whilethis topic is more thoroughly addressed in chapter 3, one pointis worth mentioning here. Of the more than 30 family, twin, andadoption studies that have been completed, the vast majority haveused white males as study subjects. Clearly, among differentracial and ethnic groups the relationship between geneticheritability and increased susceptibility to alcohol and otherdrug problems is an area that deserves further study. While race and ethnicity in and of themselves are notpredictive risk factors for future substance abuse, by reviewingwhen, how, and why certain substances became problematic withindifferent racial and ethnic groups, insight can be gained intothe generational impact drugs have had on these populations. Fourbroad racial and ethnic groups (and one multiracial and ethnicgroup, see box 6-4) are discussed below in the following manner:historical perspectives; prevalence statistics; psychosocial andcultural antecedents; and selected prevention programs. Aseparate section on areas for future research is also included. Native American Indians/Alaska Natives There are more than 1.5 million Americans Indians and AlaskanNatives throughout the United States, with vastly differentlanguages and cultural beliefs. Even within the same tribe theremay be a good deal of cultural diversity, since differences existbetween reservation and rural tribal members, and those residingin urban settings. While urban dwelling American Indians mayconstitute more than 50 percent of the total Indian population,little is known concerning their health status (59). The American Indians' introduction to alcohol dates back tothe early 1600s and their initial interactions with Europeantrappers and settlers. Much of the early trading between theEuropeans and American Indians involved an exchange of alcohol.It was not long before alcohol became a considerable problem formany American Indian tribes. Some researchers speculate thatbecause American Indians lacked a prior drinking history, or rolemodel for moderate drinking practices, many tribes adopted aquick and copious style of drinking, consistently drinking to thepoint of intoxication. However, in other tribes, it is appearsthat being intoxicated was deemed unacceptable, and over timethese tribes developed a "social" drinking style (35). Prevalence statistics Studies among American Indian adolescents have shown thatprevalence rates for licit and illicit drug use varyinsignificantly between tribes (5,4). However, compared tonon-Indian youth, Indian adolescents consistently begin usingalcohol, illicit substances, cigarettes, and inhalants at ayounger age, at higher rates, and in combination with each other(10,60,69). With regard to alcohol, there is often a great dealof peer pressure to drink as the Indian thing to do (42). Studieshave shown that Indian youth are three times more likely to beinvolved in alcohol-related offenses than their white or Hispaniccounterparts. A 1982 study indicated that alcohol was involved inas many as 58 percent of Indian juvenile arrests (63 percent formales, 37 percent for females)(60). In some tribes, up to 30 percent of American Indianadolescents have used inhalants, most notably, gasoline and glue.The age group with the highest rate of inhalant use was 11- to13-year-olds. Contrary to the popular belief that inhalant abuseoccurs primarily among boys, research among American Indiansrevealed that eighth grade girls and boys were equally likely tohave inhaled volatile substances. While the rate for Indianinhalant use decreases substantially among high school age youth(down to 4 percent), it is still 2.5 times greater than the ratefor non-Indian youth of that age. Interestingly, while the rateof inhalant use has remained relatively stable among Indian youthsince 1984, there has been a steady rise of reported use amongnon-Indian adolescents (66). While there is no substantial difference in alcohol use amongvarious tribal adolescents, rates do differ between the drinkingpatterns of tribal adults. Contrary to the still pervasivedrunken Indian stereotype, many tribes have levels of adultalcohol use below the national average (42). Consistent with theU.S. population as a whole, American Indian males are more likelyto drink than females (42,35). In some tribes it is permissiblefor adolescent females to experiment with alcohol, with theunderstanding that when adulthood is reached they are expected toabstain or drink only rarely. As is true for adolescents, adult Indians encounter anincreased rate of legal complications due to alcohol and druguse. Data on urban American Indians has shown that while underthe influence of alcohol and/or other drugs, they are arrested atfour times the rate for blacks and 10 times the rate for whites(44). Few statistics exist to quantify illicit substance use amongthe adult American Indian population. While alcohol is clearly amajor problem for some tribes, future research efforts shouldinclude data on the use of illicit substances. Psychosocial/cultural antecedents The relationship between the majority of American Indians andthe early settlers was suffused with violence, distrust, deceit,and perhaps more than anything, forcible and abrupt change. Thefood American Indians ate, how they dressed, where and how theylived, what language they spoke, tribal governing structures, andhow they worshiped were, for the most part, forcibly altered toconform with the newly dominant society's cultural and moralviews. While these involuntary changes occurred severalgenerations ago, their impact on the American Indian cultureshould not be underestimated. In some instances, tribal traditions, languages, and methodsof worship were lost. Thousands of American Indian children, someas young as 3 years old, were removed from their families andplaced in federally funded and run boarding schools, wherephysical, verbal, and sexual abuse were common. Nuclear andextended families were dispersed, and with them, a vital socialsupport system. Acculturation issues abounded. Children returnedhome from boarding schools unable to speak their native language,or understand the importance of their cultural traditions. Thesecultural problems are multigenerational, and current studiesreveal that American Indian children report more emotionalproblems, mental health problems, and low self-esteem thannon-Indian children (60). While the relationship between many ofthese psychosocial/cultural antecedents and increased substanceabuse levels has yet to be formally evaluated, clearly theAmerican Indian people have been, and in some may continue to be,subjected to cultural disruption. Prevention programs For substance abuse prevention programs to be effectivewithin the American Indian population it is important to realizethe diversity that exists between tribes and villages. Forexample, a specific program tailored to New Mexico Navajos livingon the Navajo reservation may be culturally unacceptable toWinnebago Indians living in urban Minneapolis, MN. However,several fairly universal themes permeate American Indian culture:the importance of tribal identity, which is an individual'smembership or affiliation with specific tribe(s); a belief thateach human is a multidimensional being made up of a body, mind,and spirit, and that the spirit world coexists and intermingleswith the physical world; the importance of sharing andgenerosity, allegiance to one's family and community, respect forelders, noninterference, orientation to present time, and harmonywith nature; the importance of an oral tradition as a primarymethod of teaching values, attitudes, legends, and stories; anemphasis on observant, reflective, and integrative skills whichlead to communication patterns that give virtue to silence,listening, nonverbal cues, and learning by example; and thepresence of rituals and symbols that are acknowledged for theirunderlying significance, which is expected to emerge as time andexperience go on (72). One example that assists communities in the development ofculturally sensitive programs is an instructional publicationcompiled by The Four Worlds Development Project in Alberta,Canada. Information has been collected on health promotion andprevention efforts by various indigenous people from around theworld. The text assists American Indian communities in tailoringprogram planning, training, and implementation techniques withtheir culture beliefs and specific needs (24). Blacks A great deal of diversity exists within the black community.One reflection of that diversity is the use of the terms AfricanAmerican and black. Some researchers use African American todefine black persons who are direct descendants of men and womenbrought to the United States as slaves, whereas blacks is used todefine all people and cultures of African descent, includingblack people from the West Indies, Africa, and the Americas. Attimes, the two terms are used interchangeably (72). For thissection, both terms will be utilized where appropriate. Historically Many of the first blacks to arrive in the United States didso as slaves. Plantation owners were responsible for regulatingmuch of their slaves' alcohol consumption. During holidays,alcohol was routinely distributed to the slaves in reward fortheir loyalty and hard work, and the subsequent drunken revelrieswere tolerated. This controlled permissiveness began to change inthe early 1800s, as clandestine groups of black slaves begantheir quest for freedom. It was at this point that blacks wereprohibited from owning stills, or even being in possession ofalcoholic beverages. These laws persisted after the Civil War,when technically, blacks had been granted citizenship (14). Spanning the late 1800s through the late 1960s, hundreds ofthousands of blacks left the South and, looking for work, headedfor northern cities. This period was later described as the"Great Migration," with a total outmigration estimatedat 4.3 million individuals (72,14). This outmigration contributedsubstantially to defining the large number of blacks currentlyfound in many of the northern urban areas. Unfortunately, many ofthose seeking work did not find it, nor did they find that theywere free from racism, discrimination, and oppression. Slowly,the numbersleaving the South decreased, and by the 1970s therewas actually some migration back into the southern states by bothnorthern-born blacks and individuals returning home afterunsuccessful moves to the North. Prevalence statistics Differences in adolescent drug use among high school seniorsby race and ethnicity were discussed earlier in this chapter (seebox 6-A). Among this group, alcohol, cigarette, and illicit druguse was lowest among black and Asian youth, even after inclusionof background and lifestyle factors. Obviously, a drawback tothis type of survey is that high school dropouts are not includedin the analyses. The 1991 event dropout rate (which measures theproportion of individuals who dropped out of school over aspecified time period) for grades 10 to 12, ages 15 to 24, revealdropout percentages of 3.2 for whites, 6.0 for blacks, and 7.3for Hispanics (63). While the event dropout rate for blacks isdouble that of white students, low alcohol and drug usage rateshave also been found among black eighth and tenth graders, so thelow rate of substance use among black twelfth graders cannot bedue entirely to dropout rates (75). While use of alcohol, cigarettes, and illicit drugs isrelatively low among blacks, data on heavy or frequent use ofsuch substances differs. The 1991 NHSDA data for individuals aged12 to 20 found that 7.3 percent of whites reported heavy alcoholuse (defined as having 5 or more drinks on one occasion on 5 ormore days in the past 30 days), Hispanics reported 3.9 percent,and blacks reported 2.7 percent. However, for those individualsaged 21 or older, heavy alcohol use did not differ significantlybetween whites and blacks (5.0 vs. 6.0 percent), but wassignificantly higher among Hispanics (6.6 percent) (77). Otherstudies on heavy alcohol use, by gender, have shown that whitemen aged 18 to 29 report the highest prevalence of heavydrinking, which then declined in subsequent age groups.Conversely, the abstention rate for black males was highest amongthose aged 18 to 29, while subsequent age groups showedsignificantly increased levels of heavy drinking--among whom halfreport either frequent heavy or frequent high maximum drinking(70). Similarly, white women in the 18 to 29 age group weresignificantly more likely to drink, and to drink heavily, thanwere young black women (67). Past-month use (which does not necessarily constitute abuse)of an illicit substance by race and ethnicity was discussed atthe beginning of this section (see figure 6-2). However, the 1992NHSDA also contains more specific data for some of the mostcommonly used substances such as marijuana and cocaine. Of theblacks age 12 and older surveyed, 3.2 reported using marijuanaonce a week or more compared to 2.5 percent for whites andHispanics. Blacks also had the highest reported weekly use ofcocaine (0.5 percent) compared to Hispanic and white percentages(0.4 and 0.3, respectively) (78). Persistence of drug use has also been used as anotherindicator of substance use severity and is measured by percent ofmonthly users divided by percent of lifetime users. It has beenshown that blacks and Hispanics have a different pattern of drugpersistence from that of whites. Data on cocaine use analyzedfrom the 1990 NHSDA showed that the persistence rate for blacksage 18 to 25 was almost three times that of whites (.29 vs.. 09),and among those aged 26 to 34, the rate for blacks was four timeshigher than that for whites (.21 vs.. 05). In both age groups,the persistence rates for Hispanics were between those of blacksand whites. It is important to note that the differences inpersistence did not appear to extend to alcohol and marijuana(32). Psychosocial/cultural antecedents At least initially, many blacks did not arrive in the UnitedStates voluntarily. The legacy of slavery has shaped much ofblack culture. Black slaves struggled with many of the sameissues as American Indians: loss of languages, traditions, andreligious beliefs; assimilation and acculturation issues; and thebreakup of nuclear and extended families. Not allowed to expresstheir original languages, cultures, and beliefs, blacks attemptedto establish new cultural identities amidst oppression,segregation, and racism. Hypotheses concerning alcoholism among black males have beenproposed by several studies. Some researchers believe that theincrease in the number of heavy drinkers among black males intheir thirties may be due to feelings of frustration and failureconcerning career expectations. A complementary view points tothe combination of high unemployment rates among black malescoupled with the large numbers of liquor stores found in manyurban black neighborhoods, as having contributed to the alcoholproblems faced by black men (14,82). Prevention programs With respect to the use of alcohol and other drugs, commonthemes link blacks. In general, social stratification, church andcommunity involvement, and racial identity are thought to beimportant variables in attitudes toward alcohol and drug use(72,14). The level of importance will vary between individualsand groups depending on environmental factors. One program citedas exemplary by the Center for Substance Abuse Prevention (CSAP)is called Super II, and targets primarily at risk, blackinner-city youths 11 to 17 and their parents. The design andimplementation of the program emphasizes holism and culturalcompetence, viewing them as crucial in reducing the strength ofrisk factors and increasing the strength of resiliency factors.The program takes place through already established agencies inthe communities (Boys Clubs and Girls Clubs) and incorporates thechildrens' caregivers, youth and recreational workers, policeofficials, local corporations, and a variety of social serviceagencies. The first-year evaluation report found reductions infour of five major categories of alcohol- and drug- relatedbehavior. These included frequency of use and amount of use,number of modalities of use, alcohol- and drug-related behaviorproblems, and media influenceability (71). Another antidrug abuse campaign is being waged by theCongress of National Black Churches, Inc. (CNBC), a nationalnonprofit religious organization comprised of a variety ofdenominations. Through a variety of programs, the CNBC clergy aremobilizing, creating, and coordinating groups of individualsinterested in bringing about positive change in theircommunities. Program strategies are implemented in partnershipwith the police, criminal justice agencies, school systems,social service agencies, private organization and businesses, andinformal community networks to reduce the supply of and demandfor drugs. Hispanics Historically The term Hispanic was first used by the U.S. Census Bureau in1980 to designate those individuals who resided in the UnitedStates and whose cultural origins were in Mexico, Puerto Rico,Cuba, Central America, and other Latin American countries. Notall members of this group accept the term and prefer to usephrases such as Latino or la raza (literally, "therace"). Data from the 1990 census reveal an Hispanicpopulation of more than 20 million, and projections indicate thatHispanics will be the largest minority group in the United Statessometime between the years 2000 and 2010. Hispanics of Mexicanorigin, by far the largest Hispanic group (63 percent), areclustered in the southwest, particularly California and Texas.Puerto Ricans, excluding those living on the island of PuertoRico, are the second largest subgroup (12 percent) and liveprimarily in the Northeast, especially in and around New YorkCity, New York. Cubans (5 percent) live primarily around theirport of entry, Miami, Florida, though large numbers are found inNew Jersey and New York. Dominicans, who reside primarily in theNortheastern Atlantic States, are also beginning to grow innumber. In the past 10 years, there has been a large immigrationof Central Americans to the United States. These individuals havecome primarily from civil war-plagued countries includingGuatemala, El Salvador, and Nicaragua. It is highly possible thatmany of the problems faced by newly arrived Hispanic immigrantsmay be exacerbated among this population who have left theircountries involuntarily. Refugees escaping political turmoil oropen warfare often show signs of Post Traumatic Stress Disorder(72). Prevalence statistics NIDA data collected from 1975 to 1991 on drug use amongtwelfth graders, as well as data from 1991 for eighth and tenthgraders, reveal the following for Hispanic students: as a group,Hispanic youth had the highest lifetime and annual prevalencerates in the senior year for PCP, cocaine, crack, heroin, ice,and steroids, compared to whites and blacks, and the rates forcrack and steroid use were particularly high; among eighthgraders, Hispanics had higher rates of past month use forvirtually all the drugs surveyed including, cocaine, heroin,inhalants, alcohol, marijuana, hallucinogens, and cigarettes. Inother words, in eighth grade, before a considerable number ofstudents has dropped out, Hispanic youth have the highestprevalence of nearly all drug use, but by twelfth grade, whiteshave the highest usage rates. The researchers suggest twopossible explanations, which are not necessarily exclusive. Thefirst being that the high dropout rate for Hispanics in latergrades (in some areas as high as 40 percent) is causing a shiftin the rates, and the second is that while Hispanic youth beginexperimenting earlier, white youth catch up by the later grades(75). National statistics for 1992 of past-month use of any illicitsubstance indicated that rates for Hispanics and whites were notsignificantly different, and were slightly lower than those forblacks (see figure 6-2). The same database also revealed that forthe illicit substances measured, Hispanic rates either fellbetween black and white rates, or were the lowest rates reportedby an ethnic group. The only exception would be the heavy alcoholuse data (defined as having 5 or more drinks on one occasion on 5or more days within the past 30 days) for 1991 (1992 data not yetavailable) which showed that Hispanics aged 21 or older reportedsignificantly more heavy alcohol use within the past month ascompared to whites and blacks (77). Psychosocial/cultural antecedents Dignidad, respeto, confianza--dignity, respect, and trust--are important elements in the Hispanic culture. Like manyimmigrants to the United States, Hispanics deal with language,cultural, racial, and economic barriers. These barriers and howthey are handled within the Hispanic culture have a great deal todo with subsequent alcohol and drug problems. To a large extent,drinking (at times heavily) among Hispanic males is not onlyexpected, but encouraged. Much of the research literature hastherefore centered around alcohol and its misuse. To be able todrink heavily and maintain "control" is a valuedcharacteristic among most Hispanic men (38). Personal identitiesfor a vast majority of Hispanic men are intricately entwined withthe notion of machismo, which generally connotes strength,masculinity, independence, and responsibility (1). The man of thefamily is expected to provide for and take care of his wife andchildren. For those who may be unable to fulfill this role, dueto difficulties learning English and/or procuring employment, thesocial drinking pattern can change from one of low frequency andhigh quantity, to high frequency and high quantity (38,1). Thisdrinking pattern varies between Hispanic groups, however. A studycompleted in 1981 found that drinking levels among newly arrivedDominicans, Guatemalans, and Puerto Ricans, when compared topreimmigration levels, decreased, increased, and remained thesame, respectively (1). As is relatively true for other cultures, heavy drinking isnot condoned for Hispanic women. This is not to say that it doesnot exist. While the majority of first generation Hispanic womengenerally abstain or drink very little, changes in drinkingpatterns among the following generations have been observed. Tothe distress of many first generational Hispanic families, astheir daughters and granddaughters become increasinglyacculturated, the drinking patterns and alcohol problems moreclosely mirror those found in the general population (26).Another change observed among more acculturated Hispanic women isthe diminishment of marianismo, which is the female complement tomachismo, and encompasses such behaviors as submissiveness,humility, tolerance, virtuosity, and devotion to the male(whether father, husband, or first son). Prevention programs Important intergroup differences need to be understood forthe planning, implementation, and evaluation of substance abuseprevention programs. For example, while two immigrants, oneMexican and the other El Salvadorian, may both speak Spanish andmay both be experiencing many of the same difficulties inadjusting to life in the United States, they are very likely tohave had vastly different lifetime and cultural experiences (72). Funds from CSAP as well as the National Institute on AlcoholAbuse and Alcoholism (NIAAA) have been distributed to severaldemonstration projects throughout the United States and PuertoRico that target high-risk Hispanic youth and their families.Many of these programs are similar to others previously outlinedin this report in their attempt to be as comprehensive aspossible through the coordination of families, schools, lawenforcement, and local social services and businesses. Several ofthe programs are creating their own audiovisual and writtenmaterials in Spanish, others are utilizing activities such asEnglish courses, puppet shows, and live theater performances,while others employ peer group counseling and mentoring programs(69). Asian and Pacific Island Americans Historically According to the U.S. Census Bureau, Asian and Pacific IslandAmericans are the fastest growing population in the UnitedStates. Between 1980 and 1988, the number of Asian and PacificIsland Americans increased by 76 percent compared with anincrease of 36 percent within the Hispanic population. Similar tothe other racial and ethnic categories, the term Asian andPacific Island American gives one the impression of homogeneity,while in reality, over 60 different racial and ethnic groups arelumped in this bracket. Some of the diverse populations includedin this group are Hawaiians, Guamanians, Filipinos, Thais,Bengalis, and Sri Lankans. Beside the obvious differences inlanguage, and cultural norms and beliefs, is the degree to whichdifferent subpopulations have acculturated and/or assimilated tothe dominant culture. Many Chinese and Japanese families havebeen in the United States for three generations or more, which isin sharp contrast to the majority of first-generation Vietnamese,Koreans, Asian Indians, and Filipinos (72,85). Prevalence statistics Research on substance use and abuse within the Asian andPacific Island American population appears to be sporadic, andoften limited to alcohol. While the three national surveys NHSDA,the National Adolescent School Health Survey, and the High SchoolSenior Survey, all collect separate data for Asian and PacificIsland Americans, only the High School Senior Survey routinelyanalyzes the data separately. Due to small sample sizes, theremaining two surveys included Asian and Pacific Islanders underthe racial and ethnic category of "other." Research on alcohol consumption patterns among adult Asianand Pacific Island Americans consistently shows that thispopulation drinks substantially less than whites and Hispanics,and slightly less than blacks. Though subgroup variation doesexist, as data reveal, native Hawaiians drink at levelscomparable to those of whites, among mainland Asian Americans,Japanese Americans drink the most, followed by Koreans andChinese Americans. However, Japanese, Korean, and Filipino menall have roughly the same percentage of heavy drinkers at 28percent. This style of heavy drinking is typically associatedwith business entertainment and after work socializing (68).Among Asian and Pacific Island American women, four-fifths ofKorean and Filipino women were reported to be abstainers, as weretwo-thirds of Chinese women, and one-third of Japanese women.Among women who drank, the percentage who did so heavily varied:12 percent for Japanese women; less than 4 percent for Filipinowomen; and virtually none for Chinese and Korean women (68). Asimilar statistic for white women showed 14.5 percent reporteddrinking heavily (73). Evidence suggests, however, that theprevalence of drinking may be on the rise among both men andwomen Asian and Pacific Island Americans, although the exactreasons for this remain unclear. Some researchers have suggestedthat paralleling other immigrant populations, the moreacculturated and assimilated generations will tend to adopt thedrinking patterns of the dominant culture. Yet other researcherspoint to the fact that a significant number of second and thirdgeneration Asian and Pacific Island Americans have not adopted amore copious style of drinking. For adolescent Asian Americans, the majority of the studiesmirrors the findings for the adults--this group consistently hasthe lowest prevalence of alcohol and other drug use for allracial and ethnic groups with the possible exception of blackyouth. Although, a prospective study conducted in North Carolinafound an alarming increase in reported alcohol and other drug useamong Asian Americans over a three-year period in the late 1980s.The reason for this increase at a time when prevalence rates forother races and ethnicities was decreasing remains unknown (72).Another study on youth in California reported that ChineseAmerican youth used quaaludes twice as often as white andHispanic youth, and five times as often as black youth (68).Drinking statistics for Asian American youth are again similar tothose reported by the adult population, that is, their overallprevalence rate is one of the lowest, but statistics for heavydrinking are similar to those found among white youth (72). Psychosocial/cultural antecedents Why does this population have such low overall rates ofalcohol and other drug use? The diversity present within theAsian and Pacific Island American group makes it impossible tolist all the different cultural factors that could influencealcohol and drug use patterns. However, among many of thesubpopulations, anthropologists and substance abuse experts havefound the existence of the following philosophies: moderation,family reputation, humility, keeping a low profile, negativecommunity sanctions on excessive drinking and behavior, and theimpact of parental drinking practices (83). Among Chinesespecifically, alcohol is in an important part of many religiousand celebratory ceremonies, yet excessive use is stronglydiscouraged. One study in California uncovered additional behavioralfactors that influenced drinking patterns among some AsianAmerican men. Japanese respondents were heavily influenced bytheir friends' drinking; among Chinese men, those with moreeducation were more likely to drink; and Korean men were stronglyinfluenced by their parents' drinking habits (68). Few researchers have examined psychosocial influences onAsian and Pacific Island American adolescent drinking or otherdrug use. One factor which has been mentioned, though, is thepressure Asian American youth, in particular, are under tosucceed, especially academically. Thirty-four percent of AsianAmericans are college educated, more than twice that of theUnited States population as a whole. Those with the least amountof college education were American Indians (7.7 percent) andPacific Islanders (9.3 percent). Asian parents are similar toparents, in general, in their hopes for their children's success.However, among some subpopulations (notably Japanese, Korean, andChinese) the feelings for their children are often tied to thechild's academic achievement. When their children perform poorlyin school, some parents respond with strongcriticism,disapproval, and shame. This can understandably add asubstantial amount of stress to an adolescent who may already becoping with language and cultural differences (72). Prevention programs Mainstream culture in the United States, to a great degree,emphasizes individuality, competitiveness, and monetary success.Conversely, for many Asian and Pacific Island Americans thequalities most stressed are the needs of the family, sharing andgenerosity, and a belief in who you are rather than what you own.Because the extended family is so important in many of thecultures, it is often the first group that an individual withproblems will turn to versus an "outsider" or socialservice agency. Substance abuse prevention practitioners need tobe aware of the strong resistance within many Asian and PacificIsland Americans to seek outside assistance. One innovative substance abuse program entitled Na Keiki OKa`Aina (Children of the Land) is being implemented in Oahu,Hawaii. Children attending the local Makaha elementary schoolwork several hours a week on a farm where they learn to care forthe land, their environment, and themselves as alternatives tolifestyles that rely on alcohol and other drugs. The program usesthe cultural values of native Hawaiians, which emphasize"warm, open friendship and love," love of the earth,and other spiritual values. Since the program's inception, classbehavior has noticeably improved, English scores have increased,and a survey measuring drug use in the district schools showedthat Makaha school was the only school that reported a decrease(74). Areas for Future Research Among Different Racial and EthnicGroups While this section of the report has reiterated the need toview racial and ethnic groups as heterogeneous, the majority ofsubstance abuse data is not collected or examined in this way. Todate, a variety of distinct cultures are usually grouped underone classification, and generalizations are made concerning thisgroup's drug use. While substance abuse prevention programs areoften better tailored to specific subpopulations and cultures, itis virtually impossible to adequately evaluate these programswhen little baseline substance abuse data exists for specificsubpopulations. There is therefore room for improvement in thecollection of prevalence data on alcohol and other drug use andabuse among distinct racial and ethnic groups. Furthermore, long-term prospective studies, which are essential for understandingrisk and protective factors specific to different groups, areextremely scarce. Biomedical research on different racial and ethnic groups hasalso been inconclusive and scanty (with the possible exception ofalcohol research and Asians). ECONOMICS Economics can be viewed as a factor in individual substanceabuse in two ways. In areas where substance abuse is already wellestablished and viable employment opportunities are scarce,selling illicit substances can seem very appealing. Severalquestions arise from this scenario. Are individuals lured intothe world of illegal drug sales by income potential? And, aredrug dealers more likely to become drug abusers because they aredealers? Both of these questions have been addressed under thefirst section. A parallel issue is that of poverty and the daily stressesencountered by individuals living in chronically poor areas. Doindividuals living in these poor areas abuse substances ingreater numbers or are fewer social services available in theseareas, and thus the consequences from substance abuse are moreacutely felt and visible? Generated Income While few studies have attempted to ascertain the individualincomes of drug dealers, two studies have concentrated on thestreet sale of illicit drugs by urban youth (21,52). The researchrevealed that individual dealers reported mean gross monthlyincomes of $3,558 to $5,934. Even if these self-reported earningswere exaggerated, this sum of money is clearly more than manyurban youth could hope to obtain in legitimate jobs at a medianof $7 per hour. This earning potential may be a serious obstacle toprevention, intervention, and treatment programs targeted towardurban adolescents. The staff at an innovative treatment programfor drug dealers in Baltimore, Maryland, has discovered thedifficulties former dealers have in giving up the fast lifestylesthey once led. Most dealers say they do it because of the money," saysa staff counselor. "They can't see working at McDonald's forminimum wage when they're making $500 to $1,000 per day," headds. Counselors try to help clients think beyond the idea ofmaking fast money to the moral, social and legal issuesassociated with drug dealing. They find, however, that the moralissue is not always clear-cut. In many cases, clients aresupporting their families and it is hard for them to see they aredoing something wrong when they are paying the bills. Overall, counselors say their clients are addicted to themoney. "What we do is help them see what is all around them,what they're doing to themselves and their community by sellingdrugs (48). The potential for monetary gain may be especially true withinthe crack trade. A young black male from San Francisco,California, explained his preference for the immediate rewards ofselling crack over the seemingly meaningless rituals of school: Forget about school. I'd rather have a life of selling drugs.?.?. When you go to school, you do nothing. You sit around, havebooks in your backpack, take`em home, do your homework, come backto school, get some grade. When you sell drugs, see, I hadsatisfaction of seeing my work, getting some money for it (22). It would appear then that for many urban youth, sellingillicit drugs supplies purpose, companionship, and income withoutcompromising dignity. More money can be gained from the sale ofillicit drugs than through petty crimes, and certainly more thanthrough minimum wage jobs. Another issue to be addressed is the dealer-turned-client.From the two previously cited studies, dealers were estimated tospend between 59 and 71 percent of their income each month on thepurchase of illicit drugs. For example, out of $3,558 gross permonth, $1,226 was spent purchasing additional drugs for business,$883 was spent on drugs for personal consumption, and anadditional $533 on expenses associated with drug dealing. The Urban Institute has also reviewed the relationshipbetween using and selling drugs. Its study population wascomposed of 387 inner-city adolescent males of ninth- and tenth-grade age. Of this sample, 79.6 percent reported that theyneither used nor sold drugs within the past year. Of theremainder, 19.0 percent reported both using and selling drugs,44.3 percent reported selling only, and 36.7 percent reportedusing only. They also discovered that the greater the level ofinvolvement in either using or selling, the higher the likelihoodof doing both (13). In summary, the research completed thus far neither confirmsnor negates the possible influence income potential has on luringindividuals into drug dealing. Nor can one conclude that drugdealers are more likely to become substance abusers thannondealers. Poverty Alcohol and drug problems are present not only among thepoor, but are poor individuals at greater risk for developingthese problems? While a relatively straight forward question, notonly is poverty difficult to define, but drawing conclusionsconcerning an individual's potential for future substance abusebased on one or two variables, such as family income oreducational level, is overly simplistic and deceptive. Toadequately review this question, a milieu of both individual andaggregate measures should be present in any analysis done. In recent years, great attention has been paid to the plightof the urban poor, many of whom are minorities. These inner- citycommunities are often riddled with high rates of crime, violence,unemployment, and inadequate social and medical services. Forindividuals living in these localities, the consequences of theseproblems are serious and far reaching. Yet according to the 1980census only 9 percent of all the poor, and 21 percent of all thepoor blacks, lived in these types of areas. To define the problems of the urban poor as predominantly"black problems" does a disservice to the two-thirds ofAfrican Americans who are not poor, as well as to the two- thirdsof the poor in our central cities who are not black (8). Poverty within rural communities, while lacking much of theviolence and crime of urban areas, is no less oppressive. In1987, compared with the general population, rural residents wereless likely to be employed and to have completed high school.They had lower average incomes and higher poverty rates than didurban residents, and one out of every six rural families lived inpoverty (compared with one in eight urban families). This ratioapproached one out of two for black rural families. Areas ofchronic poverty were concentrated in the South, where 25 millionof the Nation's 57 million rural residents live (48 percent), andwhere four out of every ten rural residents were poor, elderly,or both (61). To assess poverty and its relationship to alcohol and drugabuse problems, one must find appropriate measures. Someresearchers have utilized the Federal guidelines for poverty,while others employ measures of Socioeconomic Status (SES), suchas educational level and household income. To date, the largestand most comprehensive analysis of SES variables and substanceuse has been accomplished by NIDA (76). Both bivariate andmultivariate analyses were completed on data collected in 1988and 1990 from NHSDA (see box 6-C). The NIDA report has two major limitations. First, theanalysis focused on indicators of drug and alcohol use, ratherthan indicators of problem use or hard-core use. While the reporthas categories for frequent/heavy use and recent use, it cannotbe assumed that individuals who reported such use had alcohol ordrug problems. Secondly, the report lacks data for transient,homeless, or institutionalized individuals, many of whom haveserious alcohol and/or drug problems. Table 6-3 presents the findings from the multivariateanalysis of the NHSDA data. The SES variables pertinent to apossible link between poverty and substance use are educationallevel, occupation of chief wage earner, employment status, numberof jobs held in past 5 years, median housing value, and percentof housing that is owned. Neither personal income nor householdincome were included in the analysis, as personal income was mostmeaningful only for persons who worked and household income datawere not available in the 1988 survey. Alcohol consumption within the past month was measured onthree levels: abstinence; nonheavy use; and heavy use. Marijuanause was measured by any past-month use and cocaine use wasmeasured by any past-year use (both categories could includefrequent as well as casual users). Major findings from theanalysis include: o SES variables associated with poverty and predictive ofpast month abstinence from alcohol were: not having worked in thepast 5 years and having lived in a census block with a highpercentage of owner occupancy. For users, versus abstainers, SESattributes predictive of nonheavy alcohol use included havingattended college (regardless of completion) and living in censusareas with high housing values. Significant for heavy alcohol usewas not having completed high school, holding three or more jobsin the past 5 years, and living in a census area with low housingvalues. No employment status or occupational categories werefound to be independently predictive of heavy alcohol use. o For any past-month marijuana use the independent SESpredictors associated with poverty were being unemployed andhaving held three or more jobs in the past 5 years. Individualswho reported no marijuana use in the past month were more likelyto have had some degree of college participation. o Many of the SES predictors for cocaine use in the past yearwere similar to those identified for marijuana use: beingunemployed and having worked three or more jobs in the past 5years. SES characteristics predictive of no reported cocaine usein the past year were being a college graduate and having apart-time job. This type of analysis is an exercise in inclusion andexclusion. A myriad of individual and aggregate characteristicsare initially considered in the equation and, depending on theoutcome of interest, whether it be heavy alcohol use or marijuanause in the past month, different variables will show themselvesto be either predictive or not predictive of the outcome. Becausepersonal income and household income were not included in themultivariate analysis, but are often used as SES measures forpoverty, tables 6-4 and 6-5 depict the bivariate analysis done byNIDA (76). Again, this analysis reveals associations, notcausality. Personal income (which is highly correlated with anindividual's age and sex) was examined only for respondents whoreported working full time during the year prior to the survey.Associations between personal income and drug use weresignificant for most drugs. For every drug use measure (exceptpast-month use of alcohol), plus heavy use of alcohol, thepercentage of users declined as the income level rose.Differences between income levels for frequent use of marijuanaand cocaine, concurrent heavy use of alcohol with marijuana, anduse of psychotherapeutics, hallucinogens, inhalants, and crackwere all statistically significant and more than twice as commonin the lowest income group as in the highest. Low income was alsoassociated with higher rates of abstinence from alcohol as wellas higher rates of heavy drinking. The associations between household income (which is lessaffected by age and sex) and drug and alcohol use wereconsiderably weaker than those observed for personal income. Theonly statistically significant associations were for alcohol use,concurrent heavy alcohol use with marijuana, and use ofhallucinogens. Those with household incomes of $40,000 or higherwere about twice as likely as those with incomes of less than$12,000 to have used any amount of alcohol in the past month.However, the rates of heavy drinking differed little across theincome levels. Other categories of drug use appear to be slightlyless common among the wealthiest households, but, in general,drug use was not strongly related to household income. From these types of analyses, a straightforward "yes orno" response to the initial question, which linked povertyto increased individual risk for drug abuse, is clearlyimpossible. The NIDA analyses demonstrated that the type andquantity of an individual's substance use is correlated with avariety of both individual as well as geographic characteristics.Furthermore, while the NIDA report was the largest and mostcomprehensive to date, some segments of the population, many ofwhom were possible alcohol and drug abusers, were excluded fromthe survey. As one economist noted, "There is much we still need tolearn about poverty. Much of the past research has focusedprimarily on economic questions, reflecting the extensiveinvolvement by economists in this work. Research is much morelimited on topics such as the causes of changing familystructures, the impacts of neighborhoods and family structure onchildren's opportunities in life, personal and family copingstrategies among the poor, how expectations about futureopportunities are formed, and how these expectations influencebehavior" (8). PSYCHOSOCIAL/BEHAVIORAL Aggressiveness In much of the research literature the term aggression isused almost exclusively when referring to young children andadolescents between the ages of 13 and 15. Shortly after this agea divergence appears within this identified aggressive group. Thevast majority of children "outgrow" their aggressivebehavior, while a smaller percentage progress into or alsoexhibit, among other things, conduct disorders, antisocialbehavior, delinquency, and violence. Discussing each of theseareas is beyond the scope of this report. However, it should benoted that as is true for many individual risk factors, a numberof these behaviors are intricately meshed. Definitions for the term aggression vary considerably and mayinclude tardiness, breaking rules, fighting, vandalism, crueltyto animals, and verbal abuse of other children. Many studiessimply fail to define it. Wherever possible, study definitions ofaggression will be outlined. The children in the various studies on aggressiveness andsubsequent drug abuse ranged in age from 5 to 20 years old.Aggressive behavior in the majority of the studies was exhibitedalmost exclusively by boys. While girls were included in thestudy populations, the number exhibiting aggressive behavior wasvery small. However, the presence of aggressive behavior amongsome young girls has not been shown to be predictive of lateradolescent delinquency or substance use (49). This disparitybetween the sexes has not been addressed at any length. Of the preadolescent boys who exhibited aggressive behavior,30 to 40 percent maintained this behavior into adolescence. Thiscontinued aggression has been shown to be a strong predictor ofsubsequent alcohol and drug problems (28,33, 51). Interestingly,the combination of shy and aggressive behavior has also beencorrelated with later substance use problems. It has beenpostulated that aggressive boys may be more likely to be shunnedby conventional peer groups, but accepted by other aggressivechildren who could encourage drug and alcohol use. Anothertheory, while not confirmed, suggests that young childrenrejected by conventional peer groups gravitate toward each otherand that these groups of former so-called loners may fosterdelinquent behavior in later adolescence (28). Conversely, boys(but not girls) exhibiting shy behavior have been shown as lesslikely to partake in alcohol and drug using activities as theygrew older (28,33,51). Where does this aggressive behavior originate? Some studieshave shown that young children exhibiting sociable, spontaneous,and fearless behavior are at greater risk for future aggressiveand violent conduct. Factors that seem to be protective include ashy temperament, being first born, having a small and stablefamily characterized by low discord (i.e., effective familymanagement), and having parents who regularly attend religiousservices (51). Current psychological perspectives emphasize that aggressiveand violent behaviors are "learned" responses tofrustration, that they can also be learned as instruments forachieving goals, and that the learning occurs by observing modelsof such behavior. Such models may be observed in the family,among peers, elsewhere in the neighborhood, and through the massmedia (51). This observation could, in part, explain why so few younggirls are identified as aggressive. While socially defined rolesfor adults have changed considerably in the last several decades,the socialization of children's behavior to a large extent hasnot. Certain behaviors by boys are still classified by manyadults under the "boys-will-be-boys" axiom, while thesame behaviors by girls are oftenconsidered inappropriate. Biological and genetic precursors to aggressiveness have alsobeen explored. Events associated with brain dysfunction thatappear to increase an individual's potential for aggressioninclude: brain injuries; in vitro exposure to opiates, cocaine,alcohol, and tobacco; and early environmental exposure to lead(e.g., air contaminated by leaded fuels, lead-based paint, waterfrom older plumbing systems) (51). No genetic studies specific to aggressive behavior have beenconducted. Several Scandinavian countries have researched theassociation between genetics and violence, obtaining mixedresults. No such studies have been attempted in the United States(51). By understanding the antecedents of aggressive behavior,prevention programs targeted at reducing such behavior are muchmore likely to succeed. It has been asserted thatmultidimensional programs are more effective than those thatfocus on one or two components of aggressiveness. ResearcherKaren Dodge submits: Most intervention approaches are implemented without regardfor the type of aggressive behavior under scrutiny, and thatdifferent types of aggression are likely to respond differentlyto different types of intervention. Reactive aggressive childrenwho overly attribute hostility to others in provocativesituations may respond best to treatment aimed at training themto understand better others' thoughts and feelings. Proactivelyaggressive children may respond more favorably to consistentpunishment of aggressive behavior and reinforcement ofnonaggressive responses; this latter group many also have abetter prognosis than the former group. Three interventionprograms cited as being particularly suitable for differentialimplementation with these two types of aggressive childreninclude social problem-solving skills training, anger-controltraining, and parent training (17). Several unanswered questions point to areas for futureresearch. Why do boys disproportionately exhibit aggressivebehavior? Are specific aggressive behaviors unique to certainsubpopulations? What are the differences between thoseindividuals who "grow out of" their aggressive behaviorand those who do not? Answers to these questions and others will allow for moredetailed understanding of aggressive behavior and its connectionto alcohol and drug abuse, which could in turn provide for animproved structure for the planning of appropriate preventionprograms. Delinquency and Crime Similar to aggression research, studies define and collectdata on delinquency and crime differently. Some studies use thetwo terms interchangeably, while others define delinquent acts asthose less serious versus acts such as rape, armed robbery, andmanslaughter, which are clearly illegal. Self-reported data arerelied on by some studies, while others utilize only arrestrecords. These differences must be considered when attempting togeneralize delinquent behavior to subsequent misuse of alcoholand drugs. As is true for aggressiveness, males are at greater risk fordeveloping delinquent and criminal behavior. Delinquent behaviorfor most youths appears to peak between the ages of 15 to 17,while alcohol and drug use are on the rise. However, only a smallpercentage (2 to 6 percent) of these adolescents become youngadults who continue to engage in serious criminal activitycoupled with frequent drug use. Statistics reveal that manyarrests for property and violent crimes can be attributed to thissmall group of individuals (29). Several researchers have linked delinquent and criminalbehavior to alcohol and drug abuse and have concluded theseactivities precede the use and abuse of certain substances(28,29,13,56). One such study conducted on adolescents examined therelationship between later drug use and earlier individualdelinquent behavior and delinquent peer group bonding (DPGB).Females were found less likely to engage in individual delinquentbehavior before but not after participating in a delinquent peergroup. Additionally, minority students doing well in school hadlower rates of delinquent problems than did nonminority youth whowere also doing well in school. Strong positive belief systems(beliefs that committing illegal or rule-violating acts aremorally wrong) also decreased the potential for future use ofalcohol, marijuana, and other drugs. Conversely, thoseadolescents who had high DPGB levels had increased rates ofalcohol, marijuana, and polydrug use (20). A separate study of male and female cocaine addicts analyzedthe psychosocial factors present among individuals whosubstantially increased their cocaine use from adolescence toyoung adulthood. Those who progressed to heavier use displayed asignificant lack of law abidance or social conformity (46). Several points have come to light from studies on heroinaddicts. Studies conducted in the late 1970s found that whiledelinquency preceded illicit drug use, use of alcohol and firstalcohol intoxication took place before delinquency. In fact, anaverage of two years lapsed between first alcohol intoxicationand first criminal activity for both males and females who laterbecame heroin addicts (64). A further study on male heroinaddicts that grouped participants into low-crime versushigh-crime categories found that men who had been placed in thehigh-crime group admitted significantly more contact with thecriminal justice system before becoming addicted than did thosein the low-crime group. Also, the high-crime group showed earlierand more frequent use of substances, as well as use of a widervariety of narcotic and nonnarcotic substances (47). While a relatively small number of individuals who exhibitdelinquent behavior progress to serious alcohol and drugproblems, understanding the cause(s) of the delinquent behaviormay help to decrease this number further. Psychosocial elementsthat have been associated with later delinquent behavior include: o low parent-child attachment o family conflict o family social deprivation o school failure o parental and sibling drug use and criminal behavior o poor and inconsistent family management practices (e.g.,harsh or lax discipline, lack of supervision) o attitudes and beliefs o lack of neighborhood attachment and communitydisorganization o family mobility. Neurophysiological and cognitive dimensions have also beenexamined for serious delinquents, adult criminals, and childrenwith conduct disorders. However, the findings were scanty andinconclusive (29,37). When discussing prevention programs for these children, thereis the hazard of labeling them predelinquent. This concern couldbe applied equally to most risk factors linked to future alcoholand drug problems. Labeling children as aggressive, high risk,delinquent, or developmentally slow may be a self-fulfillingprophecy. Some researchers have suggested that broad,encompassing programs should be implemented in targeted areaswhere groups exhibit a number of the risk factors previouslydescribed. This type of approach would not single out individualsbut rather would assist communities, schools, and families (29). Physical and Sexual Abuse Researchers and clinicians have increasingly addressed thepossibility that physical and sexual abuse, especially inchildhood, may be associated with an increased likelihood oflater substance abuse and addiction. Although there are many gapsin this literature, and substantive and methodological issuesthat remain to be addressed, findings from several studies thathave measured the prevalence of substance abuse strongly suggestthat additional research and the evaluation of targeted clinicalinterventions are warranted. This section highlights selectedresearch findings on the relationship of physical and sexualabuse to later substance abuse. One review article on physical abuse found that childrensubjected to physical abuse had higher levels of later substanceabuse compared to children not physically victimized. The reviewalso cited another study which found that 84 percent of thefemales in treatment for alcohol or drug addiction reported ahistory of childhood abuse (18). Childhood sexual abuse appears to be rising. The NationalIncidence Study reported in 1988 that approximately 156,000children had been recognized by public agencies (such as childprotective service agencies, mental health agencies, and theschools) as being sexually abused each year, for an annual rateof about 0.3 percent (58). This is an increase in recognizedcases of child sexual abuse of more than 300 percent between 1980and 1988, and due to the sensitive nature of the topic, isprobably a gross underestimation of the actual numbers of cases. Prevalence statistics on childhood sexual assault specific towomen range from 6 to 62 percent, depending on the definitions,methodology, and study populations used (54). One study thatrelied on a random sampling method discovered that of the 391women who agreed to participate in the study, almost 34 percentreported being sexually assaulted by age 18, which provides alifetime prevalence rate of one out of every three women. Of therespondents, over 24 percent reported an experience such as rape,15 percent had been victims of molestation, and 10 percentreported some type of noncontact sexual assault (e.g., voyeurism,verbal threats of sexual assault, being forced to watchpornography) (54). Other researchers, measuring childhoodmolestation histories among women psychiatric outpatients, havecited figures of 50 to 70 percent, versus 20 to 30 percentreported by women in nonclinical populations (12). While causality has not been established between childhoodsexual abuse and later substance abuse problems, an associationbetween the two variables has been shown. Several review articleshave summarized the findings from researchers who consistentlyreport that children exposed to sexual abuse present with agreater number of symptoms and problems compared to children whoare not victimized (12,34,55). While substance abuse problems arenot measured in all the studies, where it is measured,individuals who have been sexually abused show a much higherincidence of later substance abuse than their study counterparts(55). For example, 60 to 80 percent of individuals in substanceabuse treatment programs report having been sexual abused (12).Other researchers have classified common symptoms by age group,discovering that among adolescents who had been sexually abusedat some time in their lives, 53 percent reported abusing somesubstance (34). Studies on sexually abused women have demonstrated similarlyhigh rates. One study of women requesting appointments at acrisis counseling unit of a community health center found that 44percent of the women walk-in clients reported a history of sexualabuse as children. The sexually abused women differed from thenonabused women in many ways, but they differed most in theirsubstance abuse. The abused women were about 10 times more likelythan the nonabused women in this population to report a historyof drug abuse (21.1 percent vs. 2.3 percent) and more than twiceas likely to report a history of alcoholism (26.9 percent vs.10.5 percent) (11). A review of four separate studies on women seeking treatmentfor alcoholism shows 34 to 85 percent of the women report ahistory of sexual abuse (30); and among recovering chemicallydependent women, the topics discussed most often are sexual childabuse, incest, and rape. Uncovering the memories of these earlychildhood experiences is thought to be a contributing factor indrug relapse for some women (31). Thus, early experiences ofabuse, especially sexual abuse, may require attention intreatment programs, since they may have been important precursorsand contributors to the substance abuse and addiction, and may bemajor obstacles to successful treatment and the prevention ofrelapse. Clearly, physical and sexual abuse are not uncommonphenomena. While this section has focused on the associationbetween abusive experiences and subsequent substance abuse, thereare many other psychopathologies that also arise from sexual andphysical abuse. The research question need not be whetherphysical and sexual abuse "cause" the later substanceabuse and addiction. Clearly, many factors interact, especiallyin the home, school, and peer settings of children as they growup. However, the consistent finding of higher levels of physicaland sexual abuse among substance abusers warrants furtherresearch to disentangle the many factors that are at work. Unlikerace, ethnicity, and poverty (which are not by themselvesstrongly and independently associated with substance abuse andaddiction, but must be understood in the context of subculturesand the availability and marketing of drugs in neighborhoods andcommunities), physical and sexual abuse may more directlycontribute to later behavioral problems, including substanceabuse. Mental Disorders The sheer number of Americans with mental disorderstransforms personal tragedy into a widespread public healthproblem. Nearly one in three American adults will experience amental disorder during his or her lifetime. Moreover,approximately 1.7 to 2.4 million Americans currently suffer froma persistent and severely disabling mental disorder, such asschizophrenia or bipolar disorder (commonly known as manicdepression) (62). There exists a wide array of behaviors classified assymptomatic of mental disorders, ranging from premenstrualsyndrome, hostility toward others, and other maladaptivepersonality traits, to full-blown psychosis (2). It can at timesbe difficult to delineate where mental health ends and mentalillness begins. While many alcohol and drug problems may not be attributableprimarily to mental disorders, they can certainly be exacerbatedby these disorders. One comprehensive study found a highprevalence of comorbid (i.e., occurring at the same time) mentaldisorders and alcohol or other drug disorders--including bothabuse and dependence syndromes as defined in the DSM-III-R. Usingdata from NIMH's Epidemiologic Catchment Area (ECA) survey of20,291 adults (aged 18 and older) in communities and in variousinstitutional settings (prisons, mental hospitals, nursing homes,and specialized treatment centers), they assessed the prevalenceof comorbid alcohol, other drug, and mental disorders.Schizophrenia, mood disorders, and anxiety disorders were amongthose studied. Specific drugs studied, in addition to alcohol,included marijuana, cocaine, opiates, barbiturates, amphetamines,and hallucinogens (50). Alcohol Disorder as the Primary Diagnosis An estimated 13.5 percent of all adults in the United Stateswill have a lifetime diagnosis of alcohol abuse or dependence(see figure 6-3). For these individuals, the rate of mentaldisorder was almost double that of persons with no history of analcohol disorder, and the rate of another drug disorder wasalmost six times greater. Specific comorbid mental disordersfound in people with alcohol abuse- dependence disorder includeanxiety disorders (19.4 percent), mood disorders (13.4 percent),and schizophrenia (3.8 percent). Drug Disorder (Other than Alcohol) as the Primary Diagnosis Some 6.1 percent of the total adult population will have hada primary diagnosis of drug abuse or dependency at some time intheir lives. Over half of these individuals have also beendiagnosed with a comorbid mental disorder such as anxietydisorder (28.3 percent), mood disorder (26.4 percent), orschizophrenia (6.8 percent). Compared to those persons without adrug disorder, these individuals are at more than four times therisk of having some type of mental disorder. Additionally, theseindividuals are also seven times more likely to be addicted toalcohol. Mental Disorder as the Primary Diagnosis In contrast, at some time in their lives nearly one-quarterof all adults in the United States will have had a primarydiagnosis of mental disorder. Compared with individuals having nohistory of mental disorder, people with a mental disorder facetwice the odds of having alcohol abuse- dependence and over fourtimes the odds of drug abuse dependence. Comorbid alcohol and other drug abuse or dependence disordersoccur frequently in people with the specific subtypes of mentaldisorders included in the study: o Of those who develop schizophrenia and related disordersduring their lifetimes (approximately 1.5 percent of the U.S.population), nearly half will abuse or be dependent on alcohol orother drugs, or both. o Thirty-two percent of people with mood disorders (8.3percent of the total adult population) will abuse or becomedependent on alcohol, other drugs, or both. o The anxiety disorders, as a group, occur at sometime in thelives of 14.6 percent of the population and are highly likely tobe associated with an alcohol or other drug abuse or dependencedisorder. For example, 35.8 percent of people with panicdisorder, and 32.8 percent of people with obsessive-compulsivedisorder will have some form of alcohol or other drug abuse ordependence disorder. People with both mental disorders and alcohol or other drugdisorders are likely to suffer more severe psychiatric symptoms,disruptive behaviors, aggression, and criminal behaviors. Theimportance of early detection for mental disorders is clear ifsubsequent alcohol and drug abuse problems are to be avoided. Inother cases, an individual's drug and/or alcohol problems mayprecede his or her mental disorder. In whatever order thesecomplications are distinguished, it is essential to remember thatmillions of men and women suffer through not one, but twoillnesses (62). Resiliency The majority of funding and research has been devoted tounderstanding and identifying those elements that appear to placeindividuals at a greater risk for substance abuse. However, manyof these same factors can, to some degree, be protective. Forexample, the vast majority of adolescents who have used alcohol,cigarettes, and other drugs do not grow up to become substanceabusing adults. The process of aging and successfully passingthrough various developmental stages is in itself protective. Inother cases, the lack of a particular factor is protective. Thisis true for many of the psychosocial factors such asaggressivity, delinquency, mental disorders, and physical andsexual abuse. But what about those individuals who live in stressful andchaotic conditions--who are constantly exposed to many of theserisk factors--yet who do not develop substance abuse problems.How do these individuals emerge relatively unscathed, while manyof their immediate family succumb to substance abuse? Thissection addresses a complimentary set of protective attributes,characteristics identified inindividuals who display resiliencyto the effects of various risk factors. The term resiliency can be described as the ability torecover from or adjust easily to misfortune or change. A 1991conference sponsored by the Children of Alcoholics Foundationreleased a report in which resiliency was conceptualized in thefollowing manner (15): o Resiliency is a dynamic process, not a static condition. o Resiliency is contextual; adaptive behavior in one contextmay be maladaptive in another. o Resiliency is the result of inherent personalitycharacteristics interacting with environmental factors. o Resiliency is more complex in multiple-risk situations. o Resiliency can be learned. For the most part, social science research on resiliency inchildren has not specifically addressed environmental substanceabuse, and where it has, the research has focused to a largeextent on alcoholism within the family. However, in general,resiliency studies have examined high-risk children from avariety of families and communities, of which many had substanceabuse problems. One of the largest longitudinal studies spanned a period of30 years and was completed by Emmy Werner on the Hawaiian islandof Kauai (80,81). An entire multiracial cohort of children wasfollowed from the prenatal period to young adulthood, revealinginvaluable information on resiliency in the presence of certainrisk factors. Of the 700 children originally included in thestudy, 200 were identified as at- risk for later problems basedon perinatal stress, poverty, family instability, and parentswith mental health problems. Through the children's first decadeof life, approximately 25 percent had at least one parent with aserious alcohol problem. Of these children, 41 percent laterdeveloped serious learning and behavioral problems by age 18,while the rest did not. All the children of alcoholic mothersdeveloped problems, with the exception of one. Conversely,children of alcoholic fathers "were represented in roughlyequal proportions among those who did and those who did notdevelop serious coping problems by age 18" (80). More general findings from the study highlighted thedifference between the prevalence of serious physical, learning,and behavior problems among girls and boys. Up to age 10, whenconfronted with a variety of risk factors, boys weresignificantly more likely to display a greater number ofchildhood problems requiring some type of social service and/ormedical intervention. However, this ratio changed markedly by thesecond decade (ages 10 to 18). While high- risk boys were stillthree times more likely than girls to have records of seriousdelinquency (77 vs. 26 percent), by age 18 more than twice asmany high-risk girls reported serious mental health problems.Additionally, of those children in the first decade identifiedwith serious learning and/or behavioral problems, a greaternumber of boys than girls had improved by age 18. Interestingly, the researchers also showed that some of theresilience factors identified differed between the sexes. Forexample among young girls, experiences that tended to fostergreater maturity and independence, such as absence of a father,responsibility for younger siblings, and maternal employmentoutside the home, also appeared to bolster resiliency andcompetence. On the other hand, resiliency among young boys wascorrelated with the presence of the father, little family discordor crowding, and the existence of adequate structure andsupervision. However, overall, a greater number of high-riskgirls than high-risk boys grew into resilient young adults. Several other studies have also identified factors associatedwith resiliency in children (6,19,23). One such factor isdescribed as adaptive distancing whereby the child accomplishestwo things: the child emotionally and psychologically detachesfrom the chaos of the family and resumes more "customarypursuits" in the outside world of school and friends, andthe child does not allow the caregiver's drug or alcohol problemto be the central focus of his or her world. These behaviors havebeen observed in children as young as 3 years old. A sense of purpose and future have also been identified withresiliency. Clinicians have observed very young childrenattempting to make sense of their situation upon experiencing anarray of hardships such as chronic poverty or familial substanceabuse. Resilient children display such attributes as hopefulness,hardiness, motivation, and a belief in a bright future even whenfaced with challenges and adversity. Researchers have also found that the ability to developcompetency skills was associated with resiliency. Competenceincludes "the qualities of responsiveness, flexibility,empathy and caring, communication skills, a sense of humor, andany other prosocial behavior" (6). Researchers haveconsistently documented the presence of these characteristicsamong resilient individuals, and equally important, have notedthe lack of these characteristics among individuals with severebehavioral, criminal, and mental health problems. Another element that has been associated with resiliency isthe ability to use support systems effectively. Those childrenwho tapped into school activities, spoke with counselors,actively sought an alternative parent figure or role model, andconfided in others were much more likely to be resilient thanthose children not involved in these supportive networks. Much of a person's resiliency depends on a variety ofelements including the individual's developmental stage, culturalperceptions, and "the acuteness or chronicity of the adversecircumstances" (19). Nonetheless, many men and women whohave gone on to lead productive and fulfilling lives, often didso in spite of their circumstances. By understanding how this wasachieved, prevention programs can incorporate activities tobolster the protective factors in the lives of all children. Spirituality/Religiosity The terms religiosity and spirituality are neither mutuallyexclusive nor inclusive. Both terms encompass an enormous arrayof fellowships and individual values, including institutionalizedreligion, new age religion or quasi- religious groups,traditional beliefs, and nonreligious persons. Within the drug and alcohol abuse research field, studieshave focused almost exclusively on the relationship betweeninstitutionalized Christian religions (with the exception of ahandful of studies on Judaism) and its effect on substance useamong adolescents and young adults. Virtually no data areavailable on other methods of worship, or discussion of theeffect spiritualism/religiosity may have on the progression fromadolescent alcohol and drug use to problem use and addiction. A succinct and thorough review of recent literature onreligion and substance use was completed by social psychologistPeter Benson (7). With rare exceptions, religiousness, in varyingdegrees, has been associated with decreased levels of substanceuse. The substances studied included alcohol, cigarettes, andnumerous illicit drugs. This protective factor held true for menand women across the four U.S. census regions, and to some extentamong blacks and Hispanics (although only a few studies analyzedrace and ethnicity). The most widely used measures of religiositywere church attendance, church affiliation versus nonaffiliation,and religious importance; yet it also appeared that such indirectassociations as parents' religiousness and belief in life afterdeath were correlated with decreased substance use. Multivariateanalysis was employed to examine the relative importance ofreligiousness by controlling for other demographic and socialvariables. In most instances the protective effect ofreligiousness was relatively small, but it did appear to be morepredictive than several personal factors (e.g., self-esteem,purpose in life, locus of control) and less predictive whencompared to social variables such as parental standards, peerpressure, and social tolerance. Benson puts forth severalexplanations for this apparent protective element, most of whichcenter around the idea that organized religion fosters andmaintains a certain set of morals and values. Depending on thereligion, deviating from these norms can be somewhat toleratedor, at the other extreme, considered a profound sin. For countless individuals, spirituality, while a morenebulous concept than religion, is intricately tied to emotional,psychological, and physical well-being. A practitioner of Zen(Buddhist) meditation and various New Age spiritualities stated: I think of health at every level: a healthy mind, a healthyspirit, as well as a healthy body. So that a person would have tohave energy, alertness, enthusiasm, a love of life, a love ofpeople, a love of themselves (43). Many traditional cultures think of illness and disease asindicators of personal spiritual discord. For example, theAmerican Indian Navajos strive for a state of personal wholeness,beauty, and well-being. The Blessingway rite, composed of sacredsongs and prayers, is often used to restore an individual'sharmony with those around him or her, the environment, and, in alarger sense, the universe. By ignoring different racial and ethnic religious andspiritual beliefs, their importance is minimized and/ortrivialized (perhaps inadvertently) by more dominant religions.From a drug and alcohol prevention point of view, it would seemboth cost-effective and relatively simple to encourage andcelebrate religious and spiritual differences among individualsand communities; and acknowledge the protective benefits thesefactors provide for many people. SUMMARY No single or generic set of variables explains the harmfuluse of alcohol and drugs for every individual. While this chapterreviewed a number of selected individual and protective factors,this information should be viewed in a broader context. To gain acomplete understanding of the complexity of the substance abuseissue, the information presented before and after this chaptermust be incorporated in any argument concerning factors that insome way effect an individuals potential for substance use andabuse. By reviewing the individual risk factors under the threebroad headings of Demographics, Economics, andPsychosocial/Behavioral, certain gaps in the literature appeared.Within the demographics section, the vast majority of theresearch to date has focused on identifying psychological as wellas social characteristics that place preadolescent and adolescentchildren at greater risk for the initiation and continuation ofdrug use. While the benefits of this type of research areobvious, the majority of data point to the fact that alcohol,tobacco, and illicit drug use are highest among those aged 18 to25 and 26 to 34. However, few research studies have been devotedto these age groups. Also, under the demographic section therewas a general paucity of data on risk factors that may be uniqueto racial and ethnic minority populations and to some extentwomen (although this continues to change). Within the economics section, while there may be quotes inthe general media of tremendous financial earnings by drugdealers, research substantiating these figures is scanty. Thereis also little known about whether those individuals dealingdrugs are at an increased risk for becoming drug abusers. Many of the psychosocial/behavioral factors reviewed in thechapter have been extensively studied, and their associations toalcohol and drug use documented. However, one of the sectionsthat has fairly recently been scientifically studied is that ofphysical and/or sexual abuse. Those studies that have beenrigorously conducted are beginning to yield data that positivelylinks childhood abuse to later alcohol and drug problems. Futureresearch in this area is probably warranted. Also included in thesection were select studies on resiliency and/or protectivefactors. While research has been conducted in this area for quitesome time, much of the literature is not specific to alcohol anddrug use situations, but rather, encompasses a wide array ofvariables that place individuals at a greater risk forbehavioral, developmental, and learning problems. BOX 6-1: Racial and Ethnic Differences in Adolescent Drug UseAmong High School Seniors Research on adolescent substance usehas documentedsubstantial racial and ethnic differences in useamong highschool seniors. On average, alcohol, cigarette, andotherillicit drug use is highest among American Indianyouth,somewhat lower among white and Hispanic youth,substantiallylower among black youth, and lowest among Asianyouth.Additional research explored the hypothesis thatthesedissimilarities could be partially attributed todifferencesin background (e.g., urban versus rural, familystructure,parental education) and lifestyle factors (e.g.,grades,truancy, evenings out, religious commitment).The findingsindicated that controlling for backgroundfactors alone did notaccount for most racial and ethnicdifferences in drug use, but itdid reduce American Indians'relatively high levels of use, whichsuggests that their usemay in part be related to disadvantagedsocioeconomicstatus. When both background and lifestyle factorswereincluded in the analysis, the racial and ethnicdifferenceswere substantially reduced. Educational valuesandbehaviors, religious commitment, and amount of time spentinpeer-oriented activities were particularly importantexplanatoryvariables.Racial and ethnic differences were also found in astudy ondrug-related attitudes and perceptions. Perceived riskofusing drugs, disapproval of drug use, and perceptionsofdisapproval of drug use by friends were typically highestamongblack seniors, at intermediate levels among Hispanicseniors, andlowest among white and American Indian seniors.Conversely,perceived peer use of drugs and exposure topersons using variousdrugs for "kicks" were generallylowest among black andAsian seniors, at intermediate levelsamong Hispanic seniors, andhighest among white and AmericanIndian seniors.While thesefindings are not applicable for thoseadolescents who drop out ofschool, researchers areconfident that the results are valid forthe majority ofadolescents who remain enrolled through the senioryear ofhigh school.SOURCE: U.S. Department of Health and HumanServices, PublicHealth Service, National Institutes of Health,Smoking,Drinking, and Illicit Drug Use Among AmericanSecondarySchool Students, College Students, and Young Adults,1975-1991, NIH Pub. No. 93-3480 (Rockville, MD: 1992). BOX 6-2: Racial, Ethnic, and Socioeconomic Discrepancies inMandatory Alcohol and Drug Use Reporting Practices for PregnantWomen In one county of Florida, anonymous alcohol and drugtestswere conducted on urine samples obtained from allpregnantwomen seeking prenatal care from both public healthclinicsas well as private obstetrical offices. White andblackwomen were discovered to have insignificantlydifferentprevalence rates for alcohol or illicit drug useduringpregnancy. While black women used cocaine morefrequentlythan white women (7.5 percent versus 1.8 percent),whitewomen had higher rates of marijuana usage (14.4percentversus 6 percent). The relative similarities betweenalcoholand drug use also held true for poor versusmiddle-classwomen. However, the study also documented thatafterdelivery, black women were 10 times more likely to havebeenreported to the health authorities for substance useduringpregnancy than were white women. Poor women also hadagreater chance of being reported than middle-class women.Thisstudy reflects a discrepancy in reporting practicesamong staff atsome public clinics and private obstetricaloffices, which appearsto be influenced by an individual'ssocial status as well asrace.SOURCE: I.J. Chasnoff, H.J. Landress, and M.E. Barrett,"ThePrevalence of Illicit-Drug or Alcohol Use DuringPregnancyand Discrepancies in Mandatory Reporting in PinellasCounty,Florida," The New England Journal of Medicine322(17): 1202-1206, 1990. BOX 6-3: Bivariate Versus MultivariateAnalysis Bivariate analysis is the process of taking onevariablesuch as employment status and testing its correlationandstatistical significance to reported alcohol or drug use.Amajor drawback to this type of analysis is itsrelativesimplicity; it does not control for the potential effectsofother variables. For example, if a relationship betweenbeingunemployed and heavy alcohol use was shown to bestatisticallysignificant, one could not be certain of thenature of therelationship. Perhaps the individual wasunemployed due to his orher heavy drinking. Alternatively,a person's unemployment couldhave caused his or her heavydrinking. Furthermore, if moresophisticated analyses usingadditional variables were completed,the originalassociation between being unemployed and heavydrinkingcould disappear altogether.Multivariate analysis, whilehaving its own limitations, isa much more comprehensive way inwhich to study therelationships between several variables andalcohol and drugconsumption. The multivariate analysis used bythe NationalInstitute on Drug Abuse systematically incorporatedavariety of individual variables such as educationallevel,employment status, race and ethnicity, and sex, inadditionto certain aggregate variables including region(South,Northeast, North Central, West), metropolitan status,andracial and ethnic composition of census blocks. Each oneofthese variables was then separately analyzed for itspotentialpredictive value for alcohol and drug use, whilethe othercontributing variables were also taken intoaccount. Whilemultivariate analyses fall short ofdemonstrating causality,because additional variables areused to control for plausiblealternative explanations, moreconfidence can be placed in thesignificant correlationsfound.SOURCE: Office of TechnologyAssessment, 1994. BOX 6-4: A Population at Risk--Migrant and SeasonalFarmworkers Migrant and seasonal farmworkers (M/SFWs) areindividuals"whose principal employment is in agriculture ona seasonalbasis [and who have] been so employed within the last24months" (Public Law 100-386). Migratory workers arethose"who establish ... for the purposes of such employmentatemporary abode," while seasonal workers are those whomeetthe seasonal definition but are not migrant workers(PublicLaw 100-386). While seasonal is not explicitly definedinthe public law, the Department of Agriculture defines aseasonalfarmworker as one who performs 25 to 149 days offarm wage work inone year, and does not migrate.Due to the transitory nature ofthe job and the employees,obtaining a precise estimate on thenumber of farmworkers isdifficult. State data suggest thatupwards of 4 millionfarmworkers are in the United States andPuerto Rico, and ifratios from the late 1970s hold true,approximately 30percent (or 1.2 million) of these aremigrants.The racial and ethnic background of the farmworkersvarieswith the so-called "stream." The East Coaststream isprobably the most diverse with American blacks,Haitians,Jamaicans, Dominicans, Mexicans, Puerto Ricans,anincreasing number of Central American Indians, and asmallpercentage of whites. In the Midwest and West, thegreatmajority of migrant farmworkers are of Mexicandescent,although increasingly, Asian immigrants are making theirwayinto the stream. American Indians make up asubstantialproportion of the farmworker population in the WestandSouthwest.Farmworkers are most often hired through amiddle-person or"crewleader" who is usually in chargeof negotiating lengthof employment, transportation, wages,housing, and meals. Itis not uncommon for migrant farmworkers tomove anywherefrom two to eleven times in a year. Besides thephysicallytaxing nature of the work, numerous environmentalstressors(some unique to this population) increase the likelihoodforalcohol and drug abuse. Some of these stressorsincludephysically and socially isolated camp locations;unsanitary,overcrowded, and unsafe camp conditions; towns whichoftendo not welcome the presence of farmworkers; long periodsofseparation from family members; feelings of boredom,isolation,and powerlessness; and language and culturaldifferences.The job'shigh mobility requirements hamper the collectionof health data onthis population. Anecdotal informationfrom health care providerslocated at Migrant/CommunityHealth Centers (M/CHCs) and localhealth departments citealcohol and drug abuse problems as some ofthe mostsignificant health issues faced by M/SFWs, followedbyanxiety and depression (McCaw 1991). However, fewquantitativeor qualitative studies have documentedsubstance abuse within thispopulation. One study of blackand Haitian farmworkers in upstateNew York found that themajority of the heavy drinking on themigrant camps was doneby older, single, black males, and that thedrinkingpatterns of the study participants who traveled withtheirfamilies differed little from individuals in thegeneralpopulation. To a large extent, this was attributed tothesocial controls family members exerted on one another(Matteraet al. 1983). This is an important point, as thegreatermechanization of farmwork has reduced the need formanual labor,and many of the farmworkers who previouslytraveled with theirfamilies can no longer afford to do so.Anecdotal evidencesuggests that the composition of themigrant workforce has beenshifting toward one of singlemales, rather than families. Withthis shift, a generaldecrease in social control among the migrantcamps is likelyto occur, and a greater number of alcohol and drugproblemsmay begin to appear.Providing substance abuse preventionprograms to M/SFWs is achallenge. Few M/CHCs have the financialor personnelcapabilities to implement substance abusepreventionprograms. Many farmworkers simply do not stay inonelocation long enough. Language and cultural differencesarevast, not to mention the geographical distancessometimesrequired to reach the camps, which often are located 20to30 miles away from the nearest social service and/or eachother.Two organizations (BOCES Geneseo Migrant Center inNew York, NY,and Tri-County Community Health Center inNewton Grove, NC) havesuccessfully implemented similartypes of programs based on thepremise of providing weekendactivities as an alternative todrinking and drug use. Full-day programs are normally held awayfrom the camps, andinclude educational, creative, athletic, andculturalactivities. The activities are free and transportationisoften provided. However, farmworkers can attend only iftheyhave not been drinking or using drugs.Clearly, greaterresearch is necessary to adequatelydocument the prevalence ofalcohol and drug use within themigrant streams, as well as thechanging composition of thestreams, and how this may affectsubstance use. Little isknown about the differences in substanceuse between thevarying racial and ethnic groups within thestreams, and howthe growing number of immigrants from war-torncountrieswill affect the health problems seen within thestreams.SOURCES: U.S. Congress, Office of TechnologyAssessment,Health Care in Rural America, OTA-H-434 (Washington,DC:U.S. Government Printing Office, September 1990). K.McCaw,"Migrant Workers," Clinical Manual of SubstanceAbuse, J.Kinney (ed.)(St. Louis, MO: Mosby-Year Book, Inc.,1991). G.Mattera, J. Watson, S. Kunitz, et al., "Alcohol UseAmongMigrant Laborers," unpublished report for the New YorkStateHealth Research Council, Albany, NY, 1983. _ CliffSchaffer's Home Page