WT02-B02-1IA086-000615-B001-79http://206.61.184.43:80/schaffer/Library/studies/ota/ch1.htm 206.61.184.43 19970122024015 text/html 54706HTTP/1.0 200 OKDate: Wednesday, 22-Jan-97 02:40:04 GMTServer: WebSitePro/1.1f (S/N wpo-0deb)Allow-ranges: bytesContent-type: text/htmlLast-modified: Saturday, 28-Dec-96 06:51:21 GMTContent-length: 54488 CHAPTER 1 EXECUTIVE SUMMARY TECHNOLOGIES FOR UNDERSTANDING AND PREVENTING SUBSTANCEABUSE AND ADDICTION US Government Office of Technology Assessment October 18, 1994 CHAPTER 1 EXECUTIVE SUMMARY The abuse of licit and illicit drugs represents a majorpublic health problem in the United States. The costs to societyof such abuse include thousands of premature deaths annually dueto drug-related illnesses, accidents, and homicides; economiccosts related to health care, criminal justice, and lostproductivity; and the mental and physical pain suffered bymillions of Americans. Many ills plaguing the nationtoday--including the AIDS epidemic, increased crime and violence,and homelessness--in some cases, may be linked to individuals'physical dependence on a variety of abusable substances. Theconsequences of substance abuse and addiction have been felt bypeople within every economic, social, racial, religious, andpolitical boundary. What are the root causes of substance abuse and addiction?Why and how does addiction occur? Who are the substance abusers?What factors lead to addiction? What are the implications forprevention and treatment? ROOT CAUSES The Office of Technology Assessment (OTA) was asked toidentify the root causes of substance abuse and addiction. Theterm root causes has been used in political discussions anddebate. To some, root causes of substance abuse and addiction areframed in a moral context, in which decisions related to use,abuse, and addiction are the responsibility primarily ofindividuals. To others, root causes include a multitude of socialand economic problems, such as homelessness, poverty, and racism.Many people have strongly held opinions as to what constitutesthe general root causes of substance abuse and addiction inpopulations, but no consensus exists about the specific rootcauses of substance abuse and addiction for particularindividuals. The OTA report has four parts: necessary preconditions,individual factors, community contexts, and policy options. Thefirst part, Necessary Preconditions, focuses on several factorsthat are necessary for substance abuse and addiction to occur.The second part, Individual Factors, focuses on risk andprotective factors in individuals that are thought to influencesubstance use, abuse, and addiction. The third part, CommunityContexts, looks at how risk and protective factors play out insubcultures and in major activity settings (home, school,workplace, and recreation). The fourth part, Policy Optionsaddresses a range of legislative issues and options for Congress. NECESSARY PRECONDITIONS No single or general set of variables explains the misuse ofalcohol and other drugs for every individual; in other wordsthere are no "root causes" for substance abuse thatuniversally apply to everyone. Nevertheless, OTA has identifiedthree major sets of necessary preconditions that must be presentin order for substance abuse and addiction to occur: biology and pharmacology, availability, and use and transitions to abuse and dependency. Biology and Pharmacology The first major set of preconditions includes biological andpharmacological factors, without which drug abuse and dependencywould be impossible. Underlying all alcohol and drug problems arethe actions and effects that drugs of abuse exert on the brain.It is important to understand how drugs work in the brain, whycertain drugs have the potential for being abused, and what, ifany, biological differences exist among individuals in theirsusceptibility to abuse drugs. A wide range of psychoactive substances have the potentialfor abuse (see box 1-1). The possession and use of severalsubstances (e.g., marijuana, heroin, cocaine) are illegal in all50 states. Other addictive substances (e.g., tobacco and alcohol)may be legally purchased, possessed, and consumed by manyAmericans. Some abusable substances (e.g., a wide range ofprescription drugs) are available on a restricted basis, usuallyby a physician's order, while others (e.g., inhalants) may belegally purchased, possessed, and consumed by anybody. Biological factors that contribute to substance abuse andaddiction fall into two groups: the effects drugs of abuse exerton the individual in general, and the biological status ofspecific individuals taking drugs. The effects the drugs exertcan be either acute or chronic and will vary depending on thedrug and its route of administration. Most drugs of abuseinfluence the brain's reward system. The pleasurable sensationsthat drug use can produce reinforce drug-seeking and drug-takingbehaviors. These actions differ with different drugs; thus, somesubstances have greater potential for abuse and addiction thanothers. While growing evidence suggests that the brain rewardsystem plays a role in the reinforcing properties of most drugsof abuse, the precise mechanisms involved are complex and haveyet to be completely described (see figures 1-1 and 1-2). Prolonged or chronic use of a substance or substances canproduce both biological and behavioral changes (some long-lasting). Biological changes can include sensitization and/ortolerance to a substance and, if use is discontinued, withdrawal(see box 1-2). Behavioral changes also occur with continued druguse. An individual's drug-craving, drug- seeking, and drug-takingbehaviors are reinforced through neuroadaptive changes in thebrain's reward system. Environmental cues also play a large role in drug-seeking anddrug-taking behavior. On encountering certain environmentalstimuli (i.e., specific locations, smells, tastes), drug-cravingand drug withdrawal symptoms have been reported by former drugusers who have been drug-free for months and even years. Through family, twin, and adoption studies, most researchersagree that genetic factors play some part in the acquisition ofalcohol problems and, although less clear, other drug problems.However, no conclusive evidence has been found to explainprecisely what is inherited or the overall importance of thisinherited material. It has been hypothesized that numerous genes(as opposed to one) interact in complex ways, and expression ofthose genes are affected by a myriad of environmental factors.Thus, the presence or absence of a genetic factor neither ensuresnor protects against drug addiction. Availability The second set of preconditions for drug abuse and dependencyincludes availability. A person cannot become a drug abuserunless a drug is physically available. In addition, however,availability is affected by social norms (e.g., factors withinthe community conducive to drug use, including level of parentalor guardian supervision, lack of consequences for alcohol anddrug offenses, lack of alternative activities, and portrayals ofalcohol and other drug use by friends and the media as aglamorous and healthy activity), prices (economic availability),and personal values (subjective availability) (see table 1-1). The primary focus of U.S. antidrug policy has been to attackthe physical availability of illicit drugs through lawenforcement efforts aimed at disrupting the production,transport, and sale of drugs. While this focus has increaseddrug-related arrests--nearly half of newly sentenced federalinmates in 1991 were imprisoned on drug charges--illicit drugsare still widely available. Marketing techniques for both licit and illicit drugs canalter social, economic, and subjective availability. Keycomponents of marketing include the promotion and advertising ofparticular product lines to appeal to particular subpopulationsof the consuming public, development of a product line that canbe targeted to subpopulations within the larger community ofconsumers, pricing strategies to attract new buyers, andidentification of retail outlets for sales. Federal law regulates the merchandising of licit yet abusablesubstances such as tobacco, alcohol, and prescription drugs byplacing a variety of restrictions on how such products may bemarketed. Despite current restrictions, debate continues as towhether and how a variety of legal drugs should be marketed. Use and Transitions to Abuse and Dependency The third set of preconditions for drug abuse and addictionis drug use, including the progression to heavier and moreharmful use. A person cannot become drug-dependent without firstusing a drug and then progressing to more harmful levels of use.Researchers have focused on stages in the progression of drug usein several ways. They have studied stages in the initiation ofthe use of different drugs, finding a sequence that moves fromthe use of cigarettes and wine or beer, to the use of marijuana,then hard liquor, and finally other illicit drugs. Because mostindividuals who use drugs do not go on to abuse drugs, andbecause the use of drugs at one level does not guarantee the useof drugs at a higher level, these stages are descriptive but notpredictive. Initiation is the first step in the progression to moreserious levels of drug use. Because drug use often begins duringadolescence, most drug use research has focused on drug useinitiation among adolescents. However, many individuals whoinitiate drug use do not progress to harmful drug use. Also, thefactors associated with such progression may often differ fromthe factors associated with initiation. Thus, the focus on theinitiation of drug use during adolescence is not sufficient foran understanding of the progression from use to abuse anddependency. In addition to initiation, research has focused on otheridentifiable stages in the full cycle of drug use and abuse,including continuation of drug use, maintenance and progressionof drug use within a class of drugs, progression in drug useacross drug classes, and regression, cessation, and relapsecycles. Research has also been done on the co- occurrence andpossible sequences in drug abuse and other problem behaviors,with some studies finding that problem behaviors often precedethe onset of drug abuse. INDIVIDUAL FACTORS Much of the research on substance abuse and addiction hasfocused on identifying individual risk factors for alcohol andother drug use, specifically among adolescents and young adults(see table 1-2). Risk factors have been identified as thosecognitive, psychological, attitudinal, social, pharmacological,physiological, and developmental characteristics that fosterinitiation of drug and alcohol use and/or abuse by an individual.Protective factors are those characteristics that reduce the riskof substance use and abuse and promote positive development, suchas appropriate role models, involvement in positive peer groups,and a positive self-image and outlook for the future. Because no individual risk or protective factor can becategorized as a root cause of substance abuse and addiction, afull analysis of each individual factor is beyond the scope ofthis report. However, an overview of selected factors highlightsassociations often present in substance abuse and addiction. Demographic Age The preponderance of substance abuse research points to thefact that children who use alcohol and other drugs before the ageof 15 have a greater likelihood of becoming problem alcohol andother drug users, versus those youth who begin use at a laterage. While most substance use and abuse occur during theadolescent and young-adult years, older persons are not immune tothe addictive powers of these substances. For example, amongwomen, alcohol problems tend to appear on average several yearslater than they do among men (although this trend may bereversing). For black males, problem drinking patterns typicallyoccur after age 30, versus ages 18 to 25 for white males. Although substance abuse problems are not exclusive toadolescence, most prevention programs currently target youth. Theimportance of these types of programs is obvious--to prevent ordecrease the use of alcohol, tobacco, cigarettes, and other drugsby youth. Yet, adults can also be exposed to stressful lifesituations, such as unemployment, divorce, or death of a spouseor child, which could contribute to substance abuse problems. Theadult population presents unique and often overlooked challengesfor the planning and implementation of substance abuse preventionprograms. Gender Historically, the vast majority of biological and behavioralstudies were conducted on male participants; women substanceabusers were not commonly included in research studies. Adistorted picture emerged, in which women were assumed to misusethe same substances, and for the same reasons, as men. Within thepast 10 to 20 years, however, some researchers have focused onthe causes and consequences of substance abuse problems amongwomen, and are beginning to report differences based on gender.Basic gaps in knowledge remain, however, regarding substance useand abuse among women. Until these gaps are addressed, theinaccurate and misleading practice of transferring data garneredfrom studies on men to women is likely to continue. Race and Ethnicity Historically, racial and ethnic minorities have been linkedwith, and often blamed for, many of the substance abuse problemswithin the United States (see box 1-3). Certainly, many urbanareas have high concentrations of minorities, and within many ofthese areas the prevalence of substance abuse may be high. Oftenoverlooked, however, is the prevalence of substance abuseproblems in suburban and rural areas throughout the UnitedStates. In the minds of many, the link between minoritypopulations and rampant substance abuse is inaccurate andderogatory. Adolescent research has documented substantial racial andethnic differences in substance use among high school seniors. Onaverage, licit and illicit substance use is highest among NativeAmerican Indian youth, somewhat lower among white and Hispanicyouth, substantially lower among black youth, and lowest amongAsian youth. However, such findings do not include populationsmost likely to be excluded from self-reporting studies (e.g.,high school dropouts). Until recently, much of the analysis of substance use and/orabuse data has concentrated on the relationship between the useof a substance and one or two variables such as race andethnicity and/or educational level. Often a positive associationwas found between minority populations and the use or abuse ofcertain substances. While statistically correct, these analysescan be simplistic and misleading. Clearly many risk andprotective factors interact to produce substance use and abuse.If the majority of these variables are excluded from theanalysis, a skewed picture may arise as to the importance ofcertain variables as risk factors for substance use and abuse.Additionally, to simplify the data collection, racial and ethniccategories are often broad. The most popular groupings are black,white non- Hispanic, Hispanic, and other. While each of thesecategories contains many distinct cultures, gross generalizationsare commonly made. Race and ethnicity have not been shown to be eitherbiological or genetic risk factors for substance use or abuse. Todate, the preponderance of investigative studies has focused onracial and ethnic differences in response specifically toalcohol. Few studies have been completed on differences in racialand ethnic biological responses to other licit or illicit drugs. Economic Are poor individuals at greater risk of developing problemsrelated to substance abuse? While a relatively straight forwardquestion, its resolution is hampered by the fact that poverty isdifficult to define and drawing conclusions concerning anindividual's potential for future substance abuse based on one ortwo variables such as family income or educational level isoverly simplistic and deceptive. In recent years, attention has been paid to the plight of theurban poor, many of whom are minorities. These inner- citycommunities are often riddled with high rates of crime, violence,unemployment, and inadequate social and medical services. Forindividuals living in these localities, the consequences of theseproblems are serious and far reaching. To assess poverty and its relationship to substance abuseproblems, some researchers have used the federal guidelines forpoverty, while others employ measures of socioeconomic status(SES) such as educational level and household income. To date,the largest and most comprehensive analysis of SES variables andsubstance use has been accomplished by the National Institute onDrug Abuse (NIDA). While the analysis revealed associationsbetween certain characteristics and patterns of substance use, itdid not reveal causality. From this analysis, a straightforward"yes or no" response to the initial question linkingpoverty to increased individual risk for substance use or abuseis clearly impossible. The NIDA analysis demonstrated that thetype and quantity of an individual's substance use is correlatedwith a variety of both individual as well as geographiccharacteristics. Furthermore, while the NIDA study was thelargest and most comprehensive to date, some segments of thepopulation (e.g., homeless, dropouts, institutionalized), many ofwhom were possible alcohol and drug abusers, were excluded fromthe survey. Psychosocial and Behavioral Many of the identified risk and protective factors relate topsychological, social, and behavioral characteristics. Conditionssuch as aggressiveness, delinquency, and mental disorders areoften linked with substance abuse and addiction. Experiences suchas physical and sexual abuse have also been identified aspotential risk factors. While relatively little research has beenaccomplished on protective factors, several elements identifiedwithin the resiliency literature, as well as religiosity andspirituality, have been associated with decreased substance use. However, the presence or absence of specific risk factorsneither predicates nor guarantees protection from substanceabuse. In addition, consensus is lacking within the substanceabuse field as to the importance, interaction, or order of thefactors. COMMUNITY CONTEXTS A growing body of research is focusing on factors andinterventions relevant to the onset and prevention of substanceuse, abuse, and dependency in the four principal communityactivity settings--homes and families, schools and peers,workplaces, and recreational settings. In framing prevention programs with divergent populations,researchers are attempting to better understand qualitative aswell as quantitative research methods, and the variety ofsettings in which substance abuse and addiction can take placeand can be combated (see box 1-4). Despite the promise of community-based research, severalproblems exist. First, much of the research does not addresssubstance abuse and addiction per se, but rather risk andprotective factors that can lead to a number of outcomes,including substance abuse and addiction. Second, research studiesvary widely in methodology, making it difficult to drawscientifically valid conclusions. Third, rigorous evaluation ofmany prevention research programs is missing, leaving theeffectiveness of such programs open to debate. Homes and Families Although American society expects families in their homes totake the lead in dealing with substance abuse and other problembehaviors, families in this country generally receive onlylimited support in protecting themselves against substance abuse.This situation may result in part from the belief that mostnuclear families can raise their children largely independentlyand therefore do not need outside support, and in part from thebelief that teens and young adults are more influenced by theirpeers. The first belief, however, is not supported bylong-standing practices in most societies, where extendedfamilies and life-long neighbors have traditionally helped raisechildren (although in the United States many parents do not haveaccess to these additional child-rearing resources because ofurbanization, high technology, and family mobility). And thesecond belief is being questioned by growing evidence thatcertain parenting practices and family intervention programs cansignificantly reduce the risk of substance abuse amongadolescents and young adults. A growing body of research has identified risk and protectivefactors that may be particularly relevant in home and familysituations (see table 1-3). Programs that enhance protectivefactors include those providing parent education, prenatal andinfant care, preschool, and social support activities that helpstrengthen involved and responsive parenting. Programs that seekto decrease the presence of risk factors include those designedto reduce drug trafficking (e.g., community policing, cleansweeps of housing projects), physical and sexual abuse, theimpact of negative life events (e.g., mental health counseling),and parental neglect. Substance abuse treatment programs thatinclude an addict's family members also address risk factors. Schools and Peers Schools have been the target for prevention programs tocurtail drug use at school sites (e.g., Drug Free School Zones)as well as curriculum-based programs that target drug use in thecommunity as a whole. Because school-age youth are especiallylikely to initiate the use of alcohol and other drugs, much ofthe research has focused on use, rather than on abuse anddependency. Such research is nevertheless relevant to anunderstanding of abuse and dependency, since use is aprecondition and contributor to abuse and dependency and becauseeven experimental use can be harmful. OTA conducted the most extensive compilation and examinationof survey research on school-aged substance use to date-- 9,930statistical analyses from 242 separate studies. The studiesreported statistical relationships between substance use and itspostulated causes. Statistical findings from the study reportswere sorted into 11 major categories and 50 subcategories (seetable 1-4), and then analyzed to identify strong, moderate, andweak statistical relationships, as well as those that had beeninsufficiently studied. The four variables that dominated ascorrelates of and possible contributors to substance abuse are:1) prior and concurrent use of substances, 2) substance use bypeers and friends, 3) perceived peer attitudes about substanceuse, and 4) offers to use substances. The prominence of prior andconcurrent use is consistent with the reinforcing nature ofsubstance use itself. The prominence of the other three variablesemphasizes the importance of the social environment incontributing to and reinforcing substance use among school- ageyouth. Schools primarily seek to prevent substance use and abusethrough curriculum-based drug prevention programs. Such programshave dominated the field, largely because they are relativelysimple to understand, implement, and replicate, and becausemethods to evaluate them have become standardized.Curriculum-based prevention programs have been hampered, however,by a lack of good evaluation data needed to prove theireffectiveness. Workplaces The prevalence of drug abuse among the employed remainsinadequately documented, based on a small number of studies.Substance abuse contributes to workplace problems, such asaccidents, injuries, absenteeism, turnover, lost productivity,compensation claims, and insurance costs. Substance abuse inworkplaces can be affected by nonworkplace factors and workplacefactors. The primary interventions are employee assistanceprograms that help employees with personal problems by providingservices directly (through the work organization) or indirectly(through a provider in the community); health promotion programsthat typically seek to prevent illness and promote wellnessthrough behavior change; and alterations to workplaceenvironments that seek to reduce stress and strengthen supportfor workers. Recreational Settings Recreational activities and settings may also contribute tothe prevention of substance use and abuse or, by their absence,increase the risk. Examples of recreational activities andsettings include Boys and Girls Clubs, Boy and Girl Scouts,organized sports, and local park and recreation departmentprograms. Research on the impact of organized youth activities onsubstance use and abuse is limited, and only a few studies haveaddressed the issue directly. However, existing researchindicates that involvement in youth programs and activities isassociated with fewer at-risk behaviors, including substance useamong youth. The youth development field, including the resourcesof park and recreation departments, provides opportunities forbroad-based prevention interventions. Involvement in activities does not by itself protect againstsubstance abuse. Some activities, such as those that areunstructured and unsupervised, may even increase the risks ofsubstance use and abuse through association with a wider range ofpeers, some of whom are using substances. In addition, activitiesperceived as boring may not protect against substance use andabuse. More research is needed to clarify the aspects ofrecreational and other leisure activities that may protectagainst substance use and abuse. Research might focus on whetheractivities that are supervised, structured, drug-free,empowering, skills- building, self-esteem-promoting, active,shared, and nonboring (or some combination of those) areassociated with lower levels of substance use and abuse. POLICY OPTIONS Issues related to substance abuse and addiction have longoccupied the attention of the American public (see table 1- 5).Congress has authorized a multitude of federal programs aimed atreducing or preventing the supply and demand of illicit drugs andregulating the availability of illicit substances, and hasappropriated billions of dollars each year to federal agencies,provided oversight of federal programs, and passed broad-basedlegislation to coordinate programs as part of the war on drugs.In addressing what some policymakers term as the root causes ofsubstance abuse and addiction, the list of relevant statutesexpands significantly, as many domestic and social programs caninfluence the risk and protective factors that can lead anindividual into or away from substance abuse and addiction. A total of 12 executive branch departments, four independentagencies, one multiagency program (Weed and Seed), one WhiteHouse office (the Office of National Drug Control Policy--ONDCP), and the Judiciary, all receive federal funding as part ofnational drug control strategy. These efforts includeinterdiction, treatment, and prevention programs. The federal substance abuse control policy has as its primaryfocus the eradication of the supply of drugs. Congress currentlyappropriates more than $12 billion annually on antidrug efforts,with approximately two-thirds of this amount supporting druginterdiction and law enforcement activities, and the remaindersupporting demand- side activities, such as drug treatment,research, and prevention programs. Drug demand reduction efforts focus on providing treatmentfor abusers and addicts, prevention programs for variouspopulations, and biomedical and behavioral research on the causesof substance use, abuse, and addiction. Of these, the federalgovernment spends the most on treatment, followed by preventionand causality research. Drug treatment and prevention programsare funded at both the federal and state levels, while causationresearch is funded primarily by the federal government. A recentGeneral Accounting Office (GAO) study revealed that for studyingthe causes of drug abuse, funding has remained comparativelytiny. In 1990, for example, such research was funded at a levelof $6 million, about one-tenth of one percent of the nation'sdrug control budget for that year. OTA, in conjunction with GAO, surveyed federal agenciesidentified as having substance abuse prevention efforts. OTAfinds that substance abuse prevention efforts are scattered overa number of federal agencies, and that federal prevention effortsare dictated by statutory mandates, rather than directed atidentifying causes of substance abuse and addiction per se. TheWhite House ONDCP, charged with coordinating federal antidrugefforts, lacks the statutory mandate to forcibly integrate oralter the multitude of programs that make up the federalgovernment's war on drugs. Congress faces several fundamental difficulties in addressingthe causes of substance abuse and addiction: o No scientific consensus exists as to what is the driving cause of substance abuse and addiction. A range of risk and protective factors have been associated with drug use, abuse, and addiction. o Federal antidrug efforts, though coordinated by ONDCP, are spread among many federal agencies, whose authorization and appropriations fall under the jurisdiction of numerous congressional committees and subcommittees. ONDCP efforts in drug demand reduction efforts alone involved federal agencies across at least 11 Cabinet-level departments. This makes coordinated legislative action difficult to achieve. o The federal budget deficit is an obstacle to the creation of new domestic programs or the enhancement of existing programs that target known risk and protective factors in individuals and communities. The framework and literature reviews presented in this report make clear that substance abuse and addiction can arise and be influenced by multiple factors in individuals, groups, and communities. Thus, effective intervention requires prevention practitioners to select from a variety of options, so they can target the specific factors that are especially important for the particular populations and communities they are addressing. This does not mean that everything must be done at once nor that everything be known in advance of taking action. To the contrary, policymakers and practitioners can take small steps at a time, and then, as resources and new knowledge permit, take additional steps that address a fuller range of factors and contexts in greater depth. o Current drug prevention programs lack scientifically accepted standards for determining their success or failure. Whatever methods are developed, tested, and incorporated into prevention programs, a critical component of success is careful, rigorous evaluation. Answering "what works?" is essential in making advances in preventing substance abuse. In choosing which policy issues to address, OTA focused onthose areas directly addressed in this study. OTA identified aseries of policy issues in four broad categories: federal focusand prevention program structure, research needs, communityactivity settings, and availability (see table 1- 6). A number ofpolicy questions and options for congressional action emerge fromthese four categories (see table 1-7). A full discussion of thepolicy issues and options for congressional action can be foundin chapter 9 of the full report. Given the broad nature offederal antidrug efforts, many important issues relating tofederal antidrug efforts remain beyond the scope of this report.Such topics include drug treatment, interdiction and enforcement,and drug legalization. BOX 1-1: Overview of Alcohol and Some Other PsychoactiveSubstances Class of psychoactive substance(a) Description(b) ALCOHOL (ethyl alcohol) Alcohol, one of the most widely used of all drugs, is acentral nervous system depressant with effects similar to thoseof sedative-hypnotic compounds (see below). At low doses, alcoholmay be associated with behavioral excitation thought to be due tothe depression of inhibitory neurons in the brain. Alcoholdiffers from sedative-hypnotic compounds in that it is usedprimarily for recreation or social rather than medical purposes. Examples 1. Beer. 2. Wine. 3. "Hard" liquor (e.g., whiskey,gin). Class of psychoactive substance(a) Description(b) SEDATIVES, HYPNOTICS, OR ANXIOLYTICS Sedative-hypnotics are drugs of diverse chemical structurethat exert a nonselective general depressant on the centralnervous system. In addition, they reduce metabolism in a varietyof tissues in the body, depressing any system that uses energy.Depending on the dose, any sedative hypnotic compound may beclassified as a sedative (an agent that allays excitement), atranquilizer (an antianxiety agent), a hypnotic (a sleep-inducingagent), or an anesthetic (an agent that eliminates pain).Sedative-hypnotics are used medically as sedatives, anxiolytics(antianxiety agents), hypnotics, antiepileptics, musclerelaxants, and general anesthetics. Examples 1. Barbiturates ("downers" or "barbs"):pentobarbital sodium[NembutalR], secobarbital sodium [SeconalR],amobarbital [AmytalR]--taken orally. 2. Nonbarbiturate hypnotics: methaqualone [QuaaludesR]--taken orally. 3. Tranquilizers: diazepam [ValiumR], chlordiazepoxidehydrochloride [LibriumR]--taken orally. Class of psychoactive substance(a) Description(b) CANNABIS (THC) THC (tetrahydrocannabinol) the active agent in marijuana,alters perceptions, concentration, emotions, and behavior, thoughthe mechanisms of action are not entirely clear. Researchers havefound, however, that THC changes the way in which sensoryinformation is processed by the brain. It can be used medicallyto relieve nausea and side effects of chemotherapy in cancerpatients; it is very rarely used to treat glaucoma. Examples 1. Marijuana ("pot" or "grass")-- smokedor eaten. 2. Hashish ("hash")--smoked or eaten. 3.Hashish oil ("hash oil")--smoked (mixed with tobacco.4. Tetrahydrocannabinol (THC)-- taken orally in capsules. Class of psychoactive substance(a) Description(b) NICOTINE Nicotine, obtained naturally from tobacco, is a centralnervous system stimulant.(c) It exerts its action secondary tostimulation of certain cholinergic (excitatory) synapses bothwithin the brain and in the peripheral nervous system. Examples 1. Cigarettes. 2. Smokeless tobacco (e.g., snuff or chewingtobacco). Class of psychoactive substance(a) Description(b) COCAINE Cocaine, obtained naturally from coca leaves, is a potentcentral nervous system stimulant.(c) It stimulates thesympathetic nervous system, which regulates the activity ofcardiac muscle, smooth muscle, and glands. It also producesbronchodilation in the lungs. It is used medically as a topicalanesthetic for surgical procedures. Examples 1. Cocaine hydrochloride powder ("coke" or"street cocaine")--usually snorted or injectedintravenously.(d) 2. Cocaine alkaloid ("freebase" or"crack")--smoked.(e) Class of psychoactive substance(a) Description(b) AMPHETAMINES AND RELATED STIMULANTS(f) 1. Amphetamines Amphetamines are a group of three closely related compounds,all of which are potent central nervous system and behavioralstimulants.(c) Some amphetamines are used medically to treatattention deficit disorder or minimal brain dysfunction inchildren, narcolepsy (recurrent, uncontrollable, brief episodesof sleep), or (rarely) depression. Examples 1. Amphetamine ("speed" or "uppers"(BenzedrineR]--taken orally, injected, or snorted.(g) 2. Methamphetamine ("speed" or "crystalmeth" or "ice") [MethadrineR]--taken orally,injected, or snorted.(g),(h) 3. Dextroamphetamine [DexedrineR]--taken orally, or injected. Class of psychoactive substance(a) Description(b) 2. Nonamphetamine stimulants Like amphetamines, nonamphetamine stimulates are centralnervous and behavioral stimulants. Some non-amphetaminestimulants (e.g., PreludinR) are used for weight control, andsome (e.g., RitalinR and CylertR) are used medically to treathyperactivity, minimal brain dysfunction, narcolepsy, or (rarely)depression. Examples 1. Pheumetrazine hydrochloride [PreludinR]--taken orally orinjected.(d) 2. Methylphenidate hydrochloride injected.(d) 3. Pemoline [CylertR]--taken orally. [RitalinR]--takenorally, or injected.(d) Class of psychoactive substance(a) Description(b) HALLUCINOGENS Hallucinogens, or psychedelics, are a heterogeneous group ofcompounds that affect a person's perceptions, sensations,thinking, self-awareness, and emotions.(i) Examples 1. LSD (lysergic acid diethylamide) or"acid"--taken orally or put in the eyes. 2. Mescaline (3,4,5-trimethylox- phenylethyl amide) or"mesc" and peyote--disks chewed, swallowed, or smoked;tablets taken orally. 3. Psilocybin ("magic mushrooms")--chewed andswallowed. 4. MDMA (methylene dioxymethamphetamine)--takenorally. Class of psychoactive substance(a) Description(b) INHALANTS Inhalants are chemicals that produce psychoactive vapors.Although different in makeup, nearly all of the abused inhalantsproduce effects similar to those of anesthetics, which act toslow down the body's functions or produce feelings of dizziness.At low doses, users may feel slightly stimulated. Amyl nitrite isused for heart patients because it dilates the blood vessels andincreases blood supply to the heart. There are no medicalindications for most of the inhalants. Examples 1. Solvents (model airplane glue, nail polish remover,lighter and cleaning fluids, and gasoline)--vapors inhaled. 2. Aerosols (e.g., paints, hairsprays)--vapors inhaled. 3. Some anesthetics (e.g.,nitrous oxide)--vapors inhaled. 4. Amyl nitrite ("snappers" or "poppers")and butyl nitrite ("rush")--vapors inhaled. Class of psychoactive substance(a) Description(b) OPIATES (NARCOTICS) AND RELATED ANALGESICS Opiates are natural or synthetic drugs that, like morphine, asubstance derived from the opium poppy, have analgesic(pain-relieving) properties. Heroin is not approved for medicaluses in the United States. The major medical use of other opiatesis for the relief of pain (i.e., as analgesics); some narcoticsare used to relieve coughing (i.e., as antitussives) or to treatdiarrhea. Methadone is used in the treatment of narcoticabstinence syndromes and as an analgesic in terminal illness. Examples 1. Heroin ("smack" or "horse")--injected, smoked, or inhaled.(d) 2. Codeine (codeine sulfate)--taken orally or injected.(d) 3.Morphine (morphine hydrochloride)--injected, smoked, or inhaled. 4. Synthetic opiates (e.g., methadone [DolophineR]);hydromorphone hydrochloride [DilaudidR], meperidine hydrochloride[DemerolR], oxycodone and asprin [PercodanR]-- taken orally orinjected. Class of psychoactive substance(a) Description(b) PCP (PHENCYCLIDINE) AND SIMILARLY ACTINGSYMPHATHOMIMETICS Phencycyclidine, commonly referred to as PCP, alters thefunctions of the neocortex and has been called a dissociativeanesthetic. It was developed in the 1950s as an anesthetic butwas subsequently taken off the market in 1967 when it wasdiscovered that the drug caused hallucinations in some people.(j)PCP is now used legally only in veterinary medicine as animmobilizing agent. Examples PCP ("angel dust" or "lovely")--takenorally, or smoked (sprayed on joints or cigarettes).(d) (a) According to Julien, one could conceivably classifypsychoactive drugs by at least three methods: 1) mechanism ofaction, 2) chemical structure, and 3) behavioral effects.Probably the most useful approach would be to classify them bymechanism of action, but knowledge of the brain's physiology istoo limited for this approach to be comprehensive. A limitationof the second approach is that many drugs of apparently similarstructure exert quite different effects, and many drugs ofdissimilar structure exert quite similar effects. Theclassification in this table largely reflects the behavioraleffects approach. The classification used here is based on thecategories in the American Psychiatric Association's Diagnosticand Statistical Manual of Mental Disorders, 3rd ed., revised.According to the American Psychiatric Association, all of theclasses of psychoactive substances listed in this box exceptnicotine are associated with both abuse and dependence. Nicotineis associated with dependence but not abuse. (b) The potential physiological, psychological, andbehavioral effects of using the psychoactive substance shown arediscussed in the sources listed below. The consequences depend inpart on the specific drug used, the dosage level and mode ofadministration. (c) Central nervous system stimulants are drugs that canelevate mood, increase alertness, reduce fatigue, provide a senseof increased energy, decrease appetite, and improve taskperformance. They can also produce anxiety, insomnia, andirritability. The drugs differ widely in their molecularstructures and mechanisms of action. (d) According to the American Psychiatric Association, theroute of administration of a psychoactive substance is animportant variable in determining whether use will lead todependence or abuse. In general, routes of administration thatproduce more efficient absorption of the substance in the bloodstream (e.g., intravenous injection) tend to increase thelikelihood of an escalating pattern of substance uses that leadsto dependence. Routes that quickly deliver psychoactivesubstances to the brain (e.g., smoking or intravenous injection)are associated with higher levels of consumption and with anincreased likelihood of toxic effects. Use of contaminatedneedles for intravenous administration of amphetamines, cocaine,and opiates can cause hepatitis, HIV infection, and otherillnesses. (e) Freebase cocaine is a form of cocaine made by converting"street cocaine" (cocaine hydrochloride) to a purifiedbase that is smoked. The effect of smoking freebase is similar tothat of intravenous injection but smoking provides a shorter moreintense high than sniffing or ingestion because of the rapidabsorption of the drug through the lungs. "Crackcocaine" is the street name given to freebase cocaine thathas been processed from cocaine hydrochloride to a chemical baseby cooking it with baking soda and water. The term crack refersto the cracking sound that is heard when the mixture is smoked(heated), presumably due to the sodium bicarbonate. (f) Describing a drug as a stimulant does not adequatelydescribe its properties. Drug use surveys typically meanamphetamines when they use the word stimulants. Some surveysregard as stimulants both prescription (amphetamines) andnonprescription substances (e.g., caffeine-based compounds usedin No-Doz, diet pills, and "fake pep pills"). Cocaineand nicotine (described above) are also central nervous systemsimulants. (g) According to the National Institute on Drug Abuse,designer drugs are structural analogs of substances scheduledunder the Controlled Substances Act that are prepared byunderground chemists to mimic the psychoactive effects ofcontrolled substances or produce other psychoactive effects.Because such analogs are not identical to their parent compound,their manufacture and distribution does not violate the law. Asof June 1986, there were synthetic analogs of PCP, fentanyl andmeperidine, and amphetamine and methamphetamine. (h) In the past, abuse of methamphetamine had been in theform of tablets or intravenous injection. More recently,"ice" (one of the common street names ford-methamphetamine hydrochloride) has gained popularity in a formsuitable for smoking. (i) Most of the agents in this class of drugs can inducehallucinations if the dose is high enough. But the termhallucinogen does not adequately describe the range ofpharmacological actions of the diverse group of substancesusually included in the class. The term psychedelic was proposedby Osmond in 1957 to imply that these agents all have the abilityto alter the sensory perception and thus may be considered"mind expanding." The effects of hallucinogens areunpredictable and depend on the amount taken, the user'spersonality, mood and expectations, and the surroundings in whichthe drug is used. (j) PCP is considered a hallucinogen in some surveys of druguse. SOURCES: Office of Technology Assessment, 1991, based on thefollowing sources: American Psychiatric Association, Diagnosticand Statistical Manual of Mental Disorders, 3rd ed. revised(Washington, DC: 1987); R.M. Julien, A Primer of Drug Action, 5thed. (New York, NY: W.H. Freeman and Co., 1988); J.F. Kauffman, H.Shaffer, and M. Burglass, "The Biological Basics: Drugs andTheir Effects," Alcoholism and Substance Abuse: ClinicalInterventions (New York, NY: 1985); U.S. Department of Health andHuman Services, Public Health Service, Alcohol, Drug Abuse, andMental Health Administration, National Institute on Drug Abuse,"Hallucinogens and PCP, Inhalants, Marijuana, Opiates,Sedative-Hypnotics, Stimulants, and Cocaine," Rockville, MD,1983; U.S. Department of Health and Human Services, Public HealthService, Alcohol, Drug Abuse, and Mental Health Administration,National Institute on Drug Abuse, "Designer Drugs,"NIDA Capsules, Rockville, MD, June 1986; U.S. Department ofHealth and Human Services, Public Health Service, Alcohol, DrugAbuse, and Mental Health Administration, National Institute onDrug Abuse, "Marijuana Update," NIDA Capsules,Rockville, MD, May 1989; U.S. Department of Health and HumanServices, Public Health Service, Alcohol, Drug Abuse, and MentalHealth Administration, National Institute on Drug Abuse,"Methamphetamine Abuse," NIDA Capsules, Rockville, MD,January 1989; and U.S. Department of Education, Growing Up DrugFree: A Parent's Guide to Prevention (Washington, DC: 1989). BOX 1-2: Tolerance, Sensitization, Dependence, and Withdrawal Tolerance to a drug develops when, following a prolongedperiod of use, more of the drug is required to produce a giveneffect. Sensitization, the opposite of tolerance, occurs when theeffects of a given dose of a drug increase after repeatedadministration. Dependence is a type of neuroadaptation to drugexposure. With prolonged use of a drug, cells in the brain adaptto its presence such that the drug is required to maintain normalcell function. On abrupt withdrawal of the drug, the cell behavesabnormally and a withdrawal syndrome ensues. Generally, thewithdrawal syndrome is characterized by a series of signs andsymptoms that are opposite to those of the drug's acute effects.For example, withdrawal of sedative drugs produce excitation andirritability. Conversely, withdrawal of stimulants producesprofound depression. SOURCE: Office of Technology Assessment, 1994. BOX 1-3: Drugs and Discrimination In America, tensions between the majority and variousminorities often hinge on concerns raised by drug use. The groupschange over time and place, but the dividing issues remainremarkably similar. Those in power decide which drugs are legaland how rules should be enforced. Minorities charge that unfairpolicies result from prejudice, ignorance, and hypocrisy. When? 1850 Where? Boston Who? Irish Immigrants Impoverished Irish immigrants brought the tradition ofdrinking whiskey with them. In American cities, people oftenblamed whiskey for neighborhood quarrels. In the mid-19thcentury, clashes with Irish immigrants occurred so often thatpolice vans came to be known by the term "paddywagons." When? 1880s Where? San Francisco Who? Chinese Immigrants Fear of immigrant Chinese often focused on their recreationaluse of opium. In 1875, San Francisco outlawed opium smoking,which most residents associated exclusively with the Chinese.This citywide ban became nationwide in 1909. When? 1882 Where? Ohio Who? German Immigrants Beer drinking often brought Germans into conflict withtemperance advocates. Cincinnati's lively German communitygathered at beer gardens on Sundays to sing, dance, drink, andargue politics. In 1882, Ohio's governor denounced Germans as"sabbath breakers, criminals, and free thinkers." When? 1930s Where? Colorado, New Mexico Who? Mexican MigrantWorkers The Southwest welcomed Mexican migrants during laborshortages. But during the Depression, anxiety over competitionfor jobs shifted to wildly exaggerated fears of the effects ofmarijuana use customary among Mexicans. To placate fears,Congress passed the Marijuana Tax Act of 1937, which prohibitedrecreational use of the drug. When? 1991 Who? African Americans Police forces are largelywhite and inner-city residents are mostly black. Between 1980 and1990, the drug-arrest rate in the city of Rochester, New York,was about five times that for suburban Monroe County. SOURCE: "Altered States: Alcohol and Other Drugs inAmerica," Strong Museum, Rochester, NY, 1993. BOX 1-4: Ethnography Ethnographic techniques allow researchers to study howenvironmental and cultural factors affect values, attitudes, andbehaviors of individuals and groups. For three decades,researchers have documented societal and cultural influences onthe patterns of substance use, abuse, and addiction; using arange of methodologies and working in diverse contexts,ethnographers have contributed to the understanding of substanceabuse. Interacting with drug users under a wider set ofcircumstances than do strict quantitative researchers,ethnographers have expanded the framework of substance abuseresearch hypotheses. They have also assisted in the evaluationand interpretation of clinical and survey data to differentsubcultures and populations. Ethnographies also provide information on constantlychangingsubstance use patterns. By collecting data from substance usersin their natural environments, ethnographers have been able todocument who uses drugs and how drugs are used. This type ofmethodology is essential to the historical understanding ofsubstance use and abuse. Lastly, ethnographers have documented different styles ofsubstance use within American society as well as abroad.Differences are cited in experience and use patterns based onsocial class, cultural background, gender, and geographiclocation. SOURCE: Office of Technology Assessment, 1994. _ CliffSchaffer's Home Page WT02-B02-2IA086-000614-B044-163http://206.61.184.43:80/schaffer/Library/studies/vlr/vlr9.htm 206.61.184.43 19970122021330 text/html 45637HTTP/1.0 200 OKDate: Wednesday, 22-Jan-97 02:13:22 GMTServer: WebSitePro/1.1f (S/N wpo-0deb)Allow-ranges: bytesContent-type: text/htmlLast-modified: Saturday, 28-Dec-96 06:47:08 GMTContent-length: 45419 Marijuana Legislation Clashes with Judicial Skepticism1965-70 Contents | Feedback | Search DRCNet Library | Schaffer Library | Major Studies The Forbidden Fruit and the Tree ofKnowledge THE FORBIDDEN FRUIT AND THE TREE OF KNOWLEDGE: AN INQUIRYINTO THE LEGAL HISTORY OF AMERICAN MARIJUANA PROHIBITION Richard J. Bonnie & Charles H.Whitebread, II IX. MARIJUANA LEGISLATION CLASHES WITH JUDICIAL SKEPTICISM ANDEMERGING VALUES - PIECEMEAL JUDICIAL RESPONSE: 1965-1970 The dramatic increase in marijuana use during the latter1960's and the consequent increase in prosecution1 were mattersof high public visibility. Judicial response at both the trialand appellate levels was influenced by a combination of powerfulforces, none of which had been present in the preceding years.The 1960's saw a revolution in the law of criminal procedure, andin few areas were police practices more suspect than in theenforcement of the drug laws. The latter part of the decadewitnessed widespread dissent against the political and legalsystems; this protest milieu gave an added dimension to marijuanause as more and more people smoked, oftentimes overtly, in orderto defy a seemingly ignorant law. Faced with this unusualconjunction of widespread political and social eccentricity, thecourts-institutional protectors of political deviants-wereinevitably pressed into institutional sympathy for socialdeviants. A third force was the revitalized judicial interest inthe value of privacy in a highly automated, technologicalsociety; more and more people went to the courts to questionlongstanding governmental prohibitions against essentiallyprivate decisions and acts-homosexuality, abortion, contraceptionand drugs. Together with the well-publicized medical skepticismabout the soundness of the nation's drug laws, particularly thoseregulating marijuana, these forces moved the courts to scrutinizeenforcement practices and consider a new wave of constitutionalobjections to state and federal marijuana legislation. A. Multiple Offenses: Untying the Statutory Knots 1. Federal Developments In the major decision during this period, the United StatesSupreme Court voided the federal provisions most often employedto prosecute the possessor (buyer) of marijuana. In the first armof Leary v. United States,2 the Court held that the FifthAmendment relieves unregistered buyers of any duty to pay thetransfer tax and to file the written order form as required bythe Marihuana Tax Act.3 The Court reasoned that, since filingsuch a form would expose a buyer to liability under state law,under the occupational tax provisions of the Tax Act, and perhapsunder the marijuana provision of the Import and Export Act,4 thefiling provisions violated the fifth amendment guarantees againstself-incrimination. On the other hand, the Court held in a latercase that the fifth amendment does not relieve the marijuanaseller of the duty to confine his sales to transferees who arewilling to comply with the order form requirements.5 Similarly,the Eighth Circuit recently held6 that Leary does not compelinvalidation of Tax Act section 4755(b), which prohibits theinterstate transportation of marijuana, because a convictionunder that section is not really a conviction for falling toregister and pay the occupational tax and, even if it were,registration under section 4753 is not necessarily incriminatingas was the written order form requirement struck down in Leary .7 The second arm of Leary reversed the long line of decisions8upholding the presumption of knowing concealment of illegalimportation arising from possession under section 176a of theImport and Export Act.9 The Court held that, in light of the casewith which marijuana was domestically cultivated and the numberof users, the presumption of know1edge could not rationally bedrawn from possession.10 it could not be said "withsubstantial assurance that the presumed fact [knowing concealmentof illegally imported marijuana] is more likely than not to flowfrom the proved fact [possession] on which it is made todepend."11 Although there is authority to the contrary,12the Ninth Circuit has held this part of Leary retroactive,thereby invalidating all prior Section 176a convictions in whichthe defendant did not admit knowledge and the was instructed asto the applicability of the statutory presumption .13 A serious dispute remains as to what the Government will haveto prove in subsequent prosecutions under section 176a. Assumingthat the entire provision does not violate the privilege againstself-incrimination,14 it is likely that the prosecution will haveto prove actual knowledge of illegal importation in the future.15Since it is highly improbable that such proof will beforthcoming, section 176a has probably been rendered useless asapplied to possessors. It should be clear that the entire seriesof decisions under the Tax Act and section 176a has an air ofunreality about them because Congress probably has Article Ipower directly to prohibit possession and sale of marijuana andhas now exercised that power in the Comprehensive Drug AbusePrevention and Control Act of 1970.16 This new legislation,although stopping short in some respects, discards many of thefictions perpetuated by earlier legislation. The Leary decisionwas at least partially responsible for forcing Congress torationalize the federal role in the drug field, particularly withrespect to marijuana. Another manifestation of judicial dissatisfaction with theextreme nature of existing drug legislation is the apparentreversal of the trend of decisions upholding the strict liabilityof one-time drug offenders, users and addicts for failure toregister when leaving the country.17 The Ninth Circuit held thephrase "uses narcotic drugs" unconstitutionallyvague.18 Taking a more direct approach, the Second Circuit foundknowledge of the registration requirement to be an element of thecrime.19 Thus construed, the statute precludes any due processchallenge to the sufficiency of the notice.20 Although aself-incrimination issue remains, 21 the Second Circuit'sdecision removed the most serious defect in the statute, one thathad become intolerable as the number of marijuana convictionsescalated in the late 1960's. 2. State Developments The erosion of the archaic federal criminal statutes formarijuana-related offenses has been accompanied by a similar,albeit limited, development on the state level. The major issuein state litigation concerns so-called "drug-proximity"offenses which are generally employed as plea-bargaining tools orto prevent the release of a suspect when evidence was 1 illegallyseized or when the evidence is insufficient to secure aconviction under the substantive drug offense. Typical ancillaryoffenses are loitering in the common areas of a building for thepurpose of unlawfully using or possessing any narcotic drug;22loitering in public by a user, addict or convicted drug offenderwithout lawful employment;23 presence in an establishment wherenarcotic drugs are dispensed;24 and presence of a user or drugoffender in a private place where drugs are kept.25 The decisional trend seems to point to the unconstitutionalvagueness of simple loitering and vagrancy statutes.26 Because ofthe nexus between narcotics and crime, however, the courts arestruggling to redefine narcotics-proximity statutes to avoid thevagueness objection.27 It might appear that where "goodaccount" provisions give the arresting police officer toomuch discretion the statute will fal1.28 On the other hand,courts generally avoid vagueness objections based on lack ofnotice by reading in knowledge elements wherever neccssary.29Because of the tenuous relation between marijuana and crime, thecourts should construe "narcotics" in such statutes notto include marijuana. Similar restriction of marijuana-related offenses has beenaccomplished by holding that charges of possession and sale willnot both lie where the only possession is incident to sale,30 andby tightening the requirements of specificity in the indictmentregarding the proscribed parts of the plant.31 B. Procedural Objections to Enforcement Practices The law of criminal procedure underwent a major revolution inthe 1960's. The Bill of Rights was applied piece by piece to thestates through the fourteenth amendment. The Supreme Courtfocused its concern on protecting the rights of the criminaldefendant. The earlier philosophy had been that, so long as thedefendant's rights at trial were guaranteed, the Court shouldnot, and did not need to, intrude into the pretrial stages of thecriminal process. For a variety of reasons it became clear in the1960's that in a system where between 75 and 90 percent of alldefendants bargain and enter guilty pleas, rights must be assuredwell before trial if they are to have any real meaning to theaverage person caught in the net of the criminal process. Thus,step by step the Court began to regulate police practices-search,arrest and interrogation techniques-and the conduct of the earlystages of the criminal process. This substantial change inattitude meant that more marijuana defendants could successfullyraise procedural objections. 1. Search and Seizure The most important development for the marijuana offender hasbeen the close judicial scrutiny of police searches as a resultof Supreme Court rulings under the fourth amendment. Morestringent standards have been established for the police toobtain search warrants32 and the proper scope of searchesincident to a lawful arrest has been narrowed substantially. 33 Although courts have refused to exclude any evidence that wasin plain sight when seized, such as a bag of marijuana in aschool satchel voluntarily opened by a student,34 or marijuanathrown out of window by a defendant trying to dispose of it,35they have narrowed the permissible time and area in which a carmay be searched .36 Moreover, the difficult standing problem posed by therequirement that one had to admit possession or ownership of theseized property in order successfully to challenge the search wasalleviated in cases involving group arrests by permitting allthose on the premises to challenge a given search.37 The new requirements for procuring search warrants led to anumber of technical defense victories. For example, searches ofdefendants' residences were successfully challenged in twoMontana marijuana cases38 because the warrants were issued by ajustice of the peace, rather than by a district judge, asrequired by the state law. These holdings were premised on thesanctity of private residences, and they suggest a growingreluctance to countenance "reasonable" warrantlesssearches, especially of the home. Similarly, Maryland struck downthe fruits of a search of defendant's guests and theirautomobiles on the ground that the permissible search was limitedto the areas described in the warrant.39 An Illinois court hasheld that property not included in the warrant must be returnedto the defendant.40 This return to a more stringent view ofparticularity requirements of warrants stands in stark contrastto the willingness of courts to overlook these requirements inthe late fifties.41 Likewise, courts now scrutinize more closely police claims ofprobable cause for expanding the area of the search. A Californiacourt held that even though defendant was lawfully arrested,search of his luggage in a friend's apartment was justifiedneither by the friend's consent nor by the officer's having seenthe defendant swallow something.42 The search was especiallyunjustifiable since the defendant had been arrested in hisautomobile. In another California case, the presence of peculiarodors did not constitute probable cause for the search of afootlocker.43 An airline had detained the footlocker since it correspondedto a police description. The officers had smelled the marijuanaand then searched the footlocker before sending it on its way andtracing it. The California Supreme Court held that the smellalone was not sufficient cause to search without a warrant. Despite judicial narrowing of the scope of searches with orwithout a warrant, the easing of the standing requirements, andthe closer scrutiny on the probable cause issue, courts continueto permit police to enter dwellings without knocking or by forcewhere circumstances indicate such action is reasonable andnecessary. For example, a California court upheld a marijuanasearch, even though the police entered without knocking, becausethe police heard people running around inside yelling, "It'sthe police," and thought they heard a shot fired.44 Thecourt held that the statutory knocking requirement was subject toexception when there was danger of destruction of evidence anddanger to the police. Closely related to no-knock entry isforcible entry, upheld in an Illinois case45 where the policebroke into the defendant's residence when he did not immediatelyrespond to their knocks. The necessity for forced entry isessentially the same as for unannounced entry, but forced entryadds the danger of causing fright and damage. Another search area that has not been substantiallyliberalized is that of the border search. Customs officials havea much more extensive right to search than their policecolleagues. Mere suspicion is sufficient to justify a bordersearch.46 Even though the jurisdiction of customs agents endsonce entry into the country is completed,, the courts haveallowed border guards great discretion in determining whatconstitutes completed entry. In Thomas v. United States.47 theFifth Circuit held admissible evidence seized an hour and a halfafter the appellant had entered the United States because he wasonly six blocks from the border. Although there is an inevitableproblem of how far the jurisdiction of the customs agent extends,Thomas suggests c1early that it is not limited to bordercrossings. 2. Entrapment Although the majority opinions in Sorrells v. United States48and Sherman v. United States,49 remain the leading statements onentrapment, some courts have recently permitted expansion of thedefense. In California a defendant may plead not guilty and stillraise the entrapment defense in some cases. The court in Peoplev. Perez stated: To compel a defendant to admit his guilt as a condition ofinvoking the defense of entrapment would compel him to relievethe prosecution of its burden of proving his guilt beyond areasonable doubt at the risk of not being able to meet his burdenof proving entrapment.50 The defendant must, however, still raise the defense at trialto be determined as a matter of fact by the jury.51 There is noright to raise the defense in a pretrial motion to suppress theevidence.52 Most courts continue to focus on the moralculpability of the accused53 in determining whether or notentrapment has been successfully shown. Recent Arkansas,54 andNevada55 cases, however, suggest that the courts are increasinglyconcerned about the conduct of law enforcement agents, especiallyin marijuana cases. 3. Other Prosecution Practices Several major abuses, although judicially recognized, remainlargely uncorrected. Long delay between offense and arrest iscommon in narcotics offenses because the police desire to exposethe full extent of distribution and to maintain a cover for theundercover agent as long as possible. Yet any substantial delayprejudices the defendant since the prosecution continues togather evidence while the defendant may forget exactcircumstances and possibly exculpating facts. Judicial responsehas been inconsistent, focusing primarily on the purposefulnessof the delay.56 In light of the recent rejuvenation of the speedytrial requirement by the Supreme Court,57 there is some hope thatthis abuse may be corrected. A more serious abuse with which state and federal prosecutorshave been charged is politically-motivated discretionaryenforcement.58 Although the courts can do little to remedy thisstate of affairs, it forms the basis for one of our basiccontentions: The political-social overtones of the marijuanaproblem may inhibit a rational political and prosecutorialresponse and at the same time may provoke a protective judicialresponse. One judge, particularly expert with regard tocontemporary drug problems acknowledged the partial truth of thecharges of political prosecution against Hippies, long-hairs anddraft-card burning college students.59 To the extent that othertrial and appellate Judges recognize these prosecutorialtendencies, we can expect some judicial compensation either infact-finding, in sentencing, or in response to substantivechallenges to the law. It is our contention, of course, that suchjudicial reaction has already begun. C. Sufficiency of the Evidence The ease of identifying marijuana in conjunction with the useof uncorroborated testimony and circumstantial evidence continuesto require of the prosecution only a very low burden of proof.Nevertheless, appellate decisions are gradually beginning totighten these requirements, and active judicial hostility attrial has all but disappeared. Although the use of uncorroborated testimony to convictcontinues to be upheld by the courts,60 an Illinois appellatecourt has reversed a conviction because of the behavior of thetestifying officer.61 Noting that the officer had repeatedlypressured the defendant to become an informer, the court heldthat the uncorroborated testimony of this officer was notsufficient to support a conviction. The court did not make clearwhether it exercised a weight of the evidence review of the trialjudge's fact-finding, or whether it applied an exclusionaryevidence rule pursuant to its inherent powers over theadministration of criminal justice. Whatever the case, judicialperspective in the clash between marijuana defendant and policeofficer has clearly shifted. The amount of marijuana required to uphold a conviction isundergoing substantial change. The California Supreme Court heldin People, v. Leal62 that to be sufficient for conviction, theamount of narcotics must be enough for sale or consumption, therule generally applied where the statute does not specify aminimum quantity.63 In Eckroth v. State64 a Florida court ruledthat the taking of a drug from a passing pipe is not sufficientto constitute possession where the defendant did not own thepipe, the drug or the premises. Similarly, in a case thatreceived national publicity,65 the Minnesota Supreme Court fieldthat if the state defines marijuana as a narcotic, it cannotpunish possession of what could be native cannabis in amounts tooscanty to produce a "narcotic" effect. Accordingly,exiguous traces of the drug found in the crevices of defendant'sbrief case left in his mistress' car did not constitute an amountsufficient for conviction .66 Other problems remain unsolved. Circumstantial evidencecontinues to link defendants to seized marijuana. Constructivepossession was found where the defendant's daughter was theactual possessor67 and the fact that marijuana was found where aninformer said she had seen defendant smoking it the previous daywas sufficient to support the defendant's conviction.68 There isa split as to whether a conviction can be upheld where thedefendant gratuitously brings the buyer and seller together.Massachusetts upheld the conviction for possession where thedefendant's only contact with the marijuana was passing it to thestate's agent,69 ruling that the facilitation of the sale addedenough to the act of passing to allow the court to findpossession. In a similar case, however, a New York court heldthat there was not present the required involvement or concert ofaction to uphold a conviction for sale.70 Nevertheless, courtshave refused conviction on numerous occasions in which thedefendant was not linked exclusively with the marijuana that wasfound71 and have generally required an outside linking factorbefore upholding the possession.72 However, the element that cantip the scales in favor of conviction is often unrelated to thepossible possession of the marijuana. For example, a Californiacourt73 upheld the finding of possession of marijuana discoveredalong with a purse the defendants had stolen. The defendantscontended that the marijuana was not theirs and must have been inthe purse when stolen. That the defendants were thieves probablyplayed more heavily in the conviction than any evidence of theirconnection with marijuana. Where marijuana is found on the premises of the individual,possession is presumed, although the courts have read in adefense of ignorance of the presence of the marijuana.74Nevertheless, in a New Hampshire case75 the court upheld apossession conviction premised on the defendant's knowledge ofpresence of the drug on the premises even though the courtapparently believed the defendant's story that it belonged to athird party. Ordinarily there is direct corroborating evidence toindicate the defendant's knowledge.76 Along with the gradual thaw on these points in state courts,the late sixties witnessed a total absence of the outrageousjudicial participation in inflammatory statements about thedangers of the drug and its users which we saw was typical of thelate fifties. To the contrary, the appellate opinions, at least,are replete with skeptical references to the inclusion ofmarijuana in the narcotics classification .77 D. Sanction Nowhere has judicial disenchantment with the drug laws,especially marijuana, been greater than in the area ofpunishment. Preference for civil treatment of drug abuse,78disgust with severe mandatory sentencing that deprives theJudiciary of its traditional function of weighing the culpabilityof the individual offender, 79 and skepticism about a statutoryscheme which catches the user or small scale distributor andmisses the major trafficker80 have all found their way intojudicial opinions. This dissatisfaction with legislative inaction in the area ofde-escalating punishment has already begun to provoke remedial81judicial action. In a landmark decision82 receiving nationalattention,83 the Supreme Court of New Jersey recently held thatany prison sentence imposed for first-offense possession ofmarijuana for personal use "should be suspended,"84While the court based its holding on the judiciary's statutoryauthority to suspend sentences in "the best interests of thepublic as well as of the defendant,"85 and on the appellatecourt's power to review for abuse of discretion trial courtsentencing decisions, it appears that the true locus of theopinion is the Eighth Amendment. That is, the court reallydetermined that any prison sentence for first-offense possessionof marijuana for personal use is unreasonably excessive.Accordingly, the decision will be discussed in more detail in thefollowing section.86 Footnotes: 1 See pp. 1096-1 101 supra. See also People v. Patton, 264Cal. App. 2d 637, 70 Cal. Rpt. 484 (Dist. Ct. App. 1968), wherethe arresting officer testified that he had made about 1,000marijuana arrests. 2 395 U.S. 6 (1969). 3 Although Leary involved only the concealment andtransportation provision, 26 U.S.C.  4744 (a) (2) (1964), theEighth Circuit has held, correctly, that Leary also covers theacquiring provision,  4744(a) (1), "since a personobviously would have to acquire the marijuana to knowinglytransport or conceal it." United States v. Young, 422 F.2d302, 304 (8th Cir.), cert. denied, 398 U.S. 914 (1970). 4 Because the "danger of incrimination under statelaw" was "so plain," the Court did not pursue theadditional question of a buyer's exposure to liability under theImport and Export Act. 395 U.S. at 16 n.14. 5 Minor vs. United States, 396 U.S. 87 (1969) 6 United States v. Young, 422 F.2d, 302 (8th Cir.), cert. Denied, 398 U.S. 914 (970) 7 "Although we need not reach the question, we feel thatthe Fifth Amendment is not violated by the insubstantial hazardsof incrimination posed by section 4753. Id. at 306 8 See p. 1086, supra 9 Anticipating the Leary decision on the  176a presumptionwas United States v. Adams, 293 F. Supp. 776 (S.D.N.Y. 1968). 10 395 U.S. at 52 53. Having found the "knowledge"presumption unconstitutional, the court avoided consideration ofthe "illegal importation" presumption. Id at 38. Theknowledge presumption has also be held invalid as applied tohashish. United States v. Maestri, 424 F.2d 1066 (9thCir. 1970) ; cf. United States v. Cepelis, 426 F.2d 134 (9thCir. 1970) (remanded for factual determination as to whetherLeary applies to hashish.) In Turner v. United States, 396 U.S. 398 (1970), the Courtupheld the presumption in 21 U.S.C.  174 (1964) (directancestor of  176a as applied to heroin but declared itirrational as applied to cocaine. It has been held that Turner isretroactive, United States v. Vallejo, 312 F. Supp. 244 (S.D.N.Y.1970). 11 395 U.S. at 30. 12 Rivera-Vargas v. United States, 307 F. Supp. 1075 (D.P.R.1969). 13 United States v. Scott, 425 F.2d 55 (9th Cit. 1970). Wethink the Ninth Circuit is right, at least with respect toconvictions secured after marijuana achieved high publicvisibility in the 1960's. Since the number of people stillincarcerated for earlier convictions is minimal, completeretroactive effect is in order. Essential to the Leary decisionwas a determination that the presumption was factuallyunsupportable; it therefore constituted a material flaw in thefact-finding process and seriously impaired the right to jurytrial. 14 Absent the written order form requirement of the MarihuanaTax Act, we do not see how prosecution under  176a involves thefifth amendment at all. Neither did the Ninth Circuit. Id. at 61. 15 See United States v. Martinez, 425 F.2d 1300 (9th Cit.1970); McClain v. United States, 417 F.2d 489 (9th Cit. 1969). Amere inference of importation is clearly not enough to sustain aconviction since it would nullify Leary. Cf. United States v.Ramos, 282 F. Supp. 354 (S.D.N.Y. 1968) (where Government failedto prove possession beyond reasonable doubt, court could notinfer knowledge of importation). It is difficult to see how theGovernment could raise an inference of knowledge without provingactual knowledge. If, however, such can be done, it is clear thatthe defendant has a right to prove that the marijuana was notimported. United States v. Espinoza, 406 F.2d 733 (2d Cir.),cert. denied, 395 U,S. 908 (1969) (retrial ordered for failure oftrial judge to allow defendant to prove that marijuana came fromCalifornia), 16 Pub. L. No. 91-513 (Oct. 27, 1970). See also Leary v.United States, 395 U.S. 6, 54 (1969) ("We are constrained toadd that nothing in what we hold today implies any constitutionaldisability in Congress to deal with the marijuana traffic byother means"). 17 See P. 1085 supra. 18 Weissman v. United States, 373 F.2d 799 (9th Cir. 1967).Struggling to confine its holding, the court distinguished anapparently contradictory case, United States v. Eramdjian, 155 F.Supp. 914 (S.D. Cal. 1957), on the ground that it involved"addiction" rather than use of narcotic drugs. 19 United States v. Mancuso, 420 F.2d 556 (2d Cir. 1970). 20 See Lambert v. California, 355 U.S. 225 (1957) (applicationof city ordinance requiring convicted felons to register withinfive days after arrival in city where there is no actual noticeor knowledge of ordinance is unconstitutional). 21 The Mancusocourt did not discuss the issue. 22 N.Y. PENAL LAW  1533 (5) (McKinney 1967). 23 D.C.CODE ANN.  22-3302 (1967). 24 Id.  22-1515(a). 25 Id.  3 3 -416 (a). 26 e.g.. Wheeler v. Goodman, 306 F. Supp. 58 (W.D.N.C. 1969),appeal docketed, 38 U.S.L.W. 3409 (U.S. Apr. 21, 1970) (No. 1273,1969 Term; renumbered No. 102, 1970 Term); Lazarus v. Faircloth,301 F. Supp. 266 (S.D. Fla.) appeal docketed, 38 U.S.L.W. 3225(U.S. Dec. 16, 1969) (No. 630, 1969 Term; renumbered No. 43, 1970Term; Broughton v. Brewer, 298 F. Supp. 260 (S.D. Ala. 1969). 27 In People v. Pagnotta, 25 N.Y.2d 333, 253 N.E.2d 202, 305N.YS.2d 484 (1969), the New York Court of Appeals upheld astatute making it illegal to loiter about any "stairway,staircase, hall, roof, elevator, cellar, courtyard, or anypassageway of a building for the purpose of unlawfully using orpossessing any narcotic drug." The court distinguished theordinary vagrancy and loitering cases on the ground that theconduct punished in the narcotics vagrancy statute is directlyrelated to the commission of crime against others: [P] rotection of innocent citizens from drug users is a verycrucial problem. As has recently been pointed out by severalnewspaper articles, in some of our poorer urban areas where druguse is high, innocent citizens are often beaten, robbed and evenmurdered by drug addicts .... It is completely reasonable andproper for the Legislature to protect these citizens fromaccidentally stumbling into the midst of such miscreants in thecommon areas of buildings. Id. at 338, 253 N.E.2d at 206, 305 N.Y.S.2d at 489. 28 Ricks v. District of Columbia, 414 F.2d 1097, 1104-05 (D.C.Cit. 1968). But cf. United States v. McClough, 263 A.2d 48 (D.C.Ct. App. 1970) (upholding statute prohibiting presence in anestablishment where defendant knows narcotics are beingdispensed). 29 e.g., United Stares v. McClough, 263 A.2d 48 (D.C. Ct. App.1970) (reading scienter provision into statute prohibiting priordrug users or offenders from being "found in any place . . .building, structure . . . in which any illicit narcotic drugs arekept"); cf. People v, Brim, 257 Cal. App. 2d 839, 65 Cal.Rptr. 265 (Dist. Ct. App. 1968) (interpreting statute outlawingknowingly being in a place where narcotics are being used ascharging defendant with intentional involvement with the unlawfuluse of marijuana). 30 State v. Duplain, 102 Ariz. 100, 425 P.2d 570 (1967);People v. Theobald, 231 Cal. App. 2d 351, 41 Cal. Rptr. 758(Dist. Ct. App. 1964). 31 See, e.g., State v. Haddock, 101 Ariz. 240, 418 P.2d 577(1966) (seeds contain no cannibin, therefore no crime charged);State v. Curry, 97 Ariz. 191, 398 P.2d 899 (1965) (marijuanarefers to the p2its of the plant containing cannabin). Contra,State v. Ringo, 5 Conn. Cir. 134, 246 A.2d 208 (Cir. Ct. 1968)(possession of seed, residue in pipes and a small package ofmarijuana); Commonwealth v. Cunningham, 35 Pa. D. & C.2d 527(0. & T. Allegheny 1964) (possession of marijuana seeds); cf.State v. Everidge, 77 N.M. 505, 424 P.2d 787 (1967) (defendantrequired to raise defense that marijuana possessed was withinstatutory exception); State v. Mudge, 69 Wash. 2d 861, 420 P.2d863 (1966) (same). 32 Spinelli v. United States, 393 U.S. 410 (1969); Aguilar v.Texas, 378 U.S. 108 (1964). 33 Chimel v. California, 395 U.S. 752 (1969) (search incidentto a lawful arrest limited to an area within immediate control ofthe suspect). See also Terry v. Ohio, 392 U.S. 1 (1968). 34 People v. Bloom, 270 Cal. App. 2d 731, 76 Cal. Rptr. 137(Dist. Ct. App. 1969). 35 State NT. Garcia, 76 N.M. 171, 413 P.2d 210 (1966). 36 Preston v. United States, 376 U.S. 364 (1964). See alsoCooper v. California, 386 U.S. 58 (1967). The holdings in boththese cases are probably limited by Chimel. 37 Jones N7. United States, 362 U.S. 257 (1960). 38 State v. Kurland, 151 Mont. 569, 445 P.2d 570 (1968); Statev. Langan, 151 Mont. 558, 445 P.2d 565 (1968). 39 Haley v. State, 7 Md. App. 18, 253 A.2d 424 (1969). 40 People v. Hartfield, 94 111. App. 2d 421, 237 N.E.2d 193(1968). 41 See pp. 1089-91 supra. 42 People v. Cruz, 61 Cal. 2d 861, 395 P.2d 889, 40 Cal. Rptr.841 (1964); accord, People v. Patton, 264 Cal. App. 2d 637, 70Cal. Rptr. 484 (Dist. Ct. App. 1968). In Cruz the court statedthat it was reasonable for the officers to try to dislodge thesuspected marijuana from the defendant's mouth. 43 People v. McGrew, 103 Cal. 3d 404, 462 P.2d 1, 82 Cal.Rptr. 47 3 ( 1 969), relying on People v. Marshall, 69 Cal. 2d51, 412 11.2d 665, 69 Cal. Rptr. 585 (1968) (" 'In plainsmell,' therefore, is plainly not the equivalent of 'in plainview'" 44 People V. Clay, 273 Cal. App. 2d 279, 78 Cal. Rptr. 56(Dist. Ct. App. 1969) 45) People v. Hartfield, 94 111. App. 2d 421, 237 N.F.2d 193(1968). 46 United States v. Glaziou, 402 F.2d 8 (2d Cir. 1968), cert.denicd, 393 U.S.1121 (1969); Henderson v. United States, 390 F.2d805 (9th Cir. 1967). 47 372 F.2d 252 (5th Cir. 1967). The customs agents hadsearched the defendants belongings at the time he had entered thecountry arid had not discovered the marihuana and heroin hepossessed. They came into town and searched the defendant whenthey were notified by an informer that he was carrying thecontraband. 48 287 U.S. 435 (1952) 49 356 U.S.369 (1958) 6062 Cal. 2d 769, 776, 401 P.2d 934, 938, 44 Cal. Rptr. 326,330 (1965). The decision overturned a long series of precedents.That all justices concurred is indicative of the sentiment forchange. The court required the prosecution to disclose theidentity of the informant because he was essential to thedefenses of entrapment and lack of knowledge. The decision wasimmediately implemented in People v. Marsden, 234 Cal. App. 2d796, 44 Cal. Rptr. 728 (Dist. Ct. App. 1965). There, defendantwas repeatedly requested to furnish marijuana to a governmentagent and finally purchased and gave the agent one marijuanacigarette. The court noted that the case was close to entrapmentas a matter of law. 51 People v. Oatis, 264 Cal. App. 2d 324, 70 Cal. Rptr. 524(Dist. Ct. App. 1968), cert. denied, 393 U.S. 1108 (1969). 52 State v. Folsom, 463 P.2d 381 (Ore. 1970). 53 Commonwealth v. Harvard, 253 N.E.2d 346 (Mass. 1969);Glosen v. Sheriff, 451 P.2d 841 (Nev. 1969). 54 Peters v. State, 450 S.W.2d 276 (Ark. 1970). Here thedefendant gave some marijuana free of charge to the agent afterrepeated requests. The marijuana had been left in the defendant'sshop by others. In remanding the case for consideration by thejury whether entrapment existed the court stated: Perhaps, neither the persistent solicitation, the use of analias, the misrepresentation of the purposes for which [theagent] wanted to acquire the marijuana nor the use of friends ofappellant for an entree, standing alone, would have beensufficient to raise a fact question as to entrapment, but whentaken together along with the total lack of evidence that [thedefendant] had possessed or sold marijuana before, there was suchan issue. Id. at 278. 55 Froggatt v. State, 467 P.2d 1011 (Nev. 1970) (reversed forfailure to give entrapment instruction where policeman placed marijuana in defendant's carand then Defendant sold it to another officer). 56 Compare Jordan v. United States, 416 F.2d 338 (9th Cir.1969), cert. denied, 397 U.S. 920 (1970) (since three-month delaywas not purposeful, defendant must show actual prejudice), withRoss v. United States, 349 F.2d 210 (D.C. Cir. 1965) (chargesdismissed since seven-month delay found purposeful). 57 Smith v. Hooey 393 U.S. 374 (1969). 58 E.g., J. KAPLAN, MARIJUANA THE, NEW PROHIBITION 40-42(1970). 59 Oliver, Assessment of Current Legal Practices from theViewpoint of the Courts, in DRUGS AND Youth 229 (J. Wittenborned. 1969). Judge Oliver tried to minimize the seriousness of theproblem, However: I think that as judge I must be interested in what might appear to be a pattern of discriminatory law enforcement, but I . . . consider much of this talk must be viewed with the same critical eye which most other talk about drug abuse must be viewed. Id. at 233. 60 See, e.g., Winfield v. State, 248 Ind. 95, 223 N.E.2d 576(1967). 61 People v. Quintana, 91 Ill. App. 2d 95, 234 N.E.2d 406(1968). The court was greatly displeased with the continuingmisbehavior of the officer: "[The 5-8 previous arrests andshakedowns] were a high-handed display of police power whichcompletely disregarded the defendant's constitutionalrights." Id. at 98, 234 N.F.2d at 408. 62 64 Cal. 2d 504, 413 P.2d 665, 50 Cal. Rptr. 777 (1966)(heroin). 63 People v. Villalobos, 245 Cal, App. 2d 561, 54 Cal. Rptr.60 (Dist. Ct. App. 1966) (50 milligrams insufficient); see Tuttlev. State, 410 S.W.2d 780 (Tex. Crim. App. 1967) (63 milligramssufficient, enough to make a very small cigarette); People v.Hokuf, 245 Cal. App. 2d 394, 53 Cal. Rptr. 828 (Dist. Ct. App.1966) (reversible error for the court not to instruct the jurythat fragments of marijuana cannot support conviction). But seeFranklin v. State, 8 Ind. App. 134, 258 A.2d 767 (1969) (heroin),in which the court upheld a conviction for possession where thedefendant went to the hospital with an overdose. Althoughrecognizing that once the drug is inside the body there is nopossession because there is no control, the court felt that priorpossession and self-administration could be inferred. Thedecision should do much to discourage addicts from receiving anymedical treatment that might expose them to criminal penalties. 64 227 So. 2d 313 (Fla. Dist. Ct. App. 1969). 65 See P. 1099 & note 14 supra. 66 State v. Resnick, 177 NW.2d 418 (Minn. 1970). 67 People v. Thomas, 76 Ill. App. 2d 42, 221 NE. 2d. 800(1966). 68 State v. Mantell, 71 Wash. 2d 768, 430 P.2d 980 (1967). 69 Commonwealth v. Harvard, 253 N.F.2d 346 (Mass. 1969). 70 People v. Hingerton, 27 App. Div. 2d 754, 277 N.Y.S.2d 754(1967). 71 See, e.g., State v. Oare, 249 Ore. 597, 439 P.2d 885 (1968)(one marijuana cigarette found in bathroom with two people, Homeowner convicted); People v. Van Syoc, 269 Cal. App. 2d 370, 75Cal. Rptr. 490 (Dist. Ct. App. 1969) (marijuana found onrighthand side of the dashboard in defendant's car while parkedin public lot), People v. Evans, 72 Ill. App. 2d 146, 218 N.E.2d781 (1966) (marijuana found under bar where defendant had beensitting). 72 State v. Faircloth, 181 Neb. 333, 148 NW.2d 187 (1967)(defendant had dufflebag full of marijuana between his legs in automobile); People v.Blunt, 241 Cal. App. -Id 200, 50 Cal. Rptr. 440 (Dist. Ct. App.1966) (defendant only one who had sat in back of police car whereMarijuana found). 73 People v. Irvin, 264 Cal. App. 2d 747, 70 Cal. Rptr. 892(Dist. Ct. App. 1968). 74 See Commonwealth v. Buckley, 354 Mass. 508, 238 N.F.2d 335(1968); People v. Mitchell, 51 Misc. 2d 82, 272 N.Y.S.2d 523(Sup. Ct. 1967). Contra. State v. Givens, 74 Wash. 2d 48, 442P.2d 628 (1968). 75 State v. Colcord, 109 N.H. 231, 248 A.2d 80 (1968). 76 The evidence of fragments of marijuana on the defendantoften provides this evidence, See, e.g., People v. Slade, 264Cal. App. 2d 188, 70 Cal. Rptr. 321 (Dist. Ct. App. 1968); Peoplev. Haynes, 253 Cal. App. 2d 1060, 61 Cal. Rptr. 859 (Dist. Ct.App. 1967), cert. denied, 392 U.S. 914 (1968); People v. Hurta,238 Cal. App. 2d 162, 47 Cal. Rptr. 580 (Dist. Ct. App. 1965). 77 See 1131-32 infra. 78 E.g., Oliver, supra note W. 79 See, e.g., United Sates v. Kleinhalzer, 306 F. Supp. 311(E.D.N.Y. 1969) (Weinstein, J.); Oliver, supra note 59, at 230: In most other areas of the law, however, legislatures havefreely granted judges the power and discretion within quiteflexible limitations, to determine appropriate sentences for allparticular defendants before them that may or may not, dependentupon the particular case, include commitment to a penalinstitution. . . . In the field of drug abuse, quite contrary to that experience,mandatory prison sentences apparently reflect a legislativeconviction that all drug offenders are so alike that sending allto prison is, in fact, a real solution to what must have beenviewed as a relatively simple problem. They also seem to reflecta certainty and righteousness that can hardly be said to bejustified by our present scientific knowledge. 80 For example, in Aguilar v. United States, 363 F. 2d 379 (9thCir. 1966), the court affirming the smuggling conviction of aMexican mechanic driving a car containing marijuana back to theUnited States, noted: Here was a young man with a previous clean record, and therewas no indication he was a user of narcotics or inside anarcotics ring. Apparently he was a victim of his personaleconomics. When the law gets no closer than this to the realrascal, one must wonder about the policy of it, although it bebeyond our function. Id. at 381. See also Oliver, supra note 59, at 233 81 What Justice Jackson said about adjudicative mood when thedeath penalty hangs in the balance is equally appropriate withregard to harsh marijuana penalties: When the penalty is death, we, like state judges, are temptedto strain the evidence and even, in close cases, the law in orderto give a doubtfully condemned man another chance. Stein v. New York, 346 U.S. 156, 196 (1953) 82 State v. Ward, No. A-9 (N.J. Oct. 26, 1970) 83 N.Y. Times, Oct. 27. 1970, at 1, Col. 4 84 State v. Ward, No. A-9 (N.J. Oct. 26, 1970) 85 N.J. Stat. Ann. Section 2a:168-1 (1969) 86 See pp. 1138-39 infra. Contents | Feedback | Search DRCNet Library | Schaffer Library | Major Studies The Forbidden Fruit and the Tree ofKnowledgeWT02-B02-3IA086-000614-B043-262http://206.61.184.43:80/schaffer/Library/studies/vlr/vlrtoc.htm 206.61.184.43 19970122021037 text/html 12053HTTP/1.0 200 OKDate: Wednesday, 22-Jan-97 02:10:32 GMTServer: WebSitePro/1.1f (S/N wpo-0deb)Allow-ranges: bytesContent-type: text/htmlLast-modified: Saturday, 28-Dec-96 06:48:48 GMTContent-length: 11835 Legal History of American Marijuana Prohibition - Table ofContents Contents | Feedback | Search DRCNet Library | Schaffer Library | Major Studies VIRGINIA LAW REVIEW VOLUME 56 OCTOBER 1970 NUMBER6 THE FORBIDDEN FRUIT AND THE TREE OF KNOWLEDGE: AN INQUIRYINTO THE LEGAL HISTORY OF AMERICAN MARIJUANA PROHIBITION Richard J. Bonnie* & Charles H.Whitebread, II** 'Assistant Professor of Law, University ofVirginia. B.A., 1966, JohnsHopkins University; LL.B., 1969, University of Virginia. "Assistant Professor of Law, University ofVirginia. A.B., 1965, Princeton University; LL.B., 1968, YaleUniversity. Mr. Snell. What is the bill? Mr. Rayburn. It has something to do with something that iscalled marihuana. I believe it is a narcotic of some kind. Colloquy on the House floor prior to passage of the MarihuanaTax Act. Introduction We wish to express our sincere appreciation to the studentswho assisted us in the preparation of the tables at Appendix A.Because the drug statutes of the several states are particularlyconfusing and difficult to find, and because so manyjurisdictions have recently changed their drug laws, thepreparation of the chart required long, tedious work which somany were kind enough to perform. To them, our most sincerethanks. We should like to thank especially Michael A. Cohen, John F.Kuether, W. Tracey Shaw, Alan K. Smith, and Allan J. Tanenbaum,all students at the University of Virginia School of Law, whoseresearch assistance and tireless effort were invaluable. We are particularly indebted to Professor Jerry Mandel whosupplied us with much of the raw data used in the historical casestudies in this Article. In his excellent article on drugstatistics in the Stanford Low Review, Problems with OfficialDrug Statistics, 21 STAN. L. REV. 991 (1969), Professor Mandelsuggested in a footnote that someone should attempt a history ofthe passage of anti-marijuana legislation. We have followed hissuggestion and earnestly hope that our product will fill thisgap. A modified and expanded version of this Article will bepublished in book form in the spring of 1971. TABLE OF CONTENTS I. INTRODUCTION II. THE ANTECEDENTS: CRIMINALIZATION OFNARCOTICS AND ALCOHOL A. A Review of the Temperance Movement B. Anti-Narcotics Legislation to 1914 1. Narcotics Use at the Turn of the Century: A Growing Problem 2. State Legislative Response Before 1914 3. Watershed: The Passage of the Harrison Act C. The judicial Role and the Constitutional Framework: The Police Power and Intoxicant Prohibition to 1920 1. Phase One: Prohibition of Sale and Manufacture of Alcohol 2. Phase Two: Prohibition of Sale of Opium 3. Phase Three: Prohibition of Possession of Alcohol to 1915 4. Phase Four: Prohibition of Possession of Narcotics 5 . Phase Five: Prohibition of Possession of Alcohol After 1915 6. A Postscript on the Police Power: The Cigarette Cases III. THE GENESIS OF MARIJUANA PROHIBITION A. Initial State Legislation: 1914-1931 1. Rationale in the West: Class Legislation 2. Rationale in the East: Substitution 3. The International Scene 4. Conclusion B. Judicial Corroboration IV. PASSAGE OF THE UNIFORM NARCOTIC DRUGACT: 1927-1937 A. Origins of the Uniform Law B. Drafting the Law C. Passage of the State Laws 1. Use Patterns and Public Knowledge: 1931-1937 2. Role of the Federal Bureau of Narcotics 3. Legislative Scrutiny and Media Coverage 4. Available Medical Opinion Provisions of the Uniform Narcotic Drug Act and Supplemental Virginia Marijuana Statute (a) Classification and Offenses (b) Penalties V. PASSAGE OF THE MARIHUANA TAX ACT OF 1937 A. State Enforcement of the Uniform Law B. Public Hysteria or Continued Public Ignorance? C. The Tax Act Hearings 1. Who Were Users? 2. What's Wrong with Marijuana? 3. How Dare You Dissent! D. Congressional "Deliberation" and Action E. Provisions of the Act VI. THE 1950's: HARSHER PENALTIES AND A NEWRATIONALE-THE "STEPPING STONE" THEORY A. The Boggs Act and Its Progeny: The First Escalation 1. The Problem: Increased Narcotics Use 2. The Solution: Harsher Penalties 3. Marijuana and the Boggs Act (a) Increased Use (b) Youthful Users (c) The Danger: A New Rationale 4. The State Response: Mindless Escalation B. The Late 1950's: Another Escalation of the Penalties 1. Provisions of the Narcotic Control Act of 1956 2. Marijuana: Along for the Ride 3. Trafficking Patterns 4. Origin and Use 5. Enforcement Patterns 6. The Epitome of Irrationality: Virginia's 1958 Amendment VII. MARIJUANA USERS IN THE COURTS:1930-1965 A. Statutory Fantasies: The Complications of Federal Legislation 1. Quadruple "Jeopardy" and the "Killer Weed 2. Statutory Presumptions B. Attacks on State Legislation C. Procedural Defenses and Entrapment 1. Search and Seizure 2. Entrapment D. The Pro Forma Trial VIII. THE PUBLIC DISCOVERS THE TRUTH ABOUTMARIJUANA A. Marijuana and the Masses B. Enforcement of the Marijuana Laws: 1960-1970 C. Emergence of Medical Opinion 1. Research Obstacles 2. Current Medical Knowledge (a) The Myths (b) Physical Effects (c) Psychomotor Effects (d) Psychological Effects IX. MARIJUANA LEGISLATION CLASHES WITHJUDICIAL SKEPTICISM AND EMERGING VALUES-PIECEMEAL JUDICIALRESPONSE: 1965-1970 A. Multiple Offenses: Untying the Statutory Knots 1. Federal Developments 2. State Developments B. Procedural Objections to Enforcement Practices 1. Search and Seizure 2. Entrapment 3. Other Prosecution Practices C. Sufficiency of Evidence D. Sanction X. THE HEART OF THE MATTER-SUBSTANTIVE CONSTITUTIONALCHALLENGES TO THE MARIJUANA LAWS: 1965-1970 A. The Burden of Justification: The Importance of Having a Presumption on Your Side 1. Due Process and Equal Protection: Rationality of the Classification.. 2. Cruel and Unusual Punishment: Rationality of the Sanction B. Should the Burden Be Shifted?-Marijuana and Fundamental Rights 1. The Robinson-Powell Argument 2. Free Exercise of Religion 3. Right of Privacy 4. The Ninth Amendment-The Forgotten Kitchen Sink C. Another Constitutional Perspective: The Police Power XI. LEGISLATIVE RECONSIDERATION: 1965-1970 A. Virginia Legislative "Reform": Publicity Begets Tokenism B. The Dodd Bill: Half a Loaf C. Postscript: The Dodd Bill Becomes the Comprehensive Drug Abuse Prevention and Control Act of 1970 XII. CONCLUSION: BEFORE THE FALL A. Public Policy Formation Process B. Twentieth Century Values and the Marijuana Laws 1. The Premise 2. Statutory Recommendations APPENDIX A. STATUTORY TABLES APPENDIX B. BIBLIOGRAPHY Contents | Feedback | Search DRCNet Library | Schaffer Library | Major Studies WT02-B02-4IA086-000614-B043-286http://206.61.184.43:80/schaffer/Library/studies/vlr/vlrintro.htm 206.61.184.43 19970122021053 text/html 5854HTTP/1.0 200 OKDate: Wednesday, 22-Jan-97 02:10:43 GMTServer: WebSitePro/1.1f (S/N wpo-0deb)Allow-ranges: bytesContent-type: text/htmlLast-modified: Saturday, 28-Dec-96 06:48:52 GMTContent-length: 5637 Legal History of American Marijuana Prohibition -Introduction Contents | Feedback | Search DRCNet Library | Schaffer Library | Major Studies The Forbidden Fruit and the Tree ofKnowledge THE FORBIDDEN FRUIT AND THE TREE OFKNOWLEDGE: AN INQUIRY INTO THE LEGAL HISTORY OF AMERICANMARIJUANA PROHIBITION Richard J. Bonnie* & Charles H.Whitebread, II** 1. INTRODUCTION Law may be rooted in fiction as well as fact. Indeed, a publicpolicy conceived in ignorance may be continuously reaffirmed,ever more vehemently, so long as its origins remain obscure orits fallacy unexposed. Yet once a spark of truth ignites thepublic opinion process, the authority of time will not stay theflames of controversy. In stable times the policy may soon bereversed or modified to comport with reality. In volatile times,however, a single controversy may lose its urgency. Fueled byflames generated by related public issues, the fire may spread;truth may again be consumed in the explosive collision ofcompeting cultural ideologies. So it has been with marijuana.' Suppressed for forty yearswithout significant public attention, the "killer weed"has suddenly surfaced as the preferred euphoriant of millions ofAmericans. Hardly a day passes without public exposure topropaganda from one side or the other. Hardly a day passeswithout arrests of newsworthy figures for violations of marijuanalaws. Before legislatures and courts, the law is attacked anddefended with equal fervor. Sociological, medical and policetestimony regarding the drug's effects is delivered feverishly toan attentive public. Yet, apart from some expedient peripheral actions, little hasbeen done. Detailed studies have been commissioned, but there hasbeen no significant reconsideration of basic assumptions. Becausethe marijuana issue has become ensnared in broader socialpolemics, it has been stalemated. Stability and change, defianceand repression, hippieism and middle-Americanism, "law andorder" and protest politics define the cultural milieu ofwhich the marijuana issue is viewed as but a symptom. This Article is motivated by twin concerns: that the flagrantdisregard of marijuana laws bespeaks a growing disenchantmentwith the capacity of our legal system rationally to ordersociety, and that the assimilation of the marijuana issue intolarger social conflicts has consigned the debate to the publicviscera instead of the public mind. Through a historical analysisof the marijuana laws we hope to refocus the debate. Anunderstanding of the origins of the laws might modulate thechallengers' hostile accusations and at the same time promote inlegislators an awareness of their own responsibility. For the purposes both of description and evaluation, law isinseparable from the process by which it is adopted and thevalues it manifests. Accordingly, our history focuses both on thepublic policy formation process and on evolving patterns of ourculture. With respect to policy, formation, marijuana's legalhistory is a significant illustration of the interaction of thepublic opinion, legislative and judicial processes, and, in abroader sense, the relation between folkways and gateways. Withrespect to its value-content, the evolution of marijuana policyreflects quite precisely emerging cultural attitudes towardpluralism, privacy and individual pursuit of pleasure in anincreasingly mechanized and depersonalized technological society. 1Throughout its tumultuous history, the common name of thecannabis drug has been spelled in numerous ways-marihuana,meriguana, marijuana, marijuana. We will use the last spellingbecause it appears most often in modern publications and conformsmore nearly to the Spanish. Contents | Feedback | Search DRCNet Library | Schaffer Library | Major Studies The Forbidden Fruit and the Tree ofKnowledge WT02-B02-5IA086-000614-B043-323http://206.61.184.43:80/schaffer/Library/studies/vlr/vlr1.htm 206.61.184.43 19970122021117 text/html 102087HTTP/1.0 200 OKDate: Wednesday, 22-Jan-97 02:11:01 GMTServer: WebSitePro/1.1f (S/N wpo-0deb)Allow-ranges: bytesContent-type: text/htmlLast-modified: Saturday, 28-Dec-96 06:46:57 GMTContent-length: 101868 The Antecedents: Criminalization of Narcotics and Alcohol Contents | Feedback | Search DRCNet Library | Schaffer Library | Major Studies The Forbidden Fruit and the Tree ofKnowledge THE FORBIDDEN FRUIT AND THE TREE OF KNOWLEDGE: AN INQUIRYINTO THE LEGAL HISTORY OF AMERICAN MARIJUANA PROHIBITION Richard J. Bonnie & Charles H. Whitebread, II II. THE ANTECEDENTS: CRIMINALIZATION OF NARCOTICS AndALCOHOL The restrictive public policy with respect to marijuana,initiated in the late twenties and thirties and perpetuated tothe present day, has never been an isolated phenomenon. At eachstage of its development marijuana policy has been heavilyinfluenced by other social issues because the drug has generallybeen linked with broader cultural patterns. Particularly at itsinception, nationwide anti-marijuana legislation and its fate inthe courts were inseparably linked with the earlieranti-narcotics and prohibition experiences. In fact, the facilitywith which marijuana policy was initiated directly related to theastoundingly sudden and extreme alteration of public narcoticsand alcohol policy between 1900 and 1920. In 1906 there were only three dry states, and judicialprecedent abounded for the proposition that the right to possessalcohol for private consumption was an inalienable right. Yet, by1917, twenty states had enacted prohibitionary legislation andmost others were contemplating it. Two years later the eighteenthamendment and the Volstead Act had been enacted, and it was afederal crime to possess alcohol even for the purpose of drinkingit within the home. Similarly, in 1900 only a handful of statesin any way regulated traffic in narcotic drugs-opium, cocaine,morphine and heroin-even though all but heroin had been availablefor a decade or more. Yet, by 1914, all states had enacted sometype of prohibitionary legislation, and the national governmenthad enacted the Harrison Narcotic Act. There were many major differences between the temperance andanti-narcotics movements. The temperance movement was a matter ofvigorous public debate; the anti-narcotics movement was not.Temperance legislation was the product of a highly organizednationwide lobby; narcotics legislation was largely ad hoc.Temperance legislation was designed to eradicate known evilsresulting from alcohol abuse; narcotics legislation was largelyanticipatory. On the other hand, there were striking similarities betweenthe two movements. Both were first directed against the evils oflarge scale use and only later against all use. Most of therhetoric was the same: These euphoriants produced crime,pauperism and insanity. Both began on the state level and latersecured significant congressional action. Both ultimately foundfavor with the courts, provoking interchangeable dissentingopinions. We do not propose to unearth new truths about the events ofthis period. However, we do believe that a familiarity with thepolitical and judicial response to the alcohol and narcoticsproblems is essential to an understanding of the eventualsuppression of marijuana. We believe further that anunderstanding of the relation between public opinion and anysumptuary law is germane to a discussion of the predicament ofcurrent marijuana legislation. Finally, since much of the currentdebate about marijuana is focused on its harmful effects ascompared with those of narcotics and alcohol, the evolution ofpublic policy in those areas is particularly material. A. A Review of the Temperance Movement Although aggressive prohibition campaigns had been mounted inevery state in 1851-69,1 and again in 1880-90, in 1903 only Maine(1884), Kansas (1880) and North Dakota (1889) were completely drystates.2 Ernest Cherrington, the chronicler par excellence of theProhibition movement, blamed the failure of the first thrust inpart on the intervention of the slavery question, which siphonedthe moral fervor of the people from the temperance movement .4The failure of the second campaign he attributed to the inabilityof the prohibition activists to compete politically with growingliquor interests that dominated state and local governments.5 By 1906, however, the progress of the anti-saloon arm of thetemperance movement in local option contests" and theadoption of alcohol prohibition by the people of Oklahoma in aprovision of their constitution ratified upon admission tostatehood 7 signalled a new crusade for state prohibitionarylegislation. The Oklahoma vote so "electrified the moralforces of other states" 8 that by 1913 six additional stateshad enacted statewide prohibition, and half of the remainingstates were contemplating action.9 Perhaps the most significant development during this periodoccurred on the national level. The Supreme Court had earlierdeclared the police powers of the states, under which stateprohibition laws were enacted, impotent to prevent importation ofliquor from a wet state, of which there were still many, into adry state and to stay the sale and delivery of such liquor to thebuyer while in the original package." After a congressional attempt to deal with the decision in1890 aborted in the courts," the buyer of liquor shipped ininterstate commerce still had the right to receive and thereforeto use such liquor. But in 1913 Congress, by the Webb-Kenyon Act,12 filled the gap by prohibiting the shipment of liquor from onestate to another to be used in violation of the laws of thelatter; dry states could thus enforce their prohibition laws Themere passage of this law, according to against imported liquor.13 Cherrington, committed Congress to a policy that recognizedthe liquor traffic as an outlaw trade and indicated congressionaldesire to assist the dry states. 14 By November 1913, the tide had decidedly turned. More thanhalf the population and 71 percent of the area of the UnitedStates were under prohibitionary laws.", Accordingly, theFifteenth National Convention of the Anti-Saloon League ofAmerica unanimously endorsed immediate passage of NationalConstitutional Prohibition, whereupon the National TemperanceCouncil was formed to combine the forces of the varioustemperance organizations toward this end. 16 By April 4, 1917, when a joint resolution was introduced inthe Senate proposing an amendment to the Constitution prohibitingthe manufacture, sale or transportation of intoxicating liquorswithin the United States for beverage purposes, 17 eighty percentof the territory of the United States was dry." Adopted bythe constitutional majorities of both houses on December 18,1917, the eighteenth amendment was ratified by the thirty-sixthstate on January 16, 1919, and became effective on January 16,1920.19 The Volstead Act," passed on October 28, 1919,pursuant to section 2 of the eighteenth amendment, outlawedpossession of intoxicating liquor and therefore wentsignificantly beyond the amendment itself. The National Commission on Law Observance and Enforcement (theWickersham Commission) attributed the passage of the eighteenthamendment not to public opposition to use of intoxicatingbeverages," although this was indeed the view of many of theleaders of the movement, but rather to antipathy to three majorrelated evils: excessive consumption, political corruption andlicensed saloons .22 Excessive use increased with the commercialization ofproduction and distribution, and the expansion of saloons. Publicresentment against the corrupting influence of the large liquordealers in local politics, especially in the larger cities,tended to focus public attention on removing a cancer from thebody politic. Finally, the institution that most strongly arousedpublic sentiment against liquor traffic was the licensed saloon,itself the symbol of intemperance and corruption. Owned orcontrolled by the large brewers or wholesalers, centers ofpolitical activity, homes of commercialized vice, the saloonswere the betes noires of middle-American public opinion. Because public opinion was largely opposed only to thesocio-political consequences of massive liquor traffic, theenforcement of total abstinence under the eighteenth amendmentbecame increasingly difficult. By 1931 it was an accepted factthat the upper and middle classes were "drinking in largenumbers in quite frank disregard of the declared policy" ofthe Volstead Act." The difficulties of securing compliance in such circumstanceswere aggravated by an inadequately designed enforcement strategy,24, public resentment of the lawless tactics of prohibitionagents, 25 and the lack of any sustained attempt at publiceducation.26 For twelve years, however, millions of dollars werespent by federal and state governments in a fruitless effort tosecure compliance with the law. Contemporary legal observers wereparticularly incensed by the dilution of constitutionalprotections, especially those provided by the fourth amendment,which was sanctioned by the courts in response to the "feltneeds" of securing compliance through enforcement alone.27 Although many plans were advanced for changing the prohibitionlaws to mitigate the lawlessness rampant during this period, aslate as 1931 even its most vigorous opponents felt that repeal ofthe eighteenth amendment was politically unfeasible.28 By 1932,however, public opinion had become so inflamed that theDemocratic National Convention included repeal in the partyplatform."' Proposed by Congress on February 20, 1933, thetwenty-first amendment was ratified by the thirty sixth state onDecember 5, 1933. B. Anti-Narcotics Legislation to 1914 For our purposes, the major feature of temperance history isthe responsiveness of the political process to public opinion.Whether or not a majority of Americans ever favored prohibitionand whether or not the thrust of public opinion was everaccurately assessed, the public opinion process was attuned tothe question for half a century. The alleged evils of alcoholabuse were matters of public knowledge; the proper governmentalresponse was a subject of endless public debate; enactment andrepeal of Prohibition were attended by widespread publicparticipation. In contrast, the early narcotics legislation was promulgatedlargely in a vacuum. Public and even professional ignorance ofthe effects of narcotic drugs contributed both to the dimensionsof the problem and the nature of the legislated cure. The initiallegislation was attended by no operation of the public opinionprocess, and instead generated a new public image of narcoticsuse. Only after this creation of a public perception occurred didthe legislative approach comport with what we shall call latentpublic opinion. 1. Narcotics Use at the Turn of the Century: A GrowingProblem Although estimates have varied widely regarding the number ofpersons regularly using cocaine, opium, morphine and heroinduring the pre-criminalization period, a sufficiently accuratefigure can be drawn from a composite of contemporary surveys30conducted between 1878 and 1924 .31 Estimates range from 182,215(1884) to 782,118 (1913). We can safely estimate that there werebetween one-quarter and one-half million Americans addicted tonarcotics around the turn of the century, comprising at least onepercent of the population." This rather large addict population included more females thanmales,33 more whites than blacks," and was confined neitherto particular geographical regions nor to areas of highpopulation concentrations Its most significant characteristic wasits predominantly middle-class composition. Such attributescontrast starkly with the overwhelmingly black, lower-class maleaddict population that today inhabits our major urban centers. Nineteenth century narcotics addiction was generallyaccidental. It is widely believed that medical addicts faroutnumbered "kicks" or pleasure" addicts.37Medical addiction stemmed from many sources. The first wasovermedication. Civil War hospitals used opium and morphinefreely and many veterans returned addicted to the drugs."Overmedication continued long after peace had been restored, dueto the ready availability of these drugs with and sometimeswithout prescription. Since physicians were free to dispensethese drugs as painkillers, persons given morphine first forlegitimate therapeutic purposes often found themselves addicted.39 This problem was exacerbated by the absence of restrictionsupon druggists in refilling prescriptions containing extensiveamounts of morphine and other opiates40 and by the introductionof the hypodermic syringe." The danger of overmedicationincreased in 1884 when cocaine was first introduced into thepractice of medicine, and again in 1898 when an advance in Germanchemistry produced heroin, a partially synthetic morphinederivative. 42 For a time recommended as a treatment for morphineaddiction ,43 heroin was also widely used for medicinal purposes. A second source of accidental addiction was the use andpopularity of patent medicines. Exotically labeled elixirs wereadvertised as general cures for- ills ranging from snake bite tomelancholia. By containing up to thirty or forty percent morphineor opiates by volume, most patent medicines fulfilled theircure-all promises. However, a heavy price was exacted for suchcures. In the absence of a requirement that contents be printedon the label, many an unsuspecting person became addicted withoutever knowing the medicine that worked so well contained dangerousnarcotics.44 Thus, careless prescription, incessant dispensation and hiddendistribution of harmful drugs, the addictive effects of whichwere unknown until too late, fostered a large addict populationwhich continued to increase in the early twentieth century. Theincrease in narcotics consumption, and therefore addiction, iswell illustrated by the fact that 628,177 pounds of opiates werebrought into this country in 1900, three times the amountimported thirty years earlier." Governmental and medicaldefault explains the innocent nature of nineteenth centurynarcotics addiction and therefore its predominantly middle-class,nationwide character. Not all addiction was accidental and private. It has beensuggested that both medical knowledge and governmental regulationoccurred only when each narcotic drug achieved a significantdegree of "street" use. Our research supports thisthesis, especially when "street" use is identified withthe poor and with racial minorities. For example, opium, the drugfirst determined addictive and first identified with "pleasure" use, was the earliest prohibited. Legislation wasfirst passed in the west coast states with newly immigratedChinese populations among whom its use was prevalent. Heroinearly achieved a widespread nonmedical or "street" use,especially in large urban centers among lower-class males."' Nevertheless, addiction, even to opium, was predominantlyinvoluntary until 1900. Professional attention was not focuseddirectly on! Street" use until after two developments hadsignificantly reduced the: possibility of medical addiction.First, the passage of the Pure Food and Drug Act48 in 1906 led tothe demise of the patent medicine industry,: one of the primarycauses of medical addiction. The labeling requirements of theAct, coupled with the later regulation of the production anddistribution of the opiates, protected the public from thedangers of ignorance and virtually put the patent medicineindustry out of business.49 Second, the discovery of newnonaddictive pain killers and anesthetics reduced the likelihoodof post-operative addiction since physicians no longer needed torely so heavily on morphine and opium. preparations to reduce andcontrol pain. 2. State Legislative Response Before 1914 Although many states regulated narcotics indirectly throughtheir general "poison laws" before 1870,50 the firstanti-narcotics legislation did not appear until the last quarterof the nineteenth century. Most of the early legislation focusedprimarily on crime prevention" and public educationregarding the dangers of drug use." The spread of opiumsmoking, especially in the western states with high orientalpopulations,53 provoked legislation in eighteen states between1877 and 1911 designed to eradicate the practice either bypreventing the operation of opium dens or by punishing thesmoking of opium altogether. 54 As the addictive qualities ofopium, cocaine, morphine and later heroin became known, primarilythrough observation of "street" use, concernedphysicians finally began to agitate for stricter regulation thanthat provided by the "poison laws," even though suchlaws included opium and cocaine. Nevada enacted the first lawprohibiting the retail sale of opiates for nonmedical purposes in1877.55 In 1887, Oregon prohibited sale of cocaine without aprescription,"" and seven states followed suit by theturn of the century57 as did thirty-nine more by 1914.58 However,only twenty-nine states had included opiates in theirprohibitionary legislation by 1914.59 With the exception of the Oregon schemes nineteenth centurynarcotic laws did not attempt to restrict or prohibit possessionof narcotics, and were directed solely at distribution and sale.By 1913, only six states had prohibited the mere possession ofrestricted drugs by unauthorized persons .61 Three additionalstates prohibited possession with intent illegally to dispensesuch drugs .62 3. Watershed: The Passage of the Harrison Act The first national legislation designed to regulate narcoticsdistribution, the 1909 "Act to Prohibit Importation and UseOf Opium"' 63 barred the importation of opium at other thanspecified ports and for other than medicinal use. The law furtherrequired the keeping of import records. The main force behind thepassage of this statute was a desire to bring the United Statesinto line with other nations that had signed internationalconventions against the use of the drug. 64 However, as stateanti-narcotics legislation began to take on crusade proportions,pressure was generated for federal regulation of the importationof opium for medicinal purposes and of the interstate trade incocaine, morphine and heroin. Consequently, the Harrison Act,until this year the foundation of federal law controllingnarcotic drugs, was passed in 1914.65 The Harrison Act, a taxing measure, required registration andpayment of an occupational tax by all persons who imported,produced, dealt in, sold or gave away opium, cocaine or theirderivatives. The Act required all legitimate handlers of thesenarcotics to file returns setting forth in detail their use ofthe drugs. Each legitimate handler was required to use a specialorder form in making any transfer of narcotics. Since the Actalso provided that only legitimate users could register and noone but a registered user could obtain the specified form, anytransfer by an illegitimate user was a violation of the Act. Forthose failing to comply with its registration requirements, theoriginal Harrison Act provided penalties of not more than $2,000in fines or more than five years imprisonment, or both. The passage of the Harrison Act was the culmination ofincreasing concern in the medical profession66 about the freedomwith which physicians prescribed and druggists dispensedaddictive drugs, primarily morphine and heroin. During the periodof little or no regulation, the innocent addicts were regarded asvictims of an unfortunate sickness in need of treatment; usuallythey could find a friendly physician or druggist willing tosustain their habits. The passage of the Harrison Act, however,by imposing a stamp of illegitimacy on most narcotics use,fostered an image previously associated primarily with opium thatof the degenerate dope fiend with immoral proclivities. As theregulation of physicians and druggists became more stringent,especially after the Supreme Court held that prevention ofwithdrawal was not a legitimate medical use that a prescriptionto an unregistered person,67 this image fulfilled itself. Alladdicts, whether accidental or pleasure-seeking, were shut offfrom their supply and had to turn underground to purchase thedrugs. Inflated underground prices often provoked criminalactivity and this activity in turn evoked in the public a moralresponse,, cementing the link between iniquity and. drugaddiction.68 The early clinical experiments dealing with narcoticsaddiction were inevitable victims of enforcement of theAct." The concept that underlay the clinical effort-thataddiction was a medical problem to be dealt with by sustainingthe addict cheaply while trying to induce gentle withdrawal-wasantithetical to the attitude provoking the criminalclassification of unlawful possessors of narcotic drugs."Clinics were run .in such cities as New York, Shreveport andJacksonville," but by 1923 all were closed, thus removingstill another legitimate source of supply for the addict. Again,the crimes committed to enable these people to tap I the illicitsources increased public hysteria and misunderstanding 72 aboutthe link between the opiates and crime. Another result of the physicians' resignation to pressure wasthat addicts to the opiates began to commit petty crimes in orderto secure the drugs which could prevent their suffering. Theseinevitable law-induced crimes greatly accentuated the generalpublic belief that opiates had some inherent sinister propertywhich could change normal people into moral perverts andcriminals. In addition to redefining the public conception of narcoticaddiction in a way that would not be seriously challenged forhalf a century, the Harrison Act also provided a strange modelfor the administration of narcotics laws which wouldsignificantly affect future developments' Drafted as a tax lawrather than an outright criminal statute, the Act was intended todo indirectly what Congress believed it could not dodirectly-regulate possession and sale of the opiates. Indeed,congressional caution was justified. A five-to-four decision bythe Supreme Court in the 1903 Lottery Case73 suggested what laterbecame fact-the Court, as self-appointed arbiter of the federalsystem, would plant the tenth amendment in the path ofcongressional regulation of "local" affairs. Thatdirect regulation of medical practice was indeed consideredbeyond congressional power under the commerce clause is clearlyindicated in contemporary opinions. First, in its 1918 decisionin Hammer V. Dagenhart,74 the Court held the Child Labor Actunconstitutional. Second, the Court ultimately upheld theHarrison Act as a valid exercise of the taxing power 75 only by afive-to-four margin. Finally, there is some fairly explicitlanguage about congressional regulation of medical practice insubsequent Harrison Act opinions.76 This indirect regulation of narcotics traffic under thepretext of raising revenue had a number of significantconsequences. First, since the Act could not penalize users oraddiction directly, there was an immediate need for complementaryresidual state legislation in order to deal effectively with thedrug problem. Second, the enforcement of the Act was necessarilyassigned to the Internal Revenue Service in the TreasuryDepartment. The first enforcement agency for the Harrison Act was theNarcotics Division of the Prohibition Unit of the InternalRevenue Service created in 1920.77 This division was incorporatedin the Prohibition Bureau which was created in 1927 .78 In 1930,the enforcement of the narcotics laws was severed from the Bureauof Prohibition and established as the separate Bureau ofNarcotics in the Treasury Department .79 The existence of thisseparate agency anxious to fulfill its role as crusader againstthe evils of narcotics has done as much as any single factor toinfluence the course of drug regulation from 1930 to 1970."Although the impact of the Bureau on the passage of the UniformNarcotic Drug Act and the Marihuana Tax Act will be explained indetail in subsequent sections, it is important here to note thatthe existence of a separate bureau having responsibility only fornarcotics enforcement and for educating the public on drugproblems inevitably led to a particularly prosecutorial view ofthe narcotics addict. Moreover, this creation of the Bureauseparate from the newly created FBI in the justice Departmentunnecessarily bifurcated federal law enforcement operations inthis area. C. The Judicial Role and the Constitutional Framework: The Police Power and Intoxicant Prohibition to 1920 It is not novel to suggest that the fate of contemporaryconstitutional challenges to marijuana prohibition depends inpart on a judicial reading of public opinion as well as on theavailability of a constitutional peg on which to hang an"activist" judicial inquiry. Since contextual pressureand analytical conflict were also central elements of the'Judicial response to alcohol and narcotics prohibition between1850 and 1920, it is worthwhile to trace that response. As in today's court battles over marijuana laws, the clashthen was between two polar constitutional concepts-the policepowers of the state and allegedly "fundamental"personal constitutional rights. The conflict opened on stateconstitutional grounds and was continued in the realm of thefourteenth amendment. On the issues of alcohol and"hard" narcotics, the police power was triumphant. Inthe light of the comparisons drawn in current constitutionalarguments among marijuana , alcohol and narcotics, an inquiryinto the long struggle is informative. 1. Phase One: Prohibition of Sale and Manufacture of Alcohol During the first wave of prohibitionist legislation in the1850's, thirteen en states outlawed manufacture" and sale ofintoxicating beverages." The constitutionality of such lawsunder the commerce clause of the Federal Constitution had beenpresaged in the License Case83 in 1847, where in six separateopinions the Supreme Court upheld Massachusetts, New Hampshireand Rhode Island laws regulating wholesale and retail sales ofliquor. Chief Justice Taney's famous dictum stated: And if any State deems the retail and internal traffic in ardent spirits injurious to its citizens, and calculated to produce idleness, vice, or debauchery, I see nothing, in the constitution of the United States to prevent it from regulating and restraining the traffic, or from prohibiting, it altogether, if it thinks proper.84 Armed with this pronouncement, the courts of eight statesrebuffed challenges under their own constitutions." Some ofthese decisions gave scant attention to the constitutionalargument but simply defined the police power broad terms86 andperhaps cited the Taney dictum. However, the rationale and rhetoric of those decisionssquarely rejecting the constitutional objections merit a detailedcomparison with that of two decisions, in New York88 andIndiana89, declaring the statutes void. Even the opponents of the laws acknowledged the potentialpublic evils of intemperance90crime, pauperism and vice-theeradication of which was the objective of prohibitionarylegislation. Yet they argued that the means employed toaccomplish this end-prevention of sale was beyond the policepower. Alcohol had admittedly beneficial use91 and was harmfulonly when abused.92 In order to eliminate it from channels ofcommerce, thereby depriving its owners of a -fundamental incidentof ownership-the right to sell93 -a more pernicious character hadto be shown. 94 Accordingly, the public benefit did not justifythe restriction of private rights. The criminalization of sale ofalcohol beverages constituted a deprivation of"property" without due process;95 or, failing that, itconstituted an infringement of the inalienable right of 1ife,liberty And the pursuit of happiness rooted in the precepts ofnatural justice that the people reserved to themselves when theyentered into the social compact.96 New York, in Wynehamer v.People,97 accepted .the due process argument, at least withrespect to alcohol lawfully acquired, and Indiana endorsed theinalienable rights argument in Beebe v. State.98 The virtues of judicial restraint were vehemently defended inthe decisions rejecting these arguments: The courts uniformlyrefused to interfere with the discretionary exercise of thepolice power in the absence of a specific constitutionalprohibition. The Vermont Supreme Court view was typical: The legislature in passing the law in question doubtless supposed that the traffic and drinking of intoxicating liquors went hand in hand ... and that, by cutting off the one, the other would also fall with it. Whether the drinking of intoxicating liquors tends to produce intemperance and whether the intemperance is a gangrene, tending to corrupt the moral health of the body politic, and to produce misery and lamentation; and whether the law in question is well calculated to cut off or mitigate the evils supposed to flow directly from intemperance and indirectly from the traffic in intoxicating liquors, were questions to be settled by the lawmaking power; and their decision in this respect is final and not to be reviewed by us.99 Under this view, societal self-protection, the essence of thepolice power, is broadly defined.100 So long as the legislaturedetermines that the use of alcoholic beverages exerts an adverseeffect on public, health, safety or morals, the courts mayquestion neither the factual determination nor the means employedto restrict that use. In answer to the argument that the courtshave a special obligation to review the relation between meansand ends where personal liberties are curtailed, these courtsdisavowed any power "to annul a legislative Act upon highergrounds than those of express constitutional restriction,"101 or, after assuming for sake of argument the existence of suchpower, they declined to exercise It.102 In response to theargument accepted by Judge Comstock in Wynehamer v. New York-thatprohibition of sale of legally acquired alcohol was a deprivationof property without due process of law-most courts distinguishedWynehamer on its facts,103 held that no essential"property" right had been violated,"" orconstrued "due process" to refer only to due procedureand not to the "power ... to create and define anoffense." 105 Two polar conceptions of the scope of 'Judicial review clashedover a subject of intense public interest. The immediate questionwas settled in favor of the constitutionality of prohibitingmanufacture and sale of alcoholic beverages; in fact, the Indianacourt itself disavowed its contrary decision in Beebe three yearsafter rendering it.106 However, the jurisprudential dialogue107had merely begun. Today, Wynehamer is regarded as the initialstep, on the road to the vested rights conception of due process.Similarly, Beebe is the philosophical ancestor of all challengesto prohibition of intoxicants alcohol, narcotics, andmarijuana.108 With the passage of the fourteenth amendment, the SupremeCourt was called upon to determine whether prohibitionaryexercises of the state police powers were now limited by federallaw. The battle fought in the 1850's on state constitutionalgrounds was refought in the 1870's and 80's on federalterritory-with the same outcome. In a series of cases culminatingin Mugler v. Kansas,109 it slowly became settled that themanufacturer or seller of intoxicating liquors had noconstitutional rights under either the privileges and immunitiesor due process clauses that could prevent the operation of thepolice power of the state, regardless whether the liquor wasbought or manufactured before passage of the law or even whetherit was manufactured solely for personal use.110 Thus, as a matter of both state and federal constitutionallaw, the courts required no more, and probably less, than thatlegislation be designed to retard a public evil-here pauperismand crime-and be rationally related to that end."' Absent aspecific constitutional limitation, it did not concern the courtsthat such regulations affronted personal liberty and propertyrights. The theoretical Justification of incidental curtailmentof private liberties in the public interest was that thelegislature must conduct the balancing; if the balance isunsound, the law will be repealed. Indeed, the courts wereprobably willing to indulge that presumption as a practicalmatter since the passage of the prohibition laws was preceded byvigorous public debate. In fact, the public opinion process didwork in reaction to these curtailments of private liberty, andmost such laws were subsequently repealed"' in the ensuingdecade. 2. Phase Two: Probibition of Sale of Opium As noted above, the first prohibitionary narcotics legislationwas enacted on the west coast in the 1880's in order to prohibitsale and distribution of opium for nonmedical purposes. Theracial overtonesof this legislation were self-consciouslyacknowledged by the initial Oregon and Nevada decisions.Sustaining the conviction of an alien for selling opium in Exparte Yung Jon,"' the Oregon district court noted: Smoking opium is not our vice, and therefore it may be that this legislation proceeds more from a desire to vex and annoy the "Heathen Chinee" in this respect, than to protect the people from the evil habit. But the motives of legislators cannot be the subject of judicial investigation for the purpose of affecting the validity of their acts. 114 The opium laws were attacked on precisely the same grounds ashad been the alcohol prohibition legislation. The Nevada courthad no trouble in State v. Ah Chew;115 it simply cited theLicense Cases, the Delaware decision sustaining prohibition ofalcohol sale, and distinguished Wynebamer as holding only thatthe sale of lawfully acquired property could not be prohibited.Within this framework, the result was obvious: It is not denied that the indiscriminate use of opium . . .tends in a much greater degree to demoralize the persons usingit, to dull the moral senses, to foster vice and produce crime,than the sale of intoxicating drinks. If such is its tendency, itshould not have unrestrained license to produce such disastrousresults.... Under the police power . . . in the interest of goodmorals, the good order and peace of society, for the preventionof crime, misery and want, the legislature has authority to placesuch restrictions upon sale or disposal of opium a,, willmitigate, if not suppress, its evils to society.116 The Oregon court, in the Yung Jon decision five years later,did not take the easy way out. The court was apparently notdisposed to imply that sale of previously owned alcohol andcigarettes could be prohibited, and thus reject outright theWynebamer conception of due process;117 instead it chose to holdthat sale of opium for nonmedical purposes was not an incident ofownership and, since the law did not prohibit sale for medicalpurposes, no property right was deprived. Not as cautious as hisbrethren, Judge Deady inquired more actively into the nature ofopium before upholding the legislation. Whether a legislative actis "prohibitory" (and by implication whether itviolates the due process clause) "must depend oncircumstances, and particularly the character of the article, andthe uses and purposes to which it has generally been applied inthe community." 118 He then noted that opium was primarily amedicinal drug; that although used in the East for centuries asan intoxicant, that use was new in the United States and confinedprimarily to the Chinese; that it was classed as a poison and wasless easily detected than alcoholic intoxication, "which itis said to replace where law and custom have made the latterdisreputable;" and that its "evil effects" weremanifest upon the nervous and digestive systems, resemblingdelirium tremens. Thus, there was no longstanding regard of opiumas a legitimate article of property except for medical use.Accordingly, the act does not in effect prohibit the dispositionof the drug, but allows it under such circumstances, and on suchconditions, as will, according to the general practice andopinions of the country, prevent its improper and harmful use.119 Thus, whatever the judicial propensity to limit the policepower in the interest of property rights, prohibition of trafficin opium-worse than alcohol and confined to aliens-violated noimplied or express constitutional limitations. 3. Phase Three: Prohibition of Possession of Alcohol to 1915 At this stage of constitutional jurisprudence, criminalizationof possession or consumption of alcohol or narcotics was arguablya deprivation of property without due process of law. The firstwave of prohibition cases had held only that the right to selleven previously acquired liquor was not an essential element ofownership. They had not held that the state could forbid theessential attribute of ownership-the right to use. In fact, manycourts had expressly noted that alcohol was still a legitimatearticle of property.120 Until 1915 the weight of authority was that it was beyond thepolice power to prohibit mere possession of alcoholic beveragesunless the quantity Justified an inference that they were heldfor sale. A few cases so held ;121 many courts so stated indictum, while holding the laws either in conflict with particularconstitutional provisions regarding the "sale" ofliquor"122 or in excess of the power of municipalcorporations;" and many contemporary commentators so stated.124 Although the due process rationale was sometimes employed, 125the preferred approach was "inherent" limitation. Inhis 1904 treatise, Police Power, Ernst Freund premised the"inherent" limitation of noninterference with purelyprivate conduct not on any inalienable natural right but on therequirement that interference be justified on grounds of thepublic welfare."' This and the "practical difficultiesof enforcement, coupled with the constitutional prohibition ofunreasonable searches," 127 would sufficiently deterlegislative abuse. Absent the addition of a natural rights notion, however, thisdecisional frame becomes ambivalent on the dispositive questionin an adjudication questioning such legislative"abuse": Can the mere "policy" ofnonintervention with private conduct a more rigorous judicialinquiry into the relation between the prohibited private acts andthe alleged public evil? If it cannot, the constitutional attackon prohibition of possession is no stronger than that onprohibition of sale. If it can, is not the judicial role subjectto the same charge of usurpation as it would be if the courtsemployed a pure natural rights approach? In any event, when the courts first confronted possessionprohibition, the rhetoric was varied-due process, 128 naturalrights"' and private liberty""-but the approachwas the same-a refusal to accept the legislative findings as tothe relation between private act and public harm and a refusal todefer to the legislative balance of private liberty and publicneed. For example, in one of the leading cases, Commonwealth v.Campbell,"' the Court of Appeals of Kentucky cited Cooley,Mill, and Blackstone for the proposition that [i]t is not within the competency of government to invade theprivacy of the citizen's life and to regulate his conduct inmatters in which he alone is concerned, or to prohibit him anyliberty the exercise of which will not directly injuresociety.132 Noting next that defendant was "not charged with havingthe liquor in his possession for the purpose of selling it, oreven giving it to another" and that "ownership andpossession cannot be denied when that ownership and possession isnot in itself injurious to the public," 133 the courtconcluded that the right to use liquor for one's own comfort, if the use iswithout direct injury to the public, is one of the citizen'snatural and inalienable rights .... We hold that the policepower-vague and wide and undefined as it is-has limits . . . 134 The key to this reasoning, of course, is the court'sinsistence that the injury be direct as measured according to aJudicial yardstick. Although the court devoted little attentionto the question, it implicitly rejected arguments that the onlyway to exorcize the public evils attending excessive use andadequately to enforce prohibitions against sale was to preventany private use at all. The court impliedly held that the positedconnection, albeit rational, was "remote" or"indirect" or "unreasonable" and thereforeentitled to no deference. 135 4. Phase Four: Prohibition of Possession of Narcotics This active 'Judicial role in alcohol cases should be comparedwith the courts' simultaneous refusals to second-guesslegislative "findings" with regard to thecriminalization of possession of opium. In a series of casesdecided in Washington, Oregon and California136 in 1890, 1896 and1911 respectively, courts held that the relation betweennarcotics use and public harm was to be drawn by the legislature. In answer to the argument, accepted in the alcohol cases, thatdespite the absence of explicit constitutional limitations thepolice power of prohibition was inherently limited to acts which"involve direct and immediate injury to another," 137the courts replied in predictable fashion: The state may preventa weak man from doing injury to himself if it determines thatsuch injury may cause the individual to become a "burden onsociety;" "' the state could find that excessive use ofopium, an active poison, would debase the moral and economicwelfare of' the society by causing ill health, pauperism andinsanity;... the state could find that the potential for andevils attending excessive use demand a prohibition also ofnondeleterious moderate use."' Accordingly, in the words ofthe Supreme Court of Washington, [i]t is for the legislature to place on foot the inquiry as tojust in what degree the use is injurious; to collate all theinformation and to make all the needful and necessarycalculations. These are questions of fact with which the courtcannot deal. The constitutionality of laws is not thus to bedetermined .141 The California court had more difficulty with the argumentthat punishment of possession of alcohol had been held beyond thepolice power. Despite its rhetoric regarding the wide bounds oflegislative fact-finding, the court actually made its owndetermination that public injury from private abuse was morelikely with narcotics than alcohol. The lower court had said soovertly: But liquor is used daily in this and other countries as abeverage, moderately and without harm, by countless thousands ...; whereas it appears there is no such thing as moderation in theuse of opium. Once the habit is formed the desire for it isinsatiable, and its use is invariably disastrous. 142 The California Supreme Court shied away: We do not understand this to have been intended to declare anestablished or conceded fact. So interpreted, the expressionwould be, perhaps unduly sweeping. But the validity oflegislation which would be necessary or proper under a givenstate of facts does not depend upon the actual existence of thesupposed facts. It is enough if the law-making body mayrationally believe such facts to be established. If the beliefthat the use of opium, once begun, almost ]Inevitably leads toexcess may be entertained by reasonable men-and we do not doubtthat it may-such belief affords a sufficient 'Justification forapplying to opium restrictions which might be unduly burdensomein the case of other substances, as, for example, intoxicatingliquors, the use of which may fairly be regarded as lessdangerous to their users or to the public. 143 What the court said is unobjectionable. What it did not say,however, is significant. This reasoning implies that if thelegislature should determine that the potential for excessive useof alcohol-and consequently for the public evils of pauperism,crime and insanity-is great enough to prohibit all use, thatjudgment would have to stand. Probably not intending so tosuggest, the court really held that it thought that opium use wasmore likely adversely to affect the public welfare than alcoholuse; accordingly, paternal criminal legislation was"reasonable" in the former case and not in the latter,even though they were identically "Indirect." Ithelped, perhaps, that the legislature was not telling the and hiswhite, middle-class colleagues that they shouldn't smoke opium,and that the objective was merely to prevent a few "HeathenChinee" from hurting themselves through their stupidity andfrom spreading their nasty habit to the whites."' The only astounding thing about the opium possession cases isthat there was at least one dissenting opinion. In the Washingtoncase, Ah Lim v. Territory,145 judge Scott, for himself andanother judge, insisted on either a more conclusive demonstrationthat the private act of smoking opium "directly and clearlyaffected the public in some manner" or a more narrowly drawnstatute. He catalogued the alleged public justifications: That smoking or inhaling opium injures the health of theindividual, and in this way weakens the state; that it tends tothe increase of pauperism. That it destroys the moral sentimentand leads to the commission of crime. In other words, that it hasan injurious effect upon the individual, and, consequently,results indirectly in an injury to the community. 146 After noting the insufficiency of all of the 'Justificationsincluding the argument that the moderate desires of some must besacrificed to prevent abuse by others, 147 then concluded: [The Act] is altogether too sweeping in its terms. I make noquestion but that the habit of smoking opium may be repulsive anddegrading. That its effect would be to shatter the nerves anddestroy the intellect; and that it may tend to the increase ofpauperism and crime. But there is a vast difference between thecommission of a single act, and a confirmed habit. There is adistinction to be recognized between the use and abuse of anyarticle or substance.... If this act must be held valid it ishard to conceive of any legislative action affecting the personalconduct, or privileges of the individual citizen. that must notbe upheld. . . . The prohibited act cannot affect the public inany way except through the primary personal injury to theindividual, if it occasions him any injury. It looks like a newand extreme step under our government in the field oflegislation, if it really was passed for any of the purposes uponwhich that character of legislation can be sustained, if at all.148 The sanctity of "the personal conduct or privileges ofthe individual " had suffered first blow. The knockout wasonly a few citizen rounds away. 5. Phase Five: Prohibition of Possession of Alcohol After 1915 The year 1915 was the watershed year for prohibitionists inthe courts. By 1913, the tide had finally turned in the statelegislatures, many of which prohibited possession of more than acertain quantity of alcoholic beverages. The first of thesestatutes to reach the courts was that of Alabama in SouthernExpress Co. v. Whittle.149 Overruling its earlier decision in Eidge v. City ofBessemer,150 one of the leading cases during the earlier phase,the Alabama court swept away all restraints on the police power.So long as the legislation was directed at some legitimatepurpose and was not arbitrary, the court should not interfere.151Whether or not the Supreme Court had so intended, the Alabamacourt, like other state courts, relied heavily on justiceHarlan's opinion in Mugler v. Kansas,152 and gave its legislaturea blank check when exercising police powers: If the right of common law to manufacture an intoxicatingliquor for one's own personal use, out of one's own materials bythe application of one's own personal effort, may be forbidden byappropriate legislation under the police power, as was expresslyruled in Mugler v. Kansas . . . . it cannot be logically orsoundly asserted that the receipt or possession of more than aspecified quantity at one time may not be forbidden by a statute. . . . 153 The alleged sanctity of private conduct gave the court littlepause; this was just I one of a number of instances where ancillary prohibitions of acts and conduct, innocent in themselves, have been sustained and confirmed as an exercise of the police power of the state; and so upon the theory that some valid legislative purpose might be more certainly made effective, or that evasions of the laws might be prevented or hindered of accomplishment.154 Though the Alabama court did not do so, it could have citedthe opium possession cases as authority. Most courts did. The Alabama decision was quickly followed in Idaho155 and innine other states.156 When the Idaho case, Crane v. Campbell,157came before the Supreme Court, Justice McReynolds dealt theknockout blow: As the state has the power . . . to prohibit [sale and manufacture], it may adopt such measures as are reasonably appropriate or needful to render exercise of that power effective. And, considering the notorious difficulties always attendant upon efforts to suppress traffic in liquors, we are unable to say that the challenged inhibition of their possession was 'arbitrary and unreasonable or without proper relation to the legitimate legislative purposes 158 The principle noted by Freund,159 that the police power didnot easily extend to matters of private conduct, was ignored: [I] t clearly follows from our numerous decisions upholding prohibition legislation that the right to hold intoxicating liquors for personal use is not one of those fundamental privileges of a citizen of the United States which no State may abridge. A contrary view would be incompatible with the undoubted power to prevent manufacture, gift, sale, purchase or transportation of such articles-the only feasible ways of getting them. An assured right of possession would necessarily imply some adequate method to obtain not subject to destruction at the will of the State. 160 Given the restrictive interpretation of the privileges andimmunities clause161 and the refusal to extend substantive dueprocess outside the economic area, 162 there was no existingfederal constitutional pigeonhole for "private conduct"as a principle of constitutional limitation. And on the statelevel the courts ignored the "'intrinsic limitation"argument and discarded the direct-indirect yardstick in the wakeof the temperance movement. The commentators were outraged. Again and again the courtswere indicted for interpreting constitutional precepts tocorrespond with public opinion.163 The retreat on the temperancequestion coincided perfectly with the final success of theProhibition movement. And the commentators were quite justifiedin so noting. It was merely icing on the cake when the Supreme Court upheldthe provision of the Volstead Act164 outlawing possession ofintoxicating liquor. The Court predictably rebuffed165 anargument that it was beyond congressional power under section 2of the eighteenth amendment to prohibit possession for personalconsumption of liquor owned before the passage of the Act.166 6. A Postscript on the Police Power: The Cigarette Cases Interestingly, the legislative solicitude for the health ofthe citizenry during the period under discussion also extended tothe prohibition of cigarette smoking in several jurisdictions. In1897, the General Assembly of Tennessee made it a misdemeanor tosell, give away or otherwise dispose of cigarettes or cigarettepaper.167 The Supreme Court of Tennessee upheld the statute underthe police power on the grounds that cigarettes were notlegitimate articles of commerce, being "inherently bad andbad only." 168 The United States Supreme Court affirmed inAustin v. Tennessee,169 primarily on the authority of the alcoholand opium cases, noting that there need be only a rational basisfor the legislative determination that the commodity is harmfulto 'justify its prohibition.170 The Court did not even mentionany objection based on deprivation of property rights or personalliberty. The issue was posed more directly in Kentucky and Illinoiscases171 regarding the validity of local ordinances prohibitingsmoking of cigarettes "within the corporate limits" inone case and "in any street, alley, avenue ... park ... or[other] public place" in the other. Both courts held theordinances unreasonable interferences with personal liberty.172 The argument that the ordinances were calculated to insure thepublic safety by preventing fire hazards was held to be tooremote and the argument accepted in Austin regarding potentialinjury to the smoker's health apparently was not made or at leastwent unacknowledged by both courts. These decisions, rendered in. 1911 and 1914, were probablyconsistent, under a direct-indirect injury to society theory,with Austin and with the alcohol and narcotics cases up to thattime. The post-1915 alcohol possession cases, however, underminedany such distinction. insofar as it authorized a more activejudicial inquiry into the relationship between the privateconduct and the public need. At least at this stage of itsdevelopment it may be fruitless to seek out a "neutralprinciple" beyond common sense regarding the undefinedconstitutional limitations on the police power. Professor BrooksAdams noted in 1913 that the scope of the police power could notbe determined in advance by abstract reasoning. Hence. as, eachlitigation arose, the judges could follow no rule but the rule ofcommon sense, and the Police Power, translated into plain Englishpresently came to signify whatever, at the moment, the judgeshappened to think reasonable. Consequently, they began guessingat the drift of public opinion, as it percolated to them throughthe medium of their education and prejudices. Sometimes theyguessed right and sometimes wrong, and when they guessed wrongthey were cast aside, as appeared dramatically enough in thetemperance agitation .173 And justice Holmes noted: It may be said in a general way that the police power extends to all the great public needs. It may be put forth in aid of what is sanctioned by usage, or held by the prevailing morality or strong and preponderant opinion to be greatly and immediately necessary to the public welfare.174 Whether the development of the Judicial response to exercisesof the police power at the time was the result of the changingpublic opinion or a changing analytical framework, trends in thatresponse were evident. It remains to be seen whether any trendsare evident today to indicate how marijuana users will fare inthe future. Footnotes and References 1 E. CHERRINGTON, THE EVOLUTION OFPROHIBITION IN THE UNITED STATES OF AMERICA 135-45(1920) [hereinafter cited as CHERRINGTON1. 21d. at 176-84. 31d. at 180-81; Safely, Growth of State Power Under FederalConstitution to Regulate Traffic in Intoxicating Liquors, 3LOWAL. BULL. 221, 222 (1917). 4 CHERRINGTON139.  Id. at 181-82. 6 Id. at 280. 7 Id. at 280-81. 8 Id. at 281.  Id. at 284. 10 Leisy v. Hardin, 135 U.S. 100 (1890). 11Four months after Leisy Congress enacted the "WilsonLaw," designed to make all intoxicating liquors subject"upon arrival" to the laws of the state into which theywere sent. Act of Aug. 8, 1890, ch. 728, 26 Stat. 313. In Rhodesv. Iowa, 170 U.S. 412 (1898), however, the Supreme Court heldthat "upon arrival" meant after delivery to theconsignee. Thus the right to receive the liquor and the attendantenforcement problems remained. 12Act of Mar. 1, 1913, ch. 90, 37 Stat. 699. 13 The Act was upheld in Clark Distilling Co. v. Western Md.Ry., 242 U.S. 311 (1917). 14 CHERRINGToN, 285-86. 15 Id. at 320. 115 Id. at 321-22. 17 See H.R. Doc. No. 722, 71st Cong., 3d Sess. 5 (1931)thereinafter cited as WICKERSHAM COMMISSION J. 18 Id. Is Id. at 8. 20 Act of Oct. 28, 1919, ch. 85, 41 Stat. 305. 21 In 1904 Ernst Freund had noted, quoting from an article on"personal liberty" in the Cyclopedia of Temperanceand Prohibition: Even the advocates of prohibition concede that the state hasno concern with the private use of liquor. "The opponents ofprohibition misstate the case by saying that the state has noright to declare what a man shall cat or drink. The state doesnot venture to make any such declaration.... It is not theprivate appetite or home customs of the citizen that the stateundertakes to manage, but the liquor traffic. . . . If byabolishing the saloon the state makes it difficult for men togratify their private appetites, there is no just reason forcomplaint." E. FREuND, PoLicE POWER 484 (1904). 22 WICKERSHAM CommissioN 6-7. 23 Id. at 21. In 1929 President Hoover had devoted a majorpart of his inaugural address to the "disregard anddisobedience" of the eighteenth amendment. He attributed tothe ordinary citizen "a large responsibility" for a"dangerous expansion in the criminal elements."Attempting to generate moral support for the law, he chastisedthe citizenry: No greater national service can be given by men and women ofgoodwill-who, I know, are not unmindful of the responsibilitiesof citizenship-than that they should, by their example, assist instamping out crime and outlawry by refusing participation in andcondemning all transactions with illegal liquor. Our whole missing piece 28 F. BLACK, supra note 27, at 149-50. 29 R. CHilds, MAKING REPEAL WORK 12 (1947). 30 The earliest surveys employ a methodology much lesssophisticated than those conducted after 1914. The later studies,however, suffer from a time lag which inevitably detracts fromaccuracy. In any event, taken together, these surveys adequatelydescribe the contours of the phenomenon under consideration. 31 The earliest attempt at a compilation of addiction figureswas undertaken by O. Marshall in 1878. Marshall, The OpiumHabit in Michigan, 1878 MICH. STATE BD. OF HEALTH ANN. REP. 61-73. From questionnaires sent to doctors,Marshall found 1,313 users of opium or morphine and concludedtherefrom that there were 7,763 addicts in the state. Dr. CharlesTerry later concluded that, if Marshall's figures wererepresentative, total incidence of addiction in the United Statesin 1878 was 251,936. C. TERRY & M. PELLENS, THE OPIUM PROBLEM15 (1928) [hereinafter cited as TERRY & PELLENS]. Marshallwas unable fully to take into account the fact that the incidenceof drug abuse in the cities was much higher than that in therural areas he studied; accordingly, his figures probablyunderestimate the extent of addiction in the state. In a similar study of Iowa in 1884, J. M. Hull found 5,732addicts which, if representative, would reflect a national addictpopulation of 182,215. Hull, The Opium Habit, 1885 IOWASTATE BD. OF HEALTH BIENNIAL REP. 535-45, quoted in TERRY& PELLENs 16-18. In 1900 the author of a Vermont study sent 130 questionnairesto various druggists in an attempt to determine the monthly salesof various drugs. His 116 replies indicate that 3,300,000 dosesof opium were sold every month, or enough for every person inVermont over the age of 21 to receive 11/2 doses per day.Grinnel, A Review of Drug Consumption and Alcohol as Found inProprietary Medicine, 23 MEDico-LEGAL J. 426 (1905),quoted in TERRY & PELLENs 21-23. Perhaps the best pre-1914 estimate was made by Dr. CharlesPerry who, as Health Officer of Jacksonville, Florida, compileddata for that city in 1913. He found that 541 persons, or .81% ofthe city's population, used opium or some preparation thereof in1913. Nationwide, this incidence would be 782,118. 1913JACKSONVILLE, FLA, BD. OF HEALTH ANN. REP., quoted in TERRY& PELLENs 25. A researcher in 1915 found 2,370 registered addicts inTennessee and put the national addict population at between269,000 and 291,670. Brown, Enforcement of the TennesseeAnti-Narcotic Law, 5 Am. J. PUB. HEALTH 323-33 (1915), quotedin TERRY & PELLENs 27-29. The first post-Harrison Act study, and perhaps the mostreliable of all research during this period, was done by LawrenceKolb and A. G. DuMez of the United States Public Health Service.Utilizing previously computed statistics together withinformation regarding the supply of narcotics imported into theUnited States, these authors concluded the addict populationnever exceeded 246,000. KOLB & DUMEz, THE PREVALENCE ANDTREND OF DRUG ADDICTION IN THE UNITED STATES AND FACTORSINFLUENCING IT 1-20 (39 Public Health Reports No. 21) (May 23,1924). At the same time the Narcotic Division of the Prohibition Unitof the IRS estimated that there were more than 500,000 drugaddicts in America. Narcotic Division of the Prohibition Unit,Bureau of Internal Revenue, Release (May 4, 1924), quoted in TERRY& PELLENs 42 n.25. For more recent estimates of drug addiction in America, see W.ELDRIDGE, NARCOTICS AND THE LAW 49-103 (2d rev. ed. 1967); A.LINDESMITH, THE ADDICT AND THE LAW 99-134 (1965); ARTHUR D.LITTLE, INC., DRUG ABUSE AND LAW ENFORCEMENT 1l-21 (1967). 32 But see M. NYSWANDER, THE DRUG ADDICT AS A PATIENT1-13 (1956) (the author suggests that perhaps I to 4% of Americanadult population was addicted in 1890). 33 Of the 1,313 addictsin Marshall's Michigan study, 803 were females and only 510 males. TERRY & PELLENS 11. In the Florida study, therewere 228 men and 313 women. Id. at 25. Of the 2,370 registeredaddicts in the Tennessee study, 784 were men and 1,586 women. Id.at 27. A modern observer has concluded that there were at leastas many and probably twice as many women addicts as men.O'Donnell, Patterns of Drug Abuse and Their SocialConsequences, in DRUGS & YouTH 62, 64 (J. Whittenborn ed.1969). For the last thirty years, male addicts have probablyoutnumbered female addicts by four or five to one. Id. 34 Of the 228 men included in the Florida study, 188 werewhite and 40 black; of the women 219 were white and 94 black.TERRY & PELLENs 25. At that time the white and blackpopulations in Jacksonville were equal. Of those covered in theTennessee study, 90% were white. Id. at 28. 35 The Michigan, Iowa and Vermont studies covered primarilyrural areas. 36 See, e.g., Eberle, Report of Committee onAcquirement of Drug Habits, Am. J. PHARMACY, Oct. 1903, at474-88. "While the increase is most evident with the lowerclasses, the statistics of institutes devoted to the cure ofhabitues show that their patients are principally drawn fromthose in the higher walks of life." Id, quoted in TERRY& PELLENs 23. 37 See, e.g., O'Donnell, supra note 3 3, at 64. 38 TERRY & PELLENs 69. 39Stanley, Morpbinism, 6 J. Crim. L. & CRIMINOLOGY586, 588 (1915). 40 See the resolution of the Narcotics Control Association ofCalifornia, 13 J. CRIM. L. & CRIMINOLOGY 126-27 (1922),calling for stricter laws regulating prescriptions andprescription order forms. 41 TERRY & PELLENs 66. 47 42 Brill, Recurrent Patterns in the History of Drug Dependenceand Some Interpretations, in DRUGS AND YOUTH 18 (J. Whittenborned. 1969). 43 TERRY & PELLENs 76-82. 44 See S. ADAms, THE GREAT AMERICAN FRAUD (1913). 45 TERRY & PELLENs 44. 46 Id. at 84-87. 47 See H. KANE, OPIUM-SMOKING IN AMERICA AND CHINA (1882), inwhich the author supports the contention that by approximately1890 narcotic addiction had become widespread among therespectable and professional classes. He states: The practice [opium smoking] spread rapidly and quietly amongthis class of gamblers and prostitutes until the latter part of1875, at which time the authorities became cognizant of the fact,and finding, upon investigation, that many women and young girls,as also young men of respectable family, were being induced tovisit the dens .... Quoted in TERRY & PELLENs 73. 48Ch. 3915, 34 Stat. 768 (1906). 49 "The peak of the patent medicine industry was reachedjust prior to the passage of the federal Pure Food and Drug Actin 1906." TERRY & PELLENs 75. 50 U.S. TREASURY DEPT, STATE LAWS RELATING TO THE CONTROL oFNARCOtic DRUGS AND THETREATMENT OFDRUG ADDICTION 1 (1931)[hereinafter cited as STATE LAWS]. 51 The first drug legislation enacted in eight states outlawedthe administering Of 2 narcotic drug to any person with theintent to facilitate the commission of a felony. These stateswere California (1872), Idaho (1887), New York (1897), NorthDakota (1883), Pennsylvania (1901), South Dakota (1883), Utah(1876) and Wisconsin (1901). Id. at 1-2. 52 Twenty-two states made such legislation their first lawsconcerning the drug problem. Id. at 2. 53 Id. at 3-4. 54 States with such legislation were Arizona (1883),California (1881), Georgia (1895), Idaho (1887), Maryland (1886),Missouri (1911), Montana (1881), Nevada (1877), New Mexico(1887), North Dakota (1879), Ohio (1885), Pennsylvania (1883),South Dakota (1879), Utah (1880), Wisconsin (1891) and Wyoming(1882). Sec id., Pt. III. 55 Id. at S. 56 Id. at 5, 2 5 1. 57 Arizona (1899), Arkansas (1899), Colorado (1897), Illinois(1897), Mississippi (1900), Montana (1889) and New York (1893).Id., Pt. 111. 58 See id. 59 Id. 60 Id. at 251. 61 California (1909), Maine (1887), South Carolina (1911),Tennessee (1913), Wm Virginia (1911) and Wyoming (1903). Id., Pt.III. 62 Maryland (1912), Ohio (1913) and Virginia (1908). Id. I" Act of Feb. 9, 1909, ch. 100, 35 Stat. 614, aS amended,21 U.S.C. S 173 (1964). This act was revised by Act of Jan. 17,1914, ch. 9, 38 Stat. 275, in the same wave of reform thatproduced the Harrison Act. 64 Hearings on the Importation and Use of Opium Before theHouse Comm. on Ways and Means, 61st Cong., 2d Sess. passim(1910). 65 38 Stat. 785 (1914), as amended, 26 U.S.C. S 4701-36(1964). 66 See, eg., Stanley, supra note 39, at 587; Fixes Blame forDope Fiend Evil, Boston Herald, Jan. 5, 1917. 67 Webb V. United States, 249 U.S. 96 (1919). 68 See Weber, Drugs and Crime, 44 A.B.A. REP. 527 (1919).Kolb, Factors That Have Influenced the Management and Treatmentof Drug Addicts, in NARCOTIC DRUG ADDICTION PROBLEMS 23, _26 (R.Livingston ed. 1958) states: See generally T. Duster, THE LEGISLATION OF MORALITY 3-28(1970). 69 See generally A. LiNDEsmITH, supra note 31, at 135-61;King, Narcotic Drug Laws and Enforcement Policies, 22 LAW &CONTEMP. PROB. 113, 124-26 (1957); King, The Narcotics Bureau andthe Harrison Act, 62 YALE L.J. 736 (1953); Note, NarcoticsRegulation, 62 YALE L.J. 751, 784-87 (1953). 70 For a savage attack on the clinic system by a well-knownsupporter of the law enforcement model of the Harrison Act, seeStanley, Narcotic Drugs and Crime, 12 J. Crim. L. &CRIMINOLOGY 110 (1921). 71 Lindesmith reports that for a brief period of time from1919 to 1923 some forty clinics of this type existed in theUnited States. A. Lindesmith, supra note 31, at 136, 72 The closing of the New York Clinic in 1919 was anespecially potent factor in promoting hysteria about heroin. Morethan 7,400 addicts, about 90 percent Of whom were users ofheroin, were thrown on the streets of the city. Driven to commitcrimes, including those of narcotic violations, many of theseaddicts were arrested. The increased number of arrests was widelyinterpreted as an indication of moral deterioration due tonarcotics instead of evidence of maladministration of what couldhave been a useful law. There were, of course, physicians whodissented both as to the wisdom of closing the clinics and as tothe harmful effect of the drugs. Many of those who persisted inhelping their patients were arrested. Kolb, supra note 68, at 27. 73 188 U.S. 3.21 (1903). 74 247 U.S. 251 (1918). 75 United States v. Doremus, 249 U.S. 86 (1919). The fourdissenters asserted that "the statute was a mere attempt byCongress to exert a power not delegated, that is, the reservedpolice power of the States." Id. at 95. It is interesting tonote, however, that a subsequent congressional attempt toregulate child labor through the taxing power was alsoinvalidated. Bailey v. Drexel Furniture Co., 259 U.& 20(1922). 76 justice McReynolds stated for the Court in Linder v. UnitedStates, 268 U.S. 5, 18 (1925): Obviously, direct control ofmedical practice in the States is beyond the power of the FederalGovernment. Incidental regulation of such practice by Congressthrough a taxing act cannot extend to matters plainlyinappropriate and unnecessary to reasonable enforcement of arevenue measure. The Court also held that the Harrison Act did not apply tomere possession of opium. In reaching this conclusion the Courtpointed out that any congressional attempt to punish as a crimepossession of any article produced in a state would raise the'gravest questions of power. United States v. Jin Fuey Moy, 241U.& 394, 401 (1916). 77 Schmeckebier, The Bureau of Prohibition, in BROOKINGS INST.FOR GOVT RESEARCH, SERVICE MONOGRAPH No. 57, at 143 (1929). 78 An Act to Create a Bureau of Customs and 2 Bureau ofProhibition in the Department of the Treasury, ch. 348, 44 Stat.1381 (1927). 79 Act of June 14, 1930, ch. 488, 46 Star. 585. 80 See generally King, The Narcotics Bureau and the HarrisonAct, 62 YALE L.J. 736 (1953). 81 The primary objective of prohibitionary legislation was tosuppress all traffic in intoxicating beverages. Accordingly, moststates prohibited both manufacture and sale. However, NewHampshire's law, in effect from 1855 through 1903, forbade only,sale. 82 Sixteen states passed prohibitionary legislation for thewhole territory of the state. However, twelve of them hadrepealed this legislation by 1903, and a thirteenth, Maine, hadrepealed its statute before 1884 when prohibition was embodied ina constitutional amendment. E. FREuND, POLICE POWER 202, 203(1904). 83 46 U.S. (5 How.) 504 (1847). 84 Id. at 577. 85 State v. Paul, 5 R.I. 185 (1858); State v. Wheeler, 25Conn. 290 (1856); State v Allmond, 7 De]. 612 (1856); People v.Gallagher, 4 Mich. 244 (1856); Santo v. State' 2 Iowa 165 (1855);Lincoln v. Smith, 27 Vt. 328 (1855); People v. Hawley, 3 Mich.330 (1854); Commonwealth v. Kendall, 66 Mass. (12 Cush.) 414(1853); Jones v. People, 14-111. 196 (1852). 86 State v. Paul, 5 R.I. 185 (1858); Commonwealth v. Kendall,66 Mass. (I 2 Cush.) 414 (1853); Jones v. People, 14 III. 196(1852). 87 State v. Wheeler, 25 Conn. 290 (1856); State v. Allmond, 7De]. 612 (1856); Santo v. State, 2 Iowa 165 (1855); Lincoln v.Smith, 27 Vt. 328 (1855). 88 Wynehamer v. People, 13 N.Y. 378 (1856). 89 Beebe v. State,6 Ind. 501 (1855). 90 Dissenting in People v. Gallagher, 4 Mich. 244 (1856),justice Pratt noted' "That intemperance is a great evil, nosane man can doubt." Id. at 284. The Iowa court asserted: There is no statistical or economical proposition betterestablished, nor one to which a more general assent is given byreading and intelligent minds, than this, that the use ofintoxicating liquors as a drink, is the cause. of more want,pauperism, suffering, crime and public expense, than any othercause-and perhaps it should be said, than all other causescombined. Santo v. State, 2 Iowa 165, 190 (1855). 91 Dissenting in People v. Gallagher, 4 Mich. 244 (1856) ,justice Pratt stated: "Spiritous liquors are necessary inthe prosecution of many of the most valuable arts,' as well asfor mechanical, manufacturing and medicinal purposes." Id.at 260. 92 The Indiana Court noted "as a matter of generalknowledge . . . that the use of beer &c. as a beverage, isnot necessarily hurtful, any more than the use of lemonade or icecream.... It is the abuse, and not the use, of all thesebeverages that is hurtful." Beebe v. State, 6 Ind. 501,519-20 (1855). 93 Justice Pratt reasoned: Liquors, then, whether produced by fermentation ordistillation, do legally constitute property of use and value;and the owner of this species of personal property, when lawfullyacquired, is, upon every principle, . . . entitled to thepossession and use of it. This legally includes the right ofkeeping, selling or giving it away, as the owner may deem proper.This is a natural primary right incident to ownership . . . . People v. Gallagher, 4 Mich. 244, 263 (1856); accord,Wynehamer v. People, 13 N.Y. 378, 396-98 (1856) (Comstock, J.). 94 Said the Indiana Court: [T]he legislature enacted the law in question upon theassumption that the manufacture and sale of beer . . . werenecessarily destructive to the community, and in acting upon thatassumption, in our judgment, has unwarrantably invaded the rightto private property, and its use as a beverage and article oftraffic. . . . We repeat, the manufacture and sale and use of liquorsare not necessarily hurtful, and this the Court has a right tojudicially inquire into and act upon in deciding upon thevalidity of the law in question-in deciding . . . whether it isan indirect invasion of a right secured to the citizen by theConstitution. Beebe v. State, 6 Ind. 501, 520-21 (1855) (emphasisadded). 95 In an opinion often cited as the first to invoke thesubstantive construction of "due process of law," judgeComstock in Wynchamer v. People, 13 N.Y. 378, 392-93, 398 (1856),stated: To say that "the law of the land" or "dueprocess of law", may mean the very act of legislation whichdeprives the citizen of his rights, privileges or property, leadsto a simple absurdity. The Constitution would then mean, that noperson shall be deprived of his property or rights unless thelegislature shall pass a law to effectuate the wrong, and thiswould be throwing the restraint entirely away. The trueinterpretation of these constitutional phrases is, that whererights are acquired by the citizen under existing law, there isno power in any branch of the government to take them away. When a law annihilates the value of property, and strips it ofits attributes, by which alone it is distinguished as property,the owner is deprived of it according to the plainestinterpretation, and certainly within the spirit of aconstitutional provision intended expressly to shield privaterights from the exercise of arbitrary power. 96 The Indiana court held the prohibitionary legislation incontravention of a provision in the state constitution declaringthat "all men are endowed by their Creator with certaininalienable rights; that among these are life, liberty and thepursuit of happiness." Beebe v. State, 6 Ind. 501, 510(1855). Dissenting in People v. Gall2gher, 4 Mich. 244, 258(1856), Justice Pratt conducted an identical natural rightsinquiry without the benefit of Thomas Jefferson's penmanship. 97 13N.Y. 379 (1856). 98 6 Ind. 501 (1855). 99 Lincoln v. Smith, 27 Vt. 328, 337-38 (1855). 100 See State v. Guerney, 37 Me. 156, 161 (1853). 101 State v. Allmond, 7 Del. 612, 639 (1856); see Lincoln v.Smith, 27 Vt. 328, 338-39 (1855). 102 People v. Gallagher, 4 Mich. 244, 255 (1856); State v.Wheeler, 25 Conn. 290, 297-98 (1856). 103 State v. Wheeler, 25 Conn. 290, 297 (1856); State v.Allmond, 7 Del. 612, 642 (1856). 104 State v. Allmond, 7 Del. 612, 692 (1856). 105 State v. Paul, 5 R.I. 185, 197 (1858); Lincoln v. Smith,27 Vt. 328, 360 (1855). 106 Meshmeier v. State, II Ind. 482 (1858). 107 In People v. Gallagher, 4 Mich. 244 (1856), the majoritystated: The legislature has said that . . . no man shall sell liquorsto be used as a beverage, because by so doing, he inflicts injuryon the public; but, says the defendant, irrespective of the evil,this right to sell liquors is a natural right, and you have nopower to pass a law infringing that right. How does he prove it?Not by any adjudged cases; there are none, nor by anything in theconstitution preserving to him this right; but it is to bedetermined by the nature and character of the right. . . . [Themanner in which the determination is to be made is] a questionvery suitable and proper for the discussion and deliberation of alegislative body, but one which cannot be entertained by thiscourt. Id. at 257. judge Pratt replied: If the doctrine is true that the legislature can, by theexercise of an implied discretionary power, pass any law notexpressly inhibited by the constitution, then it is certain thata hundred laws may be enacted by that body, invading directlylegitimate business pursuits, impairing and rendering worthlesstrades and occupations, and destroying the substantial value ofprivate property, to the amount of millions of dollars. . . . Butwho, I ask, believes that the legislature possesses the power, orthat the people, in their sovereignty, ever intended to confer onthat body such unlimited omnipotence? As appears to me, no man ofreason and reflection can believe it. Id. at 277-79 (dissenting opinion). 108 Mere possession or consumption of alcohol was notprohibited during this phase of temperance legislation. Many ofthe courts were careful to allude to this feature and to notethat forfeiture could result only from illegalpossession-possession with intent to sell in violation of thelaw. See, e.g., Santo v. State, 2 Iowa 165 (1855); Commonwealthv. Kendall, 66 Mass. (12 Cush.) 414 (1853). 109 123 U.S. 623 (1887). 110 In Bartemeyer v. Iowa, 85 U.S. (18 Wall.) 129 (1873), theSupreme Court held that the prohibition of traffic inintoxicating drinks violates no privilege and immunity of UnitedStates citizenship; the Court avoided the question whether a lawprohibiting sale of liquor owned before the law was passed was adeprivation of property without due process. Four years later, inBeer Co. v. Massachusetts, 97 U.S. 25 (1877), the Court sustaineda prohibition law against a challenge under the obligation ofcontracts clauses but still deferred consideration of theWynehamer question. In upholding the seizure and forfeiture ofliquors belonging to the petitioner, justice Bradley stated: Ifthe public safety or the public morals require the discontinuanceof any manufacture or traffic, the hand of the legislature cannotbe stayed from providing for its discontinuance, by anyincidental inconvenience which individuals or corporations maysuffer. All rights are held subject to the police power of theState. 97 U.S. at 32. Finally, in Mugler v. Kansas, 123 U.S. 623 (1887), Wynebamerwas slain. The Court sustained a conviction for selling beermanufactured before the passage of the law. The Court even heldthat, in order to make effective its regulations against sale,the State might forbid manufacture for personal use. Id. at 662.The only constitutional inhibitions remaining after Mugleremanated from the commerce power. For a discussion of the gradualelimination of these restrictions by congressional action, seeSafely, Growth of State Power Under Federal Constitution toRegulate Traffic in Intoxicating Liquors, 3 IOWA L. BuLL. 221,229-34 (1917). 111 In Mugler, justice Harlan stated: There is no justification for holding that the State, underthe guise merely of police regulations, is here aiming to deprivethe citizen of his constitutional rights. . . . If, therefore, astate deems the absolute prohibition of the manufacture and sale,within her limits, of intoxicating liquors for other thanmedical, scientific, and manufacturing purposes, to be necessaryto the peace and security of society, the courts cannot, withoutusurping legislative functions, override the will of the peopleas thus expressed by their chosen representatives. They havenothing to do with the mere policy of legislation. 123 U.S. at662. 112 See note 82 supra. 113 28 F. 308 (D. Ore. 1886). The prisoner had been convictedin an Oregon court and was being heard on petition for habeascorpus. 114 Id. at 312. 115 16 Nev. 50 (1881). 116 Id. at 55-56. 117 The Supreme Court rejected it one year later in Mugler v.Kansas, 123 U.S. 623 (1887). 118 Ex parte Yung Jon, 28 F. 308, 311 (D. Ore. 1886). 119 Id. In defining property essentially in terms of habits ofthe community, judge Deady was leaving room for the"natural" rights argument with regard to alcohol andtobacco: True, we permit the indiscriminate use of alcohol and tobacco,both of which are classed by science as poisons, and doubtlessdestroy many lives annually. But the people of this country havebeen accustomed to the manufacture and use of these for manygenerations, and they are produced and possessed under the commonand long-standing impression that they are legitimate articles ofproperty, which the owner is entitled to dispose of without anyunusual restraint. . . . On the other hand, the use of opium,otherwise than as this act allows, as a medicine, has but little,if any, place in the experience or habits of the people of thiscountry, save among a few aliens. Id. at 311-12 (emphasis added). 120 State v. Wheeler, 25 Conn. 290 (1856); Lincoln v. Smith,27 Vt. 328 (1855); Commonwealth v. Kendall, 66 Mass. (12 Cush.)414 (1853); cf. State v. Clark, 28 N.H. 176, 181 (1854)(ordinance that prohibited using or keeping intoxicating liquorsin any refreshment saloon or restaurant, "notunreasonable," since it did not "profess to prohibiteither the use or sale of liquor altogether"). 121 Ex parte Wilson, 6 Okla. Crim. 451, 119 P. 596 (1911);Titsworth v. State, 2 Okla. Crim. 268, 101 P. 288 (1909); Statev. Williams, 146 N.C. 618, 61 S.F. 61 (1908); Ex parte Brown, 38Tex. Crim. 295, 42 S.W. 554 (1897) (alternative holding). Contra,Cohen v. State, 7 Ga. App. 5, 65 S.E. 1096 (1909); Easley TownCouncil v. Pegg, 63 S.C. 98, 41 S.E. 18 (1902). 122 Commonwealth v. Campbell, 133 Ky. 50, 117 SAN,. 383(1909); Ex parte Brown, 38 Tex. Crim. 295, 42 S.W. 554 (1897);State v. Gilman, 33 W. Va. 146, 10 S.E. 293 (1889). 123 Eidge v. City of Bessemer, 164 Ala. 599, 51 So. 246(1909); Sullivan v. City of Oneida, 61 Ill. 242 (1871). But seeTown of Selma v. Brewer, 9 Cal. App. 70, 98 P. 61 (Dist. Ct. App.1908). 124 H. BLACK, INTOXICATING LIQUORS 50 (1892); E. FREUND,POLICE POWER 484 (1904); H. JOYCE, THE LAW RELATING T0INTOXICATING LIQUORS  85 (1910); Rogers, "Life, Libertyand Liquor": A Note on the Police Power, 6 VA. L. Rev. 156,174 (1919). 125 E.g., State v. Williams, 146 N.C. 618, 61 S.E. 61 (1908). 126 F. FREUND, P0LICE: POWER 486 (1904): Under these circumstances it seems impossible to speak of aconstitutional right of private consumption. There seems to be nodirect judicial authority for declaring private acts exempt fromthe police power, and the universal tolerance With regard to themshould be ascribed to policy. Like am, other exercise of thepolice power, control of private conduct would have to justifyitself on grounds of the public welfare. 127 Id. 128 E.g., State v. Williams, 146 N.C. 618, 61 S.E. 61 (1908). 129 E.g., State v. Gilman, 33 W. Va. 146, 10 S.E. 283 (1889). 130 E.g., Eidge v. City of Bessemer, 164 Ala. 599, 51 So. 246(1909); Commonwealth v. Campbell, 133 Ky. 50, 117 S.W. 383(1909). 131 133 Ky. 50, 117 S.W. 383 (1909). 132 Id. at 58, 117 S.W. at 385 (emphasis added). 133 Id. at 63, 117 S.W. at 387. 134 Id. 63-64,117 S.W. at 387. 135 Similarly, in State v. Gilman, 33 W. Va. 146, 10 S.E. 283(1889), the court stated: It can hardly be questioned that the right to possess propertyis [an inalienable] right, and that that right embraces theprivilege of a citizen to keep in his possession property foranother. It is not denied that the keeping of property which isinjurious to the lives, health, or comfort of all persons may beprohibited under the police power. . . . [I]t must, of course, bewithin the range of legislative action to define the mode andmanner in which every one may so use his own as not to injureothers. But it does not follow that every statute enactedostensibly for the promotion of these ends is to be accepted as alegitimate exercise of the police Power of the State . . . . The keeping of liquors in his possession by a person, whetherfor himself or for another, unless he does so for the illegalsale of it, or for some other improper purpose , can by nopossibility injure or affect the health, morals, or safety of thepublic; and, therefore, the statute prohibiting such keeping inpossession is not a legitimate exertion of the police power. Id. at 148-49, 10 S.E. it 284 (emphasis added); accord, Exparte Brown, 38 Tex. Crim. 795, 42 S.W. 554 (1897). In Ex parte Wilson, 6 Okla. Crim. 451, 119 P. 596 (1911), theCourt, after quoting extensively from Commonwealth v. Campbell,noted, "The only conclusion that we can legitimately arriveat is that the act in question is not within a reasonableexercise of the police powers of the state-is unconstitutionaland void." 6 Okla. Crim. at 475, 119 P. at 606 (emphasisadded). Finally, the Alabama Supreme Court stated, in strikingdown a local ordinance prohibiting possession by beverage dealersof alcoholic beverages: [The ordinance] can be justified only, if at all, on theground that it sustains some reasonable relation to theprohibition law in the way of preventing evasions of that law bytrick, artifice, or subterfuge under guise of which that 12W isviolated. But it has no such relation. It undertakes to prohibitthe keeping if) any quantity and for any purpose, howeverinnocent, of intoxicating liquors and beverages in places whichare innocent in themselves. Eidge v. City of Bessemer, 164 Ala.599, 606, 51 So. 246, 249 (1909). 136 Ex parte Yun Quong, 159 Cal. 508, 114 P. 835 (1911); Luckv. Sears, 29 Ore. 421, 44 P. 693 (1896); Ah Lim v. Territory, IWash. 156, 24 P. 588 (1890). 137 Ah Lim v. Territory, I Wash. 156, 163, 24 P. 588, 589(1890). 138 If the state concludes that a given habit is detrimentalto either the moral, mental or physical well being of one of itscitizens to such an extent that it is liable to become a burthenupon society, it has an undoubted right to restrain the citizenfrom the commission of that act; and fair and equitableconsideration of the rights of other citizens make it not onlyits right, but its duty, to restrain him. Id. at 164, 24 P. at590; accord, Ex parte Yun Quong, 159 Cal. 508, 515, 114 P. 835,837 (1911); Luck v. Sears, 29 Ore. 421, 426, 44 P. 693, 694(1896). 139 Ex parte Yun Quong, 159 Cal. 508, 515, 114 P. 835, 837(1911); Luck v. Sears, 29 Ore. 421, 425, 44 P. 693, 694 (1896). 140 But it is urged . . . that a moderate use of opium . . .is not deleterious and consequently cannot be prohibited. Weanswer that this is a question of fact which can only be inquiredinto by the legislature. Ah Lim v. Territory, I Wash. 156, 164, 24 P. 588, 590 (1890).The dissent argued that moderate use by some could not bepunished to prevent excessive use by others. Id. at 172-74, 24 P.at 592-93. 141 Id. at 165, 24 P. at 590. [W]hether [opiums] nature andcharacter is such that for the protection of the public itspossession by unauthorized persons should be prohibited is aquestion of fact and of public policy, which belongs to thelegislative department to determine. Luck v. Sears, 29 0re. 421,426, 44 P. 693, 694 (1896). 142 Ex parte Yun Quong, 159 Cal. 508, 514, 114 P. 835, 838(1911) (quoting lower court opinion) (citations omitted). 143 Id. at 515, 114 P. at 838 (emphasis added). 144 "It must be conceded that its indiscriminate usewould have a very deleterious and debasing effect upon our raceId. at 514, 114 P. at 838. 145 l Wash. 156, 24 P. 588 (1890). 146 Id. at 168, 24 P. at 591. 147 Individual desires are too sacred to be ruthlesslyviolated where only acts are involved which do not clearly resultin an in jury, to society, unless, possibly thus renderednecessary in order to prevent others from like actions which tothem are injurious. Id. at 173, 24 P. at 592. He concluded, however, that thestatute was too broad and that this question need not be reached. 148 Id. at 174-75, 24 P. at 593, 149 194 Ala. 406, 69 So. 652 (1915). 150 164 Ala. 599, 51 So. 246 (1909). 151 It is the peculiar function of the lawmakers to ascertainand to determine when the welfare of the people requires theexercise of the state's police powers, and what are appropriatemeasures to that end, subject only to the power and authority ofthe courts to see, when assured to the requisite certainty, thatthe measures of police so adopted do not arbitrarily violaterights protected by the organic laws. 194 Ala. at 421, 69 So. at656. 152 123 U.S. 623 (1887), quoted in 194 Ala. at 428-33, 69 So.at 659-60. 153 194 Ala. at 433, 69 So. at 660. 154 Id. at 434, 69 So. at 660. 155 Ex parte Crane, 27 Idaho 671, 151 P. 1006 (1915), aff'dsuh nom. Crane v. Campbell, 245 U.S. 304 (1917). 156 Ex parte Zwissig, 42 Nev. 360, 178 P. 20 (1919); Fitch v.State, 102 Neb. 361, 167 N.W. 417 (1918); State v. Brown, 40 S.D.372, 167 N.W. 400 (1918); Liquor Transportation Cases, 140 Tenn.582, 205 S.W. 423 (1918); State v. Certain Intoxicating Liquors,51 Utah 569, 172 P. 1050 (1918); Delaney v. Plunkett, 146 Ga.547, 91 S.E. 561 (1917); State v. Carpenter, 173 N.C. 767, 92S.E. 373 (1917); City of Seattle v. Brookins, 98 Wash. 290, 167P. 940 (1917); Brennan v. Southern Express Co., 106 S.C. 102, 90S.E. 402 (1916) (dictum). 157 245 U.S. 304 (1917). 158 Id. at 307-08 (citations omitted). 159 See text at note 126 supra. 160 245 U.S. at 308. 161 Eg., Slaughter House Cases, 83 U.S. (16 Wall.) 36 (1873). 162 Substantive due process was slowly being watered down evenin the economic area during this time. See, e.g., Muller v.Oregon, 208 U.S. 412 (1908). 163 E.g., Bronaugh, Limiting or Prohibiting the Possession, ofIntoxicating Liquors for Personal Use, 23 LAW NoTEs 67 (1919);Rogers, "Life, Liberty & Liquor": A Note on thePolice Power, 6 VA. L. REV. 156 (1919); Safely, Growth of StatePower Under Federal Constitution to Regulate Traffic inIntoxicating Liquors, 3 IOWA L, Bull 221 (1917); Vance, The Roadto Confiscation., 25 YALE I.J. 285 (1916). 164 Ch. 85, 41 Stat. 305 (1919). 165 Cornell v. Moore, 257 U.S. 491 (1922). 166 This argument was accepted in United States v. Dowling,278 F. 630 (S.D. Fla. 1922). 167, Law of Feb. 11, 1897, ch. 30, [1897] Tenn. Acts 156. 168 Austin v. State, 101 Tenn. 563, 48 S.W. 305 (1898), aff'd,179 U.S. 343 (1900). 169 179 U.S. 343 (1900). 170 The primary issue before the Court was whether the statuteinfringed the exclusive power of Congress to regulate interstatecommerce. Id. at 344. However, before turning to the"original package" questions, the Court first had toconclude that the statute was a legitimate exercise of the policepower, for only then could an indirect interference withinterstate commerce be sustained. Id. at 349. The Court noted onthis point: Cigarettes do not seem until recently to have attracted theattention of the public as more injurious than other forms oftobacco; nor are we now prepared to take judicial notice of anyspecial injury resulting from their use or to indorse the opinionof the Supreme Court of Tennessee that "they are inherentlybad and bad only." At the same time we should be shuttingour eyes to what is constantly passing before them were we toaffect an ignorance of the fact that a belief in theirdeleterious effects, particularly upon young people, has becomevery general and that communications are constantly finding theirway into the public press denouncing their use as fraught withgreat danger to the youth of both sexes. Without undertaking toaffirm or deny their evil effects, we think it within theprovince of the legislature to say how far they may be sold, orto prohibit their sale entirely . . . provided . . . there be noreason to doubt that the act in question is designed for theprotection of the public health. Id. at 348-49; cf. Gundling City of Chicago, 177 U.S. 183(1900) (affirming validity of licensing sale of cigarettes 171 City of Zion v. Behrens, 262 111. 510, 104 N.E. 836(1914); Hershberg v. City of Barbourville, 142 Ky. 60. 133 S.W.985 (1911). 172 In the broad language in which the ordinance is enacted itis apparently an attempt on the part of the municipality toregulate and control the habits and practices of the citizenwithout any reasonable basis for so doing. The ordinance is anunreasonable interference with the private rights of the citizen. . . . 262 Ill. at 513, 104 N.E. at 837-38. The ordinance is so broad as to prohibit one from smoking acigarette in his own home or on any private premises in the city.To prohibit the smoking of cigarettes in [such circumstances] isan invasion of his right to control his own personal indulgences.142 Ky. at 61, 133 S.W. at 986 (1911). By holding that theordinance applied in the home, the Kentucky court avoided thequestion raised in the Illinois case. The reasoning would appearto compel the same result, however. 173 B. ADAMS, THE THEORY OF. SOCIAL REVOLUTIONS 94 (1913). 174 Noble State Bank v. Haskell, 219 U.S. 104, III (1911). CliffSchaffer's Home Page Major Studies of Drugs and DrugPolicy ForbiddenFruit and the Tree of Knowledge - Table of Contents Contents | Feedback | Search DRCNet Library | Schaffer Library | Major Studies The Forbidden Fruit and the Tree ofKnowledgeWT02-B02-6IA086-000614-B043-344http://206.61.184.43:80/schaffer/Library/studies/vlr/vlr2.htm 206.61.184.43 19970122021135 text/html 49059HTTP/1.0 200 OKDate: Wednesday, 22-Jan-97 02:11:24 GMTServer: WebSitePro/1.1f (S/N wpo-0deb)Allow-ranges: bytesContent-type: text/htmlLast-modified: Saturday, 28-Dec-96 06:48:21 GMTContent-length: 48841 The Genesis of Marijuana Prohibition Contents | Feedback | Search DRCNet Library | Schaffer Library | Major Studies The Forbidden Fruit and the Tree ofKnowledge THE FORBIDDEN FRUIT AND THE TREE OF KNOWLEDGE: AN INQUIRYINTO THE LEGAL HISTORY OF AMERICAN MARIJUANA PROHIBITION Richard J. Bonnie & Charles H. Whitebread, II III. THE GENESIS OF MARIJUANA PROHIBITION Until the inclusion of marijuana in the Uniform Narcotic DrugAct in 1932 and the passage of the Marihuana Tax Act in 1937,there was no "national" public policy regarding thedrug. However, as early as 1914 the New York City Sanitary Lawsincluded cannabis in a prohibited drug list and in 1915 Utahpassed the first state statute prohibiting sale or possession ofthe drug. By 1931 twenty-two states had enacted such legislation.In the succeeding section, we shall delve into the circumstancessurrounding the passage of several of these early laws and theensuing judicial acquiescence in the legislative value judgmentsconcerning marijuana. We conclude that the legislative action andapproval were essentially kneejerk responses uninformed byscientific study or public debate and colored instead by racialbias and sensationalistic myths. A. Initial State Legislation 1914-1931 As indicated above, the Harrison Act, a regulatory measure inthe garb of a taxing statute, left many gaps unfilled in theeffort to prohibit illegal or nonmedical use of opiates andcocaine. Although Commissioner Anslinger of the Federal Bureau ofNarcotics stated in 1932 that few states had responded to theHarrison Act,1 most states had in fact enacted or reenactednarcotics laws in the period from 1914 to 1931.2 In so doing,twenty-one states had also restricted the sale of marijuana aspart of their general narcotics articles, one state hadprohibited its use for any purpose, and four states had outlawedits cultivation.3 Our objective in this section is to determinewhy these states chose to include cannabis in their lists ofprohibited drugs. The first consideration was the increasing public awareness ofthe narcotics problem. As noted above, the Harrison Actengendered a shift in public perception of the narcotics addict.With ever-increasing frequency and venom, he was portrayed in thepublic media as the criminal "dope fiend." Thishysteria, coupled with the actual increases in drug-relatedcriminal conduct due to the closing of the clinics,4 was thebasis for a good many of the post-Harrison Act narcoticstatutes.5 Other forces such as lurid accounts in the media,6publications of private narcotics associations 7 and theeffective separation of the addict and his problems from themedical profession8 all pressed legislatures into action to dealmore effectively with what was perceived as a growing narcoticsproblem. Despite the increasing public interest in the narcoticsproblem during this period, we can find no evidence of publicconcern for, or understanding of, marijuana, even in those statesthat banned it along with the opiates and cocaine. Observers inthe middle and late 1930's agreed that marijuana was at that timea very new phenomenon on the national scene.9 The perplexingquestion remains-why did some states include marijuana in theirprohibitive legislation a decade before it achieved any noticewhatsoever from the general public and the overwhelming majorityof legislators? From a survey of contemporary newspaper and periodicalcommentary we have concluded that there were three majorinfluences. The most prominent was racial prejudice. During thisperiod, marijuana legislation was generally a regional phenomenonpresent in the southern and western states. Use of the drug wasprimarily limited to Mexican-Americans who were immigrating inincreased numbers to those states. These movements were wellnoted in the press accounts of passage of marijuana legislation.A second factor was the assumption that marijuana, which waspresumed to be an addictive drug, would be utilized as asubstitute for narcotics and alcohol then prohibited by nationalpolicy. This factor was particularly significant in the New Yorklaw, the forerunner of nationwide anti-marijuana legislation.Finally, there is some evidence that coverage of the drug by theGeneva Conventions in 1925 was publicized in this country and mayhave had some influence. 1. Rationale in the West: Class Legislation Geometric increases in Mexican immigration after the turn ofthe century naturally resulted in the formation of sizeableMexican-American minorities in each western state.10 It wasthought then11 and is generally assumed now12 that use ofmarijuana west of the Mississippi was limited primarily to theMexican segment of the population. We do not find it surprising,therefore, that sixteen of these states prohibited sale orpossession of marijuana before 1930.13 Whether motivated byoutright prejudice or simple discriminatory disinterest, theresult was the same in each legislature-little if any publicattention, no debate, pointed references to the drug's Mexicanorigins, and sometimes vociferous allusion to the criminalconduct inevitably generated when Mexicans ate "the killerweed." In Utah, for example, the nation's first statewide prohibitionof marijuana 14 in 1915 was attended by little publicity. Thecombination of increasing Mexican immigration15 and thetraditional aversion of the Mormons to euphoriants of any kind16led inevitably to the inclusion of marijuana in the state'somnibus narcotics and pharmacy bill. Similarly, when the NewMexico and Texas legislatures passed marijuana legislation in1923, the former by separate statute17 and the latter byinclusion,18 newspaper reference was minimal despite coverage inboth states of legislative action.19 The longest of the Santa FeNew Mexican references noted: The Santa Fe representative, however, had better luck with his bill to prevent sale of marihuana, cannabis indica, Indian hemp or hashish as it is variously known. This bill was passed without any opposition. Marihuana was brought into local prominence at the penitentiary board's investigation last summer when a convict testified he could get marihuana cigarets anytime he had a dollar. The drug produces intoxication when chewed or smoked. Marihuana is the name commonly used in the Southwest and Mexico.20 In its only direct reference to marijuana, the Austin TexasStatesman stated: The McMillan Senate Bill amended the anti-narcotic law so as to make unlawful the possession for the purpose of sale of any marihuana or other drugs. Marihuana is a Mexican herb and is said to be sold on the Texas-Mexican border .21 The discriminatory aspects of this early marijuanalegislation, suggested only obliquely by origin and apparentdisinterest in Utah, New Mexico and Texas, are directly confirmedin Montana and Colorado. Montana newspapers gave relatively"full" coverage to a proposal to exclude marijuana fromthe general narcotics law and to create a separate marijuanastatute.22 On seven different days from January 14 to February10, 1929 (the date of the bill's passage), the Montana Standardsuccinctly noted the progress of the bill through thelegislature. The giveaway appeared on January 27 when the paperrecorded the following: There was fun in the House Health Committee during the week when the Marihuana bill came up for consideration. Marihuana is Mexican opium, a plant used by Mexicans and cultivated for sale by Indians. "When some beet field peon takes a few rares of this stuff," explained Dr. Fred Fulsher of Mineral County, "He thinks he has just been elected president of Mexico so he starts out to execute all his political enemies. I understand that over in Butte where the Mexicans often go for the winter they stage imaginary bullfights in the 'Bower of Roses' or put on tournaments for the favor of 'Spanish Rose' after a couple of whiffs of Marijuana. The Silver Bow and Yellowstone delegations both deplore these international complications" Everybody laughed and the bill was recommended for passage.23 The same year, a change in Colorado's marijuana law wasprecipitated by less comic apprehensions of the drug's evileffects. On April 7, 1929, a girl was murdered by her Mexicanstep-father. The story was lead news in the Denver Post every dayuntil April 16, probably because the girl's mother was white. Onthe 16th it was first mentioned that this man might have been amarijuana user. Headlined "Fiend Slayer Caught in Nebraska[;] Mexican Confesses Torture of American Baby," andsubheaded "Prisoner Admits to Officer He is MarihuanaAddict," the story, relates in full the underlying events: "You smoke marihuana?" "Yes " The Mexican said he had been without the weed for two days before the killing of his step-daughter .24 On April 17, the story on the Mexican included the following: He repeated the story he had told the Sidney Chief of Police regarding his addiction to marihuana saying that his supply of the weed had become exhausted several days before the killing and his nerves were unstrung.25 With regard to the legislative news there is no mention at anytime of a bill to regulate marijuana; however, on April 21, theDenver Post noted the Governor had signed a bill increasingpenalties for sale, possession or production of marijuana.26 The reader should note that public perception of marijuana'sethnic origins and crime-producing tendencies often went hand inhand, especially in the more volatile areas of the westernstates. Stories such as the one appearing in the Denver Post,where defendants charged with violent crimes attempted to blametheir actions on the effects of marijuana were primarilyresponsible for the drug's characterization as a "killerweed." In any event, from this brief survey of marijuanaprohibition in the western states, we have concluded that itsMexican use pattern was ordinarily enough to warrant itsprohibition, and that whatever attention such legislative actionreceived was attended by sensationalist descriptions of crimesallegedly committed by Mexican marijuana users. 2. Rationale in the East: Substitution The first significant27 instance of marijuana regulationappeared in the 1914 amendments to the New York City SanitaryLaws. The inclusion by the New York legislature of marijuana inIts general narcotics statute in 1927 was the precursor ofnationwide legislation .28 For these reasons, we have chosen NewYork as the most likely source of information regarding the.rationale for marijuana prohibition in Maine, Massachusetts,Michigan, Ohio, Rhode Island and Vermont, all of which had actedbefore 1931.29 In January 1914 the New York legislature passed its firstcomprehensive statute-The Boylan Bill-regulating the sale and useof habit forming drugs"' and did not include marijuana amongits list of prohibited narcotics. It appears that the Board ofHealth of New York City then amended its Sanitary Code adding"Cannabis indica, which is the Indian hemp from which theEast Indian drug called hashish is manufactured,"31 to theCity's list of prohibited drugs. Violation of this provision ofthe City Sanitary Code was a misdemeanor punishable by a smallfine and/or a jail term of up to six months. On July 29, 1914, anarticle reporting the amendment appeared in the New York Timeswherein the drug was described: This narcotic has practically the same effect as morphine and cocaine, but it was not used in this country to any extent while it was easy to get the more refined narcotics.32 The next day the editors of the Times commented: [T]he inclusion of cannabis indica among the drugs to be sold only on prescription is only common sense. Devotees of hashish are now hardly numerous enough here to count, but they are likely to increase as other narcotics become harder to obtain.33 From these observations, it would appear (1) that there werefew marijuana users at the time; and (2) that use of the drug wasexpected to increase as a direct result of the restriction ofopiates and cocaine. Despite New York City's early classification of cannabis withknown narcotics, New York State did not prohibit sale andpossession of the drug for other than medicinal purposes until1927.34 And this was true despite a great deal of activity on thenarcotics front from 1914 to 1927, when the legislature actedfour different times.35 Throughout all this tumult and in thevariety of narcotics proposals suggested or enacted,36 marijuanaor cannabis was not classified among the restricted drugs untilthe drafting of the 1927 Act. This act37 defined cannabis as a"habit-forming drug," 38 and accordingly punished asmisdemeanors39 the control, sale, distribution, administrationand dispensing40 of cannabis except for medical purposes. Thepenalty provision of the statute did not discriminate among typesof offenses, first or subsequent violations, or the prohibitednarcotic drugs.41 There is no apparent indication in the contemporary commentaryof the reasons for inclusion of marijuana in the New York laws.When the 1927 law was passed, public concern was focused on thegeneral need to reduce narcotic addiction; none of thecommentators were concerned about marijuana.42 While there werenumerous articles in the media dealing with the problems of theopiates, morphine, cocaine and heroin, only four articles aboutmarijuana appeared in the major New York newspaper during theentire period from 1914 until 1927. In 1923 the New York Timesnoted that the "latest habit forming drug ... marihuana,which is smoked in a cigarette" was exhibited at a women'sclub meeting.43 In 1925 the same paper reported that the drug hadbeen banned in Mexico.44 One year later, the paper reported theresults of testing in Panama on the effects of marijuana. Thearticle noted that as a result of these tests the study groupconcluded marijuana smoking was relatively safe; thus, it was"recommended that no steps be taken by the authorities ofthe Canal Zone to prevent the sale or use of marijuana and thatno special legislation on that subject was needed." 45Finally, in July 1927, the Times reported that a Mexican familywas said to have gone insane from eating marijuana.46 Perhaps theclearest indication of the absence of notice given the marijuanasection of the 1927 Act is that none of the articles discussingthe Act after its passage refer to marijuana .47 It is likely, then, that the inclusion of cannabis in thestate law was motivated primarily by the same fear that hadprovoked the Sanitary Law Amendment in 1914. Use, though stillslight, was expected to increase. Throughout the entire New Yorkexperience the main argument was preventive: Marijuana use mustbe prohibited to keep addicts from switching to it as asubstitute for the drugs which had become much more difficult toobtain after the enactment of the Harrison Act, and for alcoholafter Prohibition.48 Accordingly, the passage of the Harrison andVolstead Acts were direct causes of the preventive inclusion ofmarijuana among prohibited drugs. In fact, it has been observedthat marijuana use did increase during this period .49 Another factor that may have influenced the passage of the1927 Act was the Second Opium Conference at Geneva in 1925,50which included Indian hemp within the Convention against Opiumand other Dangerous Drugs, even though the United States hadwithdrawn in 1925 from the League of Nations deliberations oncontrolling and regulating the international traffic in dangerousdrugs.51 3. The International Scene The first mention of marijuana on the international front camewith the preliminary negotiations for the Hague Conference of1912. In preparing for this Conference, which represented anattempt to deal with the international opium traffic, thegovernment of Italy proposed that the production and traffic inIndian hemp drugs be included as part of the agenda of theConference.52 During the Conference itself, there was no mentionof the drug, and the Convention did not include cannabis in itsprovisions. In addition to the Convention, however, the delegatessigned a closing protocol: 2. The Conference considers it desirable to study the question of Indian hemp from the statistical and scientific point of view, with the object of regulating its abuses, should the necessity thereof be felt, by internal legislation or by an international agreement .53 It was not until just before the Geneva Conference of 1925that the proposal was mentioned again. In 1923 the followingresolution was passed by the Advisory Committee on Traffic inOpium and Other Dangerous Drugs of the League of Nations: IV. With reference to the proposal of the Government of the Union of South Africa that Indian hemp should be treated as one of the habit-forming drugs, the Advisory Committee recommends the Council that, in the first instance, the Governments should be invited to furnish to the League information as to the production and use of, and traffic in, this substance in their territories, together with their observations on the proposal of the Government of the Union of South Africa .54 At the 1925 meeting in Geneva, the Egyptians led the way inproposing that hashish be included within the Convention.55 AnEgyptian delegate presented a paper on the effects and use ofhashish in Egypt. Mr. El Guindy's study is so typical of theso-called scientific or empirical evidence that has beenpresented to justify the drug's prohibition that the followingexcerpt must be included. In stating that the real danger ofhashish is that it will produce insanity, the Egyptian delegatepresented the following: The illicit use of hashish is the principal cause of most of the cases of insanity occurring in Egypt. In support of this contention, it may be observed that there are three times as many cases of mental alienation among men as among women, and it is an established fact that men are much more addicted to hashish than women.56 The Egyptian proposal was referred to a subcommittee for studyand later in the Conference this group reported that the use ofIndian hemp drugs should be limited to medical and scientificpurposes. The proceedings contain no record of what medical orscientific evidence might have been brought forward to supportthe inclusion of the Indian hemp drugs in the Convention.57Nevertheless, they were the subject of Chapters IV and V of theConvention.58 4. Conclusion The early laws against the cannabis drugs were passed withlittle public attention. Concern about marijuana was relatedprimarily to the fear that marijuana use would spread, even amongwhites, as a substitute for the opiates and alcohol made moredifficult to obtain by federal legislation. Especially in thewestern states, this concern was identifiable with the growth ofthe Mexican-American minority. It is clear that no stateundertook any empirical or scientific study of the effects of thedrug. Instead they relied on lurid and often unfounded accountsof marijuana's dangers as presented in what little newspapercoverage the drug received. It was simply assumed that cannabiswas addictive and would have engendered the same evil effects asopium and cocaine. Apparently, legislators in these states foundit easy and uncontroversial to prohibit use of a drug they hadnever seen or used and which was associated with ethnicminorities and the lower class. B. Judicial Corroboration Two significant conclusions appear from a study of the fewcases59 involving convictions for marijuana offenses under theinitial wave of state laws. First, the argument regarding aprivate conduct limitation on the police power had been sodiscredited it was not even made. Second, the courts, like thelegislatures, relied on nonscientific materials to support theproposition that marijuana was an addictive, mind-destroying drugproductive of crime and insanity. In only one case was there a serious constitutional challengeto the validity of the legislation. Appealing a Louisianaconviction for possession of five hundred plants of marijuana,the defendant in State v. Bonoa60 argued not that the state couldnot punish mere possession but rather that the statute wasoverbroad, since aside from its use as an intoxicant themarijuana plant was employed in the manufacture of hemp line, inthe preparation of useful drugs and for the production of birdseed for canaries. Defendant's contention was that onlypossession, sale or use for deleterious purposes could beprohibited. The court's reply was that the drug's deleterious propertiesoutweighed its uses, especially since " [t]he Marijuanaplant is not one of the crops of this state." 61 Defendantalso offered the reductio ad absurdum argument that if possessionof the marijuana plant may be prohibited simply becauseintoxicating resin may be extracted from the flowering tops, thenthe possession of corn or grapes may be prohibited becausewhiskey and wine may be made from them, or possession of poppiesbecause opium may be extracted from them. To this the courtreplied that alcohol was less injurious than marijuana and thatboth alcohol and opium were difficult to prepare from thesesources while the marijuana plant was easily converted intotobacco and cigarettes. The court's reasoning is admirable if we accept the basicpremise that the marijuana drug is deleterious. To support thisconclusion the court quoted from Solis Cohen Githens'Pharmacotheraupeutics: The first symptom is usually an exaltation of the mind . . . . The ideas are joyous Sleep follows . . . . When aroused from sleep . . . the mind passes into the same somnolent condition, which lasts for several hours and is followed by a sense of weakness and extreme mental depression. In certain eastern people . . . perhaps because of continued use, the somnolent action is replaced by complete loss of judgment and restraint such as is seen more often from alcohol. An Arab leader, fighting against the crusaders, had a bodyguard who partook of haschisch, and used to rush madly on their enemies, slaying everyone they met. The name of "haschischin" applied to them has survived as "assassin." The habitual use of cannabis does not lead to much tolerance, nor do abstinence symptoms follow its withdrawal. It causes, however, a loss of mentality, resembling dementia, which can be recognized even in dogs.62 The court also quotes Rusby, Bliss & Ballard, TheProperties and Uses of Drugs: The particular narcosis of cannabis consists in the liberation of the imagination from all restraint . . . . Not rarely, in [the depression] state, an irresistible impulse to the commission of criminal acts will be experienced. Occasionally an entire group of men under the influence of this drug will rush out to engage in violent or bloody deeds.63 On these two sources, the entire opinion stands. The allegedlydeleterious consequences-criminal activity and insanity-aresupported only by the mythical etymology of the word"assassin." The marijuana user's purported propensitytoward crime, based on similar and often weaker authority, wasthe primary rationale underlying passage of the Marihuana TaxAct.64 So preposterous is this assertion that even the proponentsof criminalization-including the Cormmissioner of the Bureau ofNarcotics-later implicitly rejected it.65 In any event, the courts were as willing to accept suchevidence as the legislatures. In a Utah case, State v. Navaro,66where the court cited the acknowledged evils of marijuana torepel a vagueness attack,67 it relied on another set of dubiousauthorities. First, the court referred to the case of State v.Diaz68 wherein a defendant in a first degree murder prosecutiontried to disprove the requisite mens rea by showing that he wasunder the influence of marijuana at the time of the offense. Diazhad claimed that "his mind was an entire blank as to allthat happened to him and stated that after smoking the marijuanahe became 'very crazy.' To corroborate his assertion, defendantsummoned a physician whose testimony was summarized in Diaz in apassage quoted in full in Navaro: He stated that [marijuana] is a narcotic and acts upon thecentral nervous system affecting the brain, producingexhilarating effects and causing one to do things which heotherwise would not do and especially induces acts of violence;that violence is one of the symptoms of an excessive use ofmarijuana. That the marihuana produces an "I don'tcare" effect. A man having used liquor and marihuana mightdeliberately plan a robbery and killing and carry it out andescape, and then later fail to remember anything that hadoccurred. 70 Thus an attempt in an adversary setting by an accused toescape criminal responsibility by blaming his offense onmarijuana intoxication became medical authority for thescientific hypothesis that marijuana use causes crime. The second source of support in Navaro for the allegedlydeleterious effects of marijuana was a 1932 article by Hayes andBowery (the latter a member of the Wichita, Kansas, PoliceDepartment) entitled Marihuana .71 Calling for stricter penaltiesfor marijuana use, the authors stated that during theexhilaration phase, the user is likely to have increased sexualdesires72 and to commit "actions of uncontrollable violence,or even murder." 73 For these propositions, they citednewspaper accounts of crimes the causes of which the reporterattributed to marijuana74 and police testimony to the sameeffect.75 For example, the Chief Detective of the Los AngelesPolice Department was quoted as saying: In the past we have had officers of this department shot and killed by Marihuana addicts and have traced the act of murder directly to the influence of Marihuana, with no other motive. Numerous assaults have been made upon officers and citizens with intent to kill by Marihuana addicts which were directly traceable to the influence of Marihuana.76 It should be noted that Hayes and Bowery attributed theviolent impulse to the absence of restraint engendered during theso-called exhilaration phase, while each of the authorities citedby the Louisiana court in Bonoa attributed the same impulse tothe sufferings experienced during the "depression"phase.77 The authors also asserted that habitual use leads to a"loss of mental activity, accompanied by a general dullnessand indolence, like that of chronic alcoholics or opiumcaters," to "destruction of brain tissues" andinevitably to insanity. For this proposition, the authors merelysaid that "seventeen to twenty per cent of all malesadmitted to mental hospitals and asylums in India have becomeinsane through the use of this drug."78 Finally the court cited an article by Eugene Stanley, theDistrict Attorney of New Orleans, entitled Marihuana as aDeveloper of Crimiinals.79 The title conveys the message. We willreturn to Mr. Stanley in the succeeding section.80 The nonchalance with which Utah and Louisiana courts citedsensationalistic, nonscientific sources to support theproposition that marijuana produced crime and insanity suggestshow widely accepted this hypothesis was among decision-makers,both judicial and legislative, prior to 1931. Given theprevalence of this attitude, the noninvolvement of the middleclass, and the precedent established in the earlier alcohol andnarcotics cases, it is not surprising that constitutionalchallenges were either not made or easily rebuffed. Nor is itsurprising that challenges regarding the ambiguity of the word"marijuana" were unsuccessful.81 The courts, like thelegislatures, assumed marijuana caused crime and insanity, andassumed that had public opinion crystallized on the question, itwould have favored the suppression of a drug with such evileffects. Footnotes and References 1 Anslinger, The Reason for Uniform State NarcoticLegislation, 21 GEO. L.J. 52, 53 (1932). 2 STATE Laws 35-327. 3 Id. at 14. 4 For a discussion of the change in the public image ofaddicts and the closing of clinical experiments, see p. 988supra. 5 See TERRY & PELLENS 877-919. 6 See, eg., text at notes 24-25 infra. For somewhat moreclinical discussions, see TERRY & PELLENS 877-919. 7 See Weber, Drugs and Crime, 10 J. CRIM. L. & CRIMINOLOGY370 (1919). 8 A. LINDESMITH, THE ADDICT AND THE LAW 3-3S (1965); King,Narcotic Drug Laws and Enforcement Policies, 22 LAW &CONTEMP. PROB. 113, 120-26 (1957). 9 Hearing on H.R. 6385 Before the House Comm. on Ways andMeans, 75th Cong, 1st Sess. 20 (1937) [hereinafter cited as TaxAct Hearings]. 10 The Bureau of Immigration recorded the entry of 590,765Mexicans into the United States between 1915 and 1930. Of these,upwards of 90% in each year were to be resident in the 22 stateswest of the Mississippi, and more than two-thirds were to residein Texas alone. Information compiled from Tables, ImmigrantAliens, By States of Intended Future Residence and Race orPeoples, published yearly for each fiscal year from 1915 to 1930in COMM'R GEN. OF IMMIGRATION ANN. REP. 11 Tax Act Hearings 20, 3 3. 12 THE MARIHUANA PAPERs at xiv (D. Solomon ed. 1966). 13 Id.at xv. 14 At its 1915 session, the Utah legislature passed an omnibusnarcotics and pharmacy bill which included under it the cannabisdrugs. Ch. 66,  7, 8, [1915] Utah Laws 77. The law forbadesale and possession of the named drugs, and provided for medicaluse under a system of prescriptions and order blanks.Interestingly, clinical treatment of addicts was allowed. Id. at77-80. The law also prohibited possession of opium and marijuanapipes. Id. at 80. Violations were misdemeanors punishable byfines and/or imprisonment for terms up to six months, but thirdoffenders faced prison terms from one to five years. The statutemade no distinction between sale and possession, nor among thevarious drugs. The law was revised in 1927. Ch. 65, [1927]1 UtahLaws 107. 15 See note 10 supra. 16 See THE DOCTRINE AND COVENANTS OF THE CHURCH OF JESUSCHRIST OF LATTER-DAY SAINTS, CONTAINING THE REVELATIONS GIVEN TOJOSEPH SMITH, THE PROPHET  89, at 154 (192 1) (PP, P 5, 7, wineor strong drink) (P 8, tobacco) (P 9, hot drinks) (revelationsgiven through Joseph Smith the Prophet, at Kirtland, Ohio,February, 27, 1833, known as the Word of Wisdom). 17 The statute made importation of cannabis illegal andestablished a presumption of importation whenever a person wasfound to possess the drug. Ch. 42,   1-2, [1923] N.M. Laws58-59. Violations were punishable by fine and/or imprisonmentfrom one to three years. Cultivation, sale or giving awaycannabis except for use by physicians and pharmacists was alsoprohibited, and violations were punishable on first offense byone to three years in prison and on subsequent offenses by threeto five years imprisonment. Id.  3, 4. 18 The Texas general narcotics statute, ch. 150, [1919] Tex.Gen. Laws 277-79, as amended, ch. 61, [1919] Tex. Special Sess.Laws 156-57, similar in format to the Utah statute and theHarrison Act, included "any drug or preparation known orsold under the Spanish name of 'Marihuana........... Id. at 278.Unlike the Utah and New Mexico statutes, Texas prohibited onlyselling, furnishing or giving away marijuana. Except for theexempted medical purposes, such divestment of any of the listednarcotics could have resulted in a fine and/or imprisonment fromone month to one year. Id. at 279. 19 The Santa Fe New Mexican, hometown paper of the bill'ssponsor, made only one mention of marijuana at the time ofpassage, and that was to note that the drug was being smuggledinto the state prisons. Santa Fe New Mexican, Feb. 1, 1923. The Austin Texas Statesman gave heavy coverage to legislativenews at this time because the legislature was in special sessioncalled by the Governor to deal with a budgetary problem. 20 Santa Fe New Mexican, Jan. 31, 1923. The statute was passedon February 27, 1923; during the period from January 20 toFebruary 28, there were only three other references to marijuana.The newspaper first noted the bill in a one sentence report thata ban on sale of marijuana was to be discussed. Id., Jan. 20,1923. Finally, in articles entitled "A Day In TheLegislature," the progress of the bill (H.B. 56) was notedon February 21 and 27 in simple lists of bills enacted. Id., Feb.21, 27, 1923. So inconsequential was the bill that it was noteven mentioned in two stories describing the activities of thelegislature for that session. Id., Feb. 27, 1923, at 1, col. 1. 21 Austin Texas Statesman, June 19, 1923. Despite heavycoverage of legislative news and of narcotics generally, the ElPaso Times made no reference to marijuana between June 10 andJune 25. The Texas Statesman mentioned the "McMillanBill" only two other times, each time without directreference to marijuana. 22 Unlike most states that passed laws early in the 1920'sagainst marijuana use, Montana in 1927 passed a statute whichmerely amended the first section of its general narcotic law,Rev. Code of Mont. ch. 227, S 3186 (1921), to include marijuana.Ch. 91,  1, [ 1927] Mont. Laws 324. The new law, ch. 6, [1929]Mont. Laws 5, made use, sale or possession without a prescriptiona misdemeanor. 23 The Montana Standard, Jan. 27, 1929, at 3, col. 2. 24Denver Post, April 16, 1929, at 2, col. 1. 25 Id., April 17,1929, at 2, col. 1. 26 Id., April 21, 1929. Ch. 95, (1927] Colo. Laws 309,penalized possession, sale, gift, or cultivation of any of thecannabis drugs as a misdemeanor. Offenses carried a fine and/orimprisonment in the county jail for not less than one or morethan six months. The new law, ch. 93, [1929] Colo. Laws 331,increased the penalties for second offenders to one to five yearterms in the penitentiary. 27 Although Commissioner Anslinger stated in the 1937 Tax ActHearings that the District of Columbia had no law regulatingmarijuana, Dr. Woodward of the AMA refuted the Commissioner'sstatement by citing a 1906 provision which limited the sale ofcannabis to pharmacists and regulated sale of the drug by suchpharmacists to the public. Tax Act Hearings 92-93. The D.C.provision, Act of May 7, 1906, ch. 2084,  13, 34 Star. 175, istypical of early attempts to deal with the drug under the generalpoison laws, but it is noteworthy in its treatment of marijuanaseparately from opiates. 28 See pp. 10 30-3 3 infra. 29 In 1913, Maine prohibited the sale of cannabis indicawithout a prescription. STATE LAWS 137. Massachusetts passed asimilar law in 1917, id. at 150, and Michigan forbade possessionin 1929, id. at 161. A 1923 Ohio law prohibited sale orpossession with intent to sell, id. at 242; Rhode Islandprohibited sale in 1918, id. at 263; and Vermont barred salewithout a prescription in 1915, id. at 296. 31 Ch. 363, [1914] N.Y. Laws 1120. The first narcoticslegislation in New York was enacted in 1893. Ch. 661, art. XII,208, 11893] N.Y. Laws 1561. The 1893 law provided that noprescription containing opium, morphine, cocaine or chloral couldbe filled more than once. Two years later, the legislatureenacted a provision requiring that the effect of narcotics on thehuman system be taught in the public schools. Ch. 1041, 1,[18951 N.Y. Laws 972. In 1897, a law was passed making it afelony to possess any narcotic "with intent to administerthe same or cause the same to be administered to another"without his consent. Ch. 42,  1, [1897] N.Y. Laws 21. The firstprovision aimed at the sale of narcotics was passed in 1907 andprovided that the sale or distribution of cocaine without aprescription was unlawful. Ch. 424, @ 1, [ 1907] N.Y. Laws 879.This provision was subsequently amended to provide for thekeeping of records of sales and of transactions between dealers.Ch. 470,  2, [1913] N.Y. Laws 984; ch. 131,  1, [1910] N.Y.Laws 231; ch. 277,  1, [1908] N.Y. Laws 764. 31 N.Y. Times, July 29, 1914, at 6, col. 2. 32 Id. 33 Id., July 30, 1914, at 8, col. 4. 34 Ch. 672, [1927] N.Y. Laws 1695-1703. 35 The 1914 act was amended by the Whitney Act in 1918 whichalso provided for the repeal of the 1914 act. Ch. 639, [1918]N.Y. Laws 2026. In 1921 an act was passed that in effect repealedall the legislation relating to the narcotics problem. Ch. 708,[1921] N.Y. Laws 2496. The measure made no provision for otherlaws on the subject. This surprising move was made in theinterests of economy, N.Y. Times, Jan. 6, 1921, at 1, col. 8, andwith the belief that the drug problem could be better handled bylocal authorities working in concert with federal agencies. Seeid., Jan. 9, 1921, S 2, at 1, col. 7; id., May 22, 1921, S 2, at11, col. 3, An act making illegal the sale of cocaine without aprescription was enacted in 1923. Ch. 130, [1923] N.Y. Laws 160.The possession of opium or cocaine without a prescription wasoutlawed in 1926. Ch. 650,  2, [1926] N.Y. Laws 1198. 36 As late as 1918, a legislative committee that hadexhaustively studied the narcotics problem in New York did notmention the use of marijuana and concluded: "The drugs whichare the sources of the difficulty are cocaine and eucaine withtheir salts and derivatives and opium and its derivatives,codeine, morphine and heroin." JOINT LEGISLATIVE COMM. TOINVESTIGATE THE LAWS IN RELATION TO THE DISTRIBUTION AND SALE OFNARCOTIC DRUGS, FINAL REPORT, NEW YORK SENATE Doc. No. 35 (1918).quoted in TERRY & PELLENs 833. 37 The Act of April 5, 1927, repealed both the 1923 and 1926laws and replaced them with a comprehensive narcotic controlscheme. Ch. 672, [1927] N.Y. Laws 1695. This act containedprovisions relating to the control and use of narcotic drugs andtreatment of addicts; it also exempted certain preparations fromits coverage. The act furnished the model for the UniformNarcotic Drug Act. See pp. 1030-31 infra. Subsequently, in 1929, unlawful sale of narcotics was made afelony and all other violations of the 1927 act were mademisdemeanors. Ch. 377, [19291 N.Y. Laws 881. 38 Ch. 672, S 421(14), [ 1927] N.Y. Laws 1697. 39 Id. S 443, at 1702, 40 Id. 5 423, at 1697. 41 See id.  443, at 1702. 42 See N.Y. Times, Mar. 25, 1927, at 4, col. 6. 43 Id., Jan. 11, 1923, at 24, col. 1. 44 Id., Dec. 29, 1925, at 10, col. 7. 45 Id., Nov. 21, 1926,  2, at 3, col. 1. 46 Id., July 6, 1927, at 10, col. 6. 47 See id., Mar. 25, 1927, at 4, col. 6; id., April 6, 1927,at 13, col. 2. 48 See Simon, From Opium to Hasheesh, Sci Am., Nov. 1921, at14-15. See also N.Y. Times, Jan. 11, 1923, at 24, col. 1. Asimilar argument was made with respect to cocaine: Cocaine in particular is greatly in demand. When prohibitionis in force, persons, especially drinkers from compulsion ofhabit who have been robbed of their daily drink, will naturallyresort to cocaine . . . . Weber, supra note 7, at 372. 49 B. RENBORG, INTERNATIONAL DRUG CONTROL 216 (1947): As the campaign against the illicit traffic in opium,morphine, and cocaine drugs made progress and gradually resultedin diminution of the supplies on the illicit market, a markedincrease in the illicit traffic and the use of Indian hemp drugswas noticed. more particularly on the North American Continent(the problem of marihuana) and in Egypt (the hashish problem). 50 See Second Geneva Opium Conference, Convention, Protocoland Final Act, quoted in W. WILLOUGHBY, OPIUM AS AN INTERNATIONALPROBLEM 534-70 (1925). 51 Id. at 344-46. 52 Wright, The International Opium Conference, 6 Am. J. INT'LL. 865, 871 (1912). 53 Addendum and Final Protocol of The international OpiumConf., The Hague, 1912, quoted in W. WILLOUGHBY, supra note 50,at 492. 54 ADVISORY Comm. ON TRAFFIC in OPIUM AND OTHER DANGEROUSDRUGs, REPORT To COUNCIL ON THE WORK OF THE SIXTH SESSION (1924),quoted in W. WILLOUGHBY, supra note 50, at 374. 55 See W. WILLOUGHBY, supra note 50, at 2 SI. 56 Quoted in id. at 378. Mr. El Guindy concludes by saying:"Generally speaking, the proportion of cases of insanitycaused by the use of hashish varies from 3 to 60 percent of thetotal number of cases occurring in Egypt." Id. at 379. 57 There are no records of these subcommittee hearings, so wecan only surmise that the quality of the evidence might have beenabout as bad as that presented in the floor report of theEgyptian delegation. 58 Geneva Convention of 1925, quoted in W.WILLOUGHBY, supranote 50, at 539. Moreover, the Convention defines Indian hemp asfollows: "Indian hemp" means the dried flowering or fruitingtops of the pistillate plant Cannabis sativa L. from which theresin has not been extracted, under whatever name they may bedesignated in commerce. Id. at 535 59 In an extensive surveyof cases appearing in the FourthDecennial Digest for the years 1926 to 1936, we could find onlyeight cases dealing with marijuana under laws enacted prior tothe Uniform Narcotic Drug Act. In chronological order: Gonzalesv. State, 108 Tex. Crim. 253, 299 S.W.. 901 (1927); State v.Franco, 76 Utah 202, 289 P. 100 (1930); State v. Bonoa, 172 La.955, 136 So. 15 (1931); Santos v. State, 122 Tex. Crim. 69, 53S.W.2d 609 (1932); Baker v. State, 123 Tex. Crim. 209, 58 S.W.2d534 (1933); Horton v. State, 123 Tex. Crim. 237, 58 S.W.2d 833(1933); State v. Navaro, 83 Utah 6, 26 P.2d 955 (1933); People v.Torres, 5 Cal. App. 2d 580, 43 P.2d 374 (Dist. Ct. App. 1935). 60 172 La. 955, 136 So. 15 (1931). 61 Id. at 964, 136 So. at 18. 62 id. at 961-62, 136 So. at 17-18. 63 id. at 962-63, 136 So. at 18. 64 See pp 1055-57 infra. 65 See pp. 1072 infra. 66 see Utah 6, 26 P.2d 955 (1933) 67 Appellant, convicted on an information charging"possession of marijuana," contended that the statueprohibited only possession of the flowering tops and leaves ofthe marijuana plant. The court held that marijuana was thepopular name for the drug, not just the plant, and that theinformation accordingly charged an offense. For this proposition,it cited dictionaries, other state statutes, articles, cases andtexts. It is the court's familiarity with the articles describingthe allegedly evil effects of the drug with which we areconcerned. 68 76 Utah 463, 290 P. 727 (1930). 69 Id. at 469, 290 P. at 729 70 83 Utah at 12, 26 P.2d at 957, quoting 76 Utah at 469-470,290 P. at 729 71 Hayes & Bowery, Marihuana, 23 J. CRim. L. &CRIMINOLOGY 1086 (1932). 72 Id. at 1087, 1089. 73 Id. at 1088. 74 Id. at 1093. 75 Id. at 1088, 1090-91. 76 Id. at 1088 (emphasis added). 77 Compare text at note 72 supra with text at notes 62-63supra. 78 Hayes & Bowery, supra note 71, at 1090. 79 Stanley, Marihuana as a Developer of Criminals, 2 Am. J.Police Sci. 252 (1931),cited in State v Navaro, 83 Utah 6, 14-15,26 P.2d 955, 958 (1933). 80 See p. 1044 infra. 81 E.g., State v. Navaro, 83 Utah 6, 15, 26 P2d 955, 959(1933); State v. Bonoa, 172 La. 955, 959, 136 So. 15, 17 (1931 ).The Texas court was somewhat stricter in a series of casescharging simply sale or possession of "narcotic drugs"without specifying marijuana. On the same day, the court reversedconvictions in Baker v. State, 123 Tex. Crim. 209. 58 S.W.2d 534(1933) (possession); Baker v. State, 123 Tex. Crim. 212, 58S.W.2d 535 (1933) (sale or possession); and Horton v. State, 123,Tex. Crim. 237, 58 S.W.2d 833, (1933) (possession). On the otherhand the Court held that an indictment charging "possessionof marijuana" is sufficient even though it does not allegethat marijuana is a narcotic drug. Santos v. State 122 Tex. Crim.69, 53 S.W.2d 609 (1932). Contents | Feedback | Search DRCNet Library | Schaffer Library | Major Studies The Forbidden Fruit and the Tree ofKnowledgeWT02-B02-7IA086-000614-B044-27http://206.61.184.43:80/schaffer/Library/studies/vlr/vlr3.htm 206.61.184.43 19970122021154 text/html 63786HTTP/1.0 200 OKDate: Wednesday, 22-Jan-97 02:11:41 GMTServer: WebSitePro/1.1f (S/N wpo-0deb)Allow-ranges: bytesContent-type: text/htmlLast-modified: Saturday, 28-Dec-96 06:48:10 GMTContent-length: 63568 Passage of the Uniform Narcotic Drug Act: 1927-1937 Contents | Feedback | Search DRCNet Library | Schaffer Library | Major Studies The Forbidden Fruit and the Tree ofKnowledge THE FORBIDDEN FRUIT AND THE TREE OF KNOWLEDGE: AN INQUIRYINTO THE LEGAL HISTORY OF AMERICAN MARIJUANA PROHIBITION Richard J. Bonnie & Charles H.Whitebread, II IV. PASSAGE OF THE UNIFORM NARCOTIC DRUG ACT: 1927-1937 Our conclusions to this point bear summarization. During thefirst two decades of the twentieth century, state as well asnational policy was steadfastly opposed to manufacture, sale andconsumption of narcotics and alcohol except for medical purposes.Constitutional objections ions were uniformly ignored, in thenarcotics cases primarily because the nexus between the privateconduct and public harm was in fact a close one, and in thealcohol cases primarily because the legislation was in responseto full operation of the public opinion process, to which thecourts were willing to defer. We have also found that public opinion had not crystallizedagainst intoxicants generally, although public policy was movingrapidly in that direction. Ultimately, the mere existence of thatpublic policy even in the form of criminal law-was not sufficientto convert a public antipathy toward the evils of commercialalcohol traffic into opposition to moderate use of alcohol. Onthe question of private use, the public policy was unenforceableand eventually abandoned. However, with respect to narcotics, thepublic policy, also expressed through the criminal law,effectively converted narcotics use, in the public view, from amedical problem to a legal-moral problem. Sympathy forunfortunate victims turned into moral indictment. Because otherlaws and medical advances had reduced the number of accidentaladdicts, the number of addicts decreased; in this sense thepublic policy was successful. However, to the extent that thispolice, effectively ostracized a group of users from the rest ofsociety, drove them to criminal activity to sustain their habit,and engendered a moralistic public image, the stage was set formany ensuing problems the consequences of which have onlyrecently become matters of public debate. Ancillary to these developments during this period was theclassification of marijuana in some half the states as anaddictive drug that produced the same evils as the opiates andcocaine--crime, pauperism and insanity. The users, few in number,were primarily Mexicans. But as Mexican immigration increased andthe legitimate supply of narcotics and alcohol disappeared, afear developed, particularly in the western states, thatmarijuana use would increase, particularly among the white youth.As a result, some twenty-two states restricted marijuana use tomedical channels. The private conduct objection havingevaporated, the courts uncritically affirmed the legislativeclassification, accepting on faith nonscientific opinion thatmarijuana was a "killer weed." Even though the public opinion process did not operate on theissue during this period, the decision-makers in all probabilitythought that their actions comported with latent publicattitudes. If indeed marijuana caused crime and insanity, ofcourse the public would oppose its use, as it presumably did useof opium and cocaine. Because the users were few in number andconfined primarily to a suppressed social and economic minority,there was no voice which could be beard to challenge theseassumptions. To put it another way, the middle class hadsuccessfully frustrated alcohol prohibition because the publicopinion process came to reflect its view that the law should notcondemn intoxication. Yet because marijuana use was primarily alower class phenomenon, the middle class was generally unaware ofthe proposed legislation. The public opinion process did not operate and decision-makersremained uninformed about the drug. Quickly and with neitherconsideration nor dissent, the laws were enacted, thusestablishing a deliberative format followed often in thesucceeding debates. Although the groundwork had been laid, denigration of the"loco-weed" was primarily a regional phenomenon until1932. Nationalization ensued in two fell swoops in the 1930's.First, cannabis was included in an optional provision of theUniform Narcotic Drug Act proposed in 1932. Second, Congressenacted the Marihuana Tax Act in 1937. In the following sectionswe shall scrutinize these two watershed developments. A. Origins of the Uniform Law As we have suggested, the Harrison Act's masquerade as arevenue measure required residual state legislation in order toeffectuate full prohibition of the narcotics trade in America.1After its passage most states obediently marched to the tuneplayed in Washington. By 1931 every state had restricted the saleof cocaine and, with the exception of two, the opiates.2Thirty-six states had enacted legislation prohibitingunauthorized possession of cocaine3 and thirty-five prohibitedunauthorized possession of the opiates and other restricteddrugs.4 Eight states also prohibited possession of hypodermicsyringes.5 Perhaps the most significant feature of the stateresponse to the Harrison Act was the sharp increase in penaltiesbetween 1914 and 1931.6 Even those penalties, however, seem lightin comparison with the current penalties.7 On the other hand, some influential legislators thought thatthe Federal Act was sufficient to deal with the problem.8 Andthere was a considerable lack of uniformity regarding theoffenses prohibited and the penalties imposed by the severalstates. Finally, there was little attention devoted todevelopment of enforcement patterns within and among the states.9 With such a variety of state legislation, it is not surprisingthat little data is available on the enforcement of these laws.Since the Uniform Crime Statistics, currently the most reliablesource for enforcement data, were first compiled in 1932, thereare no figures on the number of drug arrests by state authoritiesin the 1920's. One commentator asserts: As of June 30, 1928, of the 7738 prisoners in federal penitentiaries, 2529 were sentenced for narcotics offenses, 1156 for prohibition law violations, and 1148 for stolen-vehicle transactions. Data are not available for approximately the same number in state institutions at this time.10 Despite the significant degree of federal enforcement activityevidenced by the above data, state law enforcement agenciesseldom involved themselves with narcotics.11 Perhaps the bestevidence of the lax enforcement of state narcotic laws from 1914to 1927 is the 1921 call for more effective enforcement of the1917 Massachusetts anti-narcotic law by the Medical Director ofthe Boston Municipal Court: Our laws aiming at the suppression of morphinism could perhaps be better, but, no matter whether they be improved or not, they will not have their maximal efficiency without adequate appropriations for their enforcement. Even with the insufficient funds now available, more could be reached. I understand, for instance, that there is no special police force (white squads) entrusted with the detection and arrest of cases of V.D.L. [Violation of the Drug Law.] and that officers are very much hankered by not being allowed to follow suspected persons outside their particular districts.12 The general lack of uniformity in anti-narcotic legislation,13the weakness of state enforcement procedures, 14 and the growinghysteria about dope fiends and criminality15 converged in severalrequests beginning as early as 1927 for a uniform state narcoticlaw.16 The drafting process of the Uniform Narcotic Drug Act mustalso be viewed against the backdrop of two larger movements: (1) the trend toward the creation and dissemination of uniformstate laws by the National Commissioners on Uniform State Laws, agroup to which each state sent two representatives appointed bythe governor; and (2) the general concern in the late 20's and early 30's aboutcontrolling interstate crime, manifested, for example, in thecreation of the nearly autonomous Federal Bureau of Investigationin 1930. Because the concepts of states rights and narrowly construedfederal power held shelf sway in this period, appeal to theNational Commissioners was the inevitable recourse for thosepressing for uniform and-narcotic regulations. B. Drafting the Law A committee of Commissioners in conjunction with Dr. WilliamC. Woodward, Executive Secretary of the Bureau of Legal Medicineand Legislation of the American Medical Association, prepared andsubmitted at the 1925 meeting of the Commissioners the FirstTentative Draft.17 The Committee report stated: "It occursto your committee that the New York Act should be taken as abasis for framing a Uniform Act, and the draft submitted herewithis largely a copy of the New York Act." 18 It appears thatthe First Draft was drawn up by the Chairman of the Committeealone.19 It was never presented on the floor of the full meetingbut was recommitted for further study. 20 The First Draftincluded the following definitions: (12) "Cannabis indica" or "cannabis sativa" shall include any compound, manufacture, salt, derivative or preparation thereof and any synthetic substitute for any of them identical in chemical composition. (13) "Habit forming drugs" shall mean coca leaves, opium, cannabis indica or cannabis sativa.21 Nowhere in the Committee report or in the Proceedings doesthere appear an explanation of the inclusion of cannabis underthe prohibited or regulated drugs. The Second Tentative Draft was presented in 1928,22 and againthe draft was not discussed at the Conference but recommitted forfurther study.23 The Second Draft was an exact copy of the 1927New York statute.24 It retained cannabis in the class of"habit forming drugs ." 25 The lack of concern on thepart of the Commissioners themselves for the whole narcoticsmatter is reflected in the remarks of the President of theConference in introducing a brief statement to the Conference byDr. Woodward: President Miller: In view of the importance of the act I think it would not be amiss to listen to the Doctor for a few minutes, that he may point out to us why it is important. In some of the states we do not recognize the importance because it has not been called to our attention.26 Moreover, the statements of Dr. Woodward point out that one ofthe major forces supporting the drafting of the Uniform Act wasthe AMA. The doctors not only wanted to protect the public fromdrug addiction but also sought uniformity among state laws"in order that the profession may have a betterunderstanding of its obligations and duties and of its rights inthe use of narcotic drugs. " 27 Two Third Drafts were submitted. The initial one closelyresembled the first two Tentative Drafts and was presented in1929.28 Again, it was recommitted for further study.29 The secondThird Tentative Draft30 was the first to remove cannabis from thedefinition of "habit forming drugs" and to include onlya supplemental provision for dealing with the drug.31 Theexplanation for this change from the first two drafts iscontained in this note following the supplemental section: Note: Because of the many objections raised to the inclusion of cannabis indica, cannabis americana and cannabis sativa in the general list of habit-forming drugs, no mention is made of them in other sections of this act. The foregoing section is presented in order to meet an apparent demand for some method of preventing the use of such drugs for the production and maintenance of undesirable drug addiction. It may be adopted or rejected, as each state sees fit, without affecting the rest of the act.32 Judge Deering, the Chairman of the Committee on the UniformNarcotic Drug Act, recommended recommission for further studybecause the committee had not yet had a chance to consult withthe newly created Bureau of Narcotics. At the time of thisconference (August 14, 1930) no one had yet been appointed tofill the office of Commissioner of the Bureau.33 After receiving suggestions from the newly appointedCommissioner Anslinger, the Committee presented a FourthTentative Draft to the national conference in September 1931.34The section dealing with marijuana was identical to that includedin the 1930 revised version of the Third Tentative Draft.35 Thenational conference directed the Committee to return the nextyear with a Fifth Tentative or Final Draft:36 The Fifth-and final-Tentative Draft was adopted by theNational Conference of Commissioners on October 8, 1932.37 Therewere some major changes in the Uniform Act between the Fourth andthe Fifth Tentative Drafts with regard to the regulation ofmarijuana. Although the marijuana provisions remainedsupplemental to the main body of the Act, any state wishing toregulate sale and possession of marijuana was instructed tosimply add cannabis to the definition of "narcoticdrugs," in which case all the other provisions of the Actwould apply to marijuana as well as the opiates and cocaine.38 Itappears that the change from a supplemental section to a seriesof amendments to the relevant sections of the Act was preferredby the Narcotics Bureau.39 The only opposition to adoption of theFinal Draft came from some Commissioners who objected to tyingthe uniform state law to the terms of the Federal Harrison Act.40This last obstacle to adoption of the Act was overcome by theargument that a number of states had already passed suchlegislation so that the federalism problem should not stand inthe way; the Act was adopted 26-3.41 These floor arguments at thenational conference are a most important indication that no onechallenged or even brought up the issue of the designations ofthe drugs to be prohibited. Moreover, this brief debate confirmsthe notion that the Act received very little attention of any ofthe Commissioners other than those sitting on the committee thatdrafted it.42 Examination of the annual proceedings of the Commissionersimmediately suggests several conclusions about the drafting andproposal of the Uniform Narcotic Drug Act. (1) It was drafted inconjunction with the American Medical Association and, after1930, Commissioner Anslinger of the Federal Bureau of Narcotics.(2) It was not one of the more controversial uniform laws and itwas given little consideration during the full meetings of theCommissioners. (3) Impetus for the legislation, especially theoptional marijuana provisions, came from the Bureau of Narcoticsitself. (4) No scientific study of any kind was undertaken beforethe optional marijuana section was proposed. (5)The first threetentative drafts included marijuana within the general part ofthe Act while the last two (including the one finally adopted bythe Commissioners) made marijuana the subject of a separate,optional provision. (6) The model for all the drafts of theUniform Act was the 1927 New York State statute. C. Passage of the State Laws By 1937 every state had enacted some form of legislationrelating to marijuana, and thirty-five had enacted the UniformAct.43 The process by which a previously regional phenomenonbecame nationwide closely parallels that which characterized theearlier state-by-state developments. The major difference is thatthe Bureau of Narcotics sought to insure passage of the Act ineach state through lobbying and testifying before thelegislatures and by propagandizing in channels of public opinion.The Bureau's role has been overstated, however. The same factorsthat combined to produce the earlier legislation were exacerbatedduring the nationalization period, 1932-1937, and the legislationprobably would have passed just as easily without the efforts ofthe Bureau. Use of the drug was still slight and confined tounderprivileged or fringe groups who had no access either topublic opinion or to the legislators. The middle class had littleknowledge and even less interest in the drug and the legislation.Passage of the Act in each state was attended by littlepublicity, no scientific study and even more blatant ethnicaspersions than the earlier laws. In short, the laws wentunnoticed by legal commentators, the press and the public atlarge, despite the propagandizing efforts of the Bureau ofNarcotics. 1. Use Patterns and Public Knowledge: 1931-1937 As we noted earlier, marijuana use began in this country instates near the Mexican border,44 "marijuana" in factbeing a Mexican label for the cannabis drug. Throughout the1920's marijuana use was confined primarily to theMexican-American community; however, by the late 20's use of thisdrug had spread to many of the larger cities and had become quitepopular among some elements in the Black ghettoes .45 jazzmusicians, dancers and others found the drug a cheap and readilyavailable euphoriant.46 Nevertheless, use still remained slight even in 1934.Commissioner Anslinger himself asserted in 1937: "Ten yearsago we only heard about it [marijuana] throughout the Southwest .. . . [I]t has only become a national menace in the last 3years." 47 Still another commentator has written: Only in the 1920's was there any significant usage even by the Mexican-American communities in border cities, and only in the mid and late 1920's did Negro, jazz musicians and "degenerate" bohemian sub-cultures start smoking marijuana. Even the most lurid Journalists did not claim marijuana "seeped" into society at large until the 1930's and usually the mid-30's.48 As late as 1928, the arrest of one Harlem youth for possessionof a small amount of marijuana was news." Thus, we concludethat the number of users was still small, although it may havebegun to grow around 1935, and that these users were stillconcentrated regionally in the West and Southwest andsocioeconomically within the lower class Mexican-American andBlack communities. At the same time, the overwhelming majority of middle-classAmericans in the 1930's knew nothing of marijuana use-they hadnever seen marijuana and knew no one who used the drug. Prior to1935 there was little, if any, attention given marijuana in majornational magazines50 and the leading national newspapers.51 Thatfew middle class Americans in this period knew anything ofmarijuana or its effects is best illustrated by the fact that theBureau of Narcotics conducted a campaign to alert people to thedangers of marijuana. The Bureau as early as 1932 began arousingpublic opinion against marijuana by "an educational campaigndescribing the drug, its identification and its evileffects." 52 In July 1936, the New York City police wereshown marijuana so that they would recognize it growing or indried, smokeable form .53 Thus, even policemen had to be shownthe plant as late as 1936 to permit effective enforcement of theNew York state law. We may accordingly infer that the level ofpublic familiarity with the drug was quite low indeed.54 What little information filtered to the middle class wasgenerated by sporadic campaigns by local newspapers detailing thepotential evils of marijuana; the accounts, as before, weresensationalistic and tended to exacerbate latent ethnicprejudices. For example, a 1934 newspaper account linked crime inthe Southwest with marijuana smoking Mexican-Americans in theregion.55 In a 1935 letter to the editor of the New York Times, aSacramento, California, reader asserted: Marijuana, perhaps now the most iinsidious of our narcotics, is a direct by-product of unrestricted Mexican immigration . . . . Mexican peddlers have been caught distributing sample marijuana cigarettes to school children.56 The writer went on to demand a quota on Mexicans permitted toenter the country. In testifying in favor of the Marihuana TaxAct, Commissioner Anslinger submitted a letter he had receivedfrom the editor of a Colorado newspaper asking the Bureau to helpstamp out the marijuana menace. After describing an attack by aMexican-American, allegedly under the influence of marijuana, ona girl of his region the writer stated: I wish I could show you what a small marijuana cigaret can do to one of our degenerate Spanish-speaking residents. That's why our problem is so great; the greatest percentage of our population is composed of Spanish-speaking persons, most of whom are low mentally, because of social and racial conditions.57 Again, in the testimony at the hearings on the Marihuana TaxAct the following is excerpted from an article included in therecord: We find then that Colorado reports that the Mexican population there cultivates on an average of 2 to 3 tons of the weed annually. This the Mexicans make Into cigarettes, which they sell at two for 25 cents, mostly to white school students.58 Thus, not only did few middle-class Americans know aboutmarijuana and its use, but also what little"information" was available provoked an automaticadverse association of the drug with Mexican immigration, crimeand the deviant life style in the Black ghettos. Naturally, theimpending drug legislation, as had the earlier state legislation,became entangled with society's views of these minority groups. 2. Role of the Federal Bureau of Narcotics It has become quite fashionable among critics of existingmarijuana legislation to assert that the sole cause of theillegal status of marijuana has been the crusading zeal of theFederal Bureau of Narcotics and especially of its long-time head,Harry J. Anslinger. Some observers have suggested that theBureau's activity was produced by bureaucratic exigencies and theneed to expand;59 others have said the Bureau was on a moralcrusade;60 still others have asserted that the Bureau believedits own propaganda about the link between criminality and dopefiends.61 While much of this may be true, it is clear that theBureau did not single-handedly conjure up the idea of banningmarijuana use. Since many states had already undertaken theregulation of marijuana before the creation of the Bureau in1930, we cannot credit the Bureau alone with the pressure tooutlaw the drug. At the same time, it is certain that the Federal Bureau ofNarcotics' actions quickened the pace of the passage by statelegislators of the Uniform Narcotic Drug Act. The Bureau saw thepassage of state narcotics laws as one of its primary objectives.To this end we have detailed how directly the Bureau was involvedin the creation of the Final Draft of the Uniform Act. Afterapproval of the Final Draft, the Bureau began a significantcampaign in the newspapers and legal journals to boost publicsupport for the Uniform Act.62 By detailing the inability offederal enforcement agencies to deal with the burgeoningnarcotics traffic, the Bureau continued to press for passage ofthe Uniform Act by creating a felt need in the public for suchlegislation.63 Despite the efforts of the Bureau, the Uniform Actwent virtually unnoticed by legal commentators and periodicals,and by the public media. 3. Legislative Scrutiny and Media Coverage The Uniform Act was passed by the legislatures of most stateswith out scientific study or debate and without attracting publicattention. In examining in detail the passage of the Uniform Act inVirginia and some other selected states, it will be clear thatpublic concern over marijuana succeeded the outlawing of the drugand did not precede it. Our methodology to determine the extentof public attention in a given state at the time of the passageof the act was to review the newspapers of larger cities for thetwo weeks before and after passage.64 In Virginia the Uniform Narcotic Drug Act passed the House88-0 on February 16, 1934,65 and was approved 34-0 by the Senateon February 22.66 Although the Act as passed in Virginiacontained no marijuana provisions, the same legislature the nextmonth passed a bill (H.B. 236), prohibiting "use of opium,marijuana [and] loco weed ... in the manufacture of cigarettes,cigars" and other tobacco products.67 This law, whichamended a 1910 Virginia statute prohibiting the use of opium inthe manufacture of cigarettes,68 was the first mention ofmarijuana, or any of its derivatives in the Virginia Code. An examination of the Richmond Times-Dispatch, the newspaperof the state capital and perhaps the most influential newspaperin the state at that time, for the period surrounding theenactment of these two provisions (February 1 to March 15, 1934)shows clearly that little, if any, public attention attendedtheir passage. There is no mention at any time of H.B. 236.69 Asfor H.B. 94 (the Uniform Act), the Times Dispatch reported onFebruary 7 that the bill had been introduced. This announcementwas buried among the list of all bills introduced and referred onFebruary 6.70 In a February 12 article dealing with"controversial" bills before the House and Senate thatweek no mention was made of H.B. 94. On March 6, the newspaperrecorded: "Among the important bills passed were. . . . [fardown the list] the Scott bill, making the State narcotic lawconform to the Federal statute." 71 That is the sum of thepublicity received by the Uniform Act and the statute that firstregulated marijuana in any way in Virginia. In 1936, the legislature passed a separate statute prohibitingthe sale and use of marijuana. This bill-S.B. 289-passed theHouse and Senate unanimously.72 The Act prohibited, except for anarrow medical exception, sale, possession, use and cultivationof marijuana .73 The penalties for violation, interestingly, weremore severe than those for violation of the 1934 Uniform Act.Looking again at the Times-Dispatch for the period from February15 to March 19, 1936, we find only one brief article on the newmarijuana legislation. After the Senate passed the measure onFebruary 29, the following appeared: Among the bills passed by the Senate was the Apperson measure prohibiting the cultivation, sale or distribution of derivatives of the plant cannabis sativa, introduced as an outgrowth of alleged traffic in marihuana cigarettes in Roanoke. It fixes punishment for violation of its provisions at from one to 10 years in the penitentiary, or by confinement in jail for 12 months and a fine of not more than $1,000 or both. Charges that school children were being induced to become addicts of marihuana cigarettes and that the weed was being cultivated in and near the city on a wide scale were laid before the Roanoke City Council last year. A youth who said he was a former addict of the drug testified before the Council that inhalation of one of the cigarettes would produce a 'cheap drunk' of several days' duration.74 No further mention of this statute was made after the Housepassed it or after the Governor signed it into law. In order to determine whether the lack of public attention inVirginia was common to other states when the first prohibition ofmarijuana took place, we have surveyed the leading newspapers ofseveral other states at the times encompassing passage of thelaw. We tried to select states that had not previously regulateduse of the drug under the assumption that more publicity wouldattend initial legislation than an amendment of existing law. In New Jersey, Rhode Island, Oregon and West Virginia, forexample, the major newspapers of Newark, Providence, Salem andCharleston 78 respectively, referred to the Uniform Act only onceand to marijuana not at all. In Kentucky, the Louisville HeraldPost printed only two short references to the Uniform Act,79 oneof which referred to marijuana: [Congressman] Kramer added that boys and girls of school age are being led into the use of habit forming drugs by underworld leaders.......... Muggles" or cigarettes made from marijuana, commonly called loco weed or hemp, are also tabooed under the new state law, it was learned.80 Typical of both legislative and newspaper concern about thenew law is the following Charleston Daily Mail comment: A Narcotic Bill Inconspicuously upon the special calendar of the house of delegates rather far down upon it-is Engrossed S.B. No. 230, lodging specific powers in the hands of state authorities for the control of the traffic in narcotics. It has passed the Senate unanimously. It should pass the House, and its only danger of defeat there is the very real one that it will become lost in the shuffle of adjournment now but a few hours away. The bill goes under the name of the uniform narcotic drug act and it is just that. Identical measures for the control by the states of illicit traffic on drugs have been passed by other states, notably the Southern group. Its passage here would result in a broad territory in which there are corresponding laws .... 81 The editorial nowhere mentions marijuana. The bill itselfpassed in the waning hours of the special session with nosubsequent attention given it. 82 From our survey of these and other states, we have concludedthat with but one exception83 the Virginia experience was thenorm. (1) The laws prohibiting use, sale, possession, anddistribution of marijuana passed unnoticed by the media. Therewas no public outcry for such legislation. (2) Quite often thebill was buried beneath more controversial bills in a busylegislative session. (3) In many states the Act was passed latein the session along with myriad other"uncontroversial" laws. (4) Finally, no state undertookindependent study to determine the medical facts aboutmarijuana-they relied on information supplied by the FederalBureau of Narcotics84 or a few lurid newspaper stories.85 4. Available Medical Opinion In conjunction with the fourth conclusion from our state casehistories of the passage of this Act, we should examine theextent of medical knowledge that might have been available tolegislators had they wanted to conduct an independent evaluationof the dangers of the hemp drugs. There were five influential sources for information about theeffects of marijuana and hemp on humans. None of these wereconducted with the scientific precision characterizing modernstudies of drug effects. However, they each deserve mention hereeither because they deserved attention then or because theyheavily influenced later commentators. The first exhaustive study of the effects of cannabis and theother hemp drugs was done by the British in India. Their IndianHemp Drugs Commission studied cannabis use among the nativepopulation in India in 1893 and 1894,86 and submitted itsconclusions in a 500-page report. The Commission receivedevidence from 1,193 witnesses, including 335 doctors, and studiedthe relevant drug-related judicial proceedings and the intakerecords of every mental hospital in British India. As a resultthey concluded: In regard to the moral effects of the drugs, the Commission are of opinion that their moderate use produces no moral injury whatever. There is no adequate ground for believing that it injuriously affects the character of the consumer. Excessive consumption, on the other hand, both indicates and intensifies moral weakness or depravity. Manifest excess leads directly to loss of self-respect, and thus to moral degradation. In respect to his relations with society, however, even the excessive consumer of hemp drugs is ordinarily inoffensive. His excesses may indeed bring him to degraded poverty which may lead him to dishonest practices; and occasionally, but apparently very rarely indeed, excessive indulgence in hemp drugs may lead to violent crime. But for all practical purposes it may be laid down that there is little or no connection between the use of hemp drugs and crime.87 It is quite clear, however, that the Indian Hemp DrugCommission88 Report was not disseminated in the United Statesuntil 1969 . On the other hand, periodic reports of the Panama Canal ZoneGovernor's Committee to study the physical and moral effects ofthe use of marijuana were available to legislators before thepassage of the Uniform Act. After an investigation extending fromApril to December 1925, the Committee reached the followingconclusions: There is no evidence that marijuana as grown here is a"habit-forming" drug in the sense in which the term isapplied to alcohol, opium, cocaine etc. or that it has anyappreciable deleterious in influence on the individual usingit.89 In 1933, a similar Panama Canal Zone committee reported: Delinquencies due to marijuana smoking which result in trial by military court are negligible in number when compared with delinquencies resulting from the use of alcoholic drinks which also may be classed as stimulants and intoxicants.90 About the time that the final Governor's Committee Report fromthe Canal Zone was completed, a New Orleans physician, Dr.Fossier, completed a study from which he concluded that marijuanawas a highly dangerous drug with habit-forming properties.91 Thispiece would have remained relatively unnoticed due to theobscurity of the journal in which it was published had it notbeen picked up by the New Orleans District Attorney, EugeneStanley, and made the basis for his own article-Marihuana as aDeveloper of Criminals92 which appeared in a law enforcementjournal. Mr. Stanley stated: It is an ideal drug to cut off inhibitions quickly. . . . At the present time the underworld has been quick to realize the value of this drug in subjugating the will of human derelicts to that of a master mind. Its use sweeps away all restraint, and to its influence may be attributed many of our present day crimes. It has been the experience of the Police and Prosecuting Officials in the South that immediately before the commission of many crimes the use of marihuana cigarettes has been indulged in by criminals so as to relieve themselves from the natural restraint which might deter them from the commission of criminal acts, and to give them the false courage necessary to commit the contemplated crime.93 Mr. Stanley's article, based on no empirical data whatsoever,was widely used by courts to corroborate early legislation and bylobbyists to justify the later prohibitive legislation againstthe hemp drugs.94 In 1933 the following colloquy appeared in the Journal of theAmerican Medical Association: Effects of Cannabis To the Editor:-I have been hearing about the smoking of cigarets dipped into or medicated with fluid extract of Cannabis americana. I can find nothing about the use of the drug by addicts. What is its immediate effect? What are its late effects? What is the minimum lethal dose? In what way does it differ from or resemble "muggles" in its action? While in Louisiana I was told that the use of marihuana causes dementia. Is this true' Please omit name. M.D., Illinois. ANSWER.-The effect of Cannabis americana is the same as that of Cannabis indica- and, of the effect of the latter, the books are so full that it is hardly necessary to detail them here. It must suffice here to say that cannabis, at the height of its action, usually produces hallucinations, with or without euphoria, and that these are followed by a deep sleep. Its most marked after-effect is the liability to the establishment of a craving for the drug, the habitual use of which undermines the intellectual qualities and the social value of the victim and leads to general physical deterioration. It is stated that smokers nearly always become imbecile in time. The minimum lethal dose is unknown, no fatalities having been reported in man. In view of the fact that one dose may kill one dog that has no marked effect on another, one must admit the possibility of a lethal effect on man. In view of what has been said, it must be admitted that "marihuana," which is merely another name for Cannabis indica, may cause dementia.95 The reply contains no indication how or where the persons whoanswered the question got their data. It seems clear from thenature of the response that the medical community was quiteuncertain as to the effects of the drug in 1933. In 1934, Dr. Walter Bromberg, senior psychiatrist at BellevueHospital, reported that marijuana was not a habit-forming drugand was far less responsible for crime than other drugs such asalcohol. In this study, Bromberg drew his data from examinationof 2,216 inmates convicted of felonies.96 Dr. Bromberg pointedout that marijuana users tend to be passive in comparison tousers of alcohol and that the hemp drugs should lead to crimeonly in cases of use by already psychopathic types. 97 This then was the extent of medical evidence available tolaymen and legislators alike at the time the Uniform NarcoticDrug Act and the fast prohibitions of marijuana were enacted inmost states. We can conclude the following from our brief reviewof the medical literature. (1) Little was really known about theeffects of marijuana use-there were few studies and what studiesthere were had serious methodological flaws. (2) Even if thestudies we record had been adequate methodologically, theyappeared generally in obscure medical not widely read by laymen.(3) Of these studies, most found marijuana relatively harmlessespecially in contrast to use of alcohol. (4) None of thesestudies were considered in either the formulation or the passageof the Uniform Act in the states examined. And what is moreastounding is that instead of consulting medical opinion,legislators relied on lurid newspaper accounts of marijuana,often provided by defendants in criminal prosecutions whosemotivation was to use marijuana to escape criminalresponsibility. 5. Provisions of the Uniform Narcotic Drug Act andSupplemental Virginia Marijuana Statute Having studied the circumstances surrounding passage of theUniform Act and similar legislation in several states between1932 and 1937, we shall briefly summarize the provisions of thoselaws. (a) Classification and Offenses.-The Virginia legislature madeno changes in the Uniform Act as drafted by the Commissioners anddid not include the supplementary marijuana provisions in passingthat Act.98 In 1936, Virginia passed special marijuanalegislation99. which defined cannabis exactly as did thedefinitional provision of the Uniform Act. Both the specialmarijuana statute in Virginia and the Uniform Act prohibitedpossession, transfer and cultivation of the drug100 but did notrefer to the more specific acts that later came to be separatedand punished more heavily, such as sale to a minor and possessionof more than a certain amount. (b) Penalties.-The Uniform Act contained no specific penaltiesfor its violations; the matter of supplying the appropriatepenalties was left to each state. Virginia punished firstviolations of its Uniform Act by a fine not exceeding $100 and/orimprisonment in jail not exceeding one year, and second andsubsequent offenses by a fine not exceeding $1,000 and/orimprisonment for not more than five years in the penitentiary.101The penalties for violation of Virginia's 1936 marijuana statutewere stiffer than for violation of its Uniform Act. Each offensewas punishable by imprisonment in the penitentiary for from oneto ten years or by confinement in jail for not more than twelvemonths and/or by a fine up to $1,000, in the discretion of thecourt or jury.102 An analysis of penalties for violation of the marijuanastatutes enacted in other states at about the same time indicatesVirginia's penalties were atypically harsh. In New Jersey, forinstance, the penalty for unlawful possession and sale ofmarijuana was that attaching to a high misdemeanor.103 In RhodeIsland the penalty for unlawful possession was a fine of not morethan $1,000 or imprisonment for not more than threeyears orboth.104 For unlawful selling, Rhode Island provided a fine ofnot more than $2,000 or imprisonment for not more than five yearsor both.105 In Kentucky the penalty for a first offense violationwas a fine of not less than $100 and not more than $500 or jailfor not less than thirty days nor more than one year or both. Forsecond and subsequent offenses the statute required imprisonmentin the penitentiary for not less than one nor more than fiveyears.106 Finally, West Virginia penalized a first offender by afine not exceeding $100 or jail for not exceeding one year orboth, and subsequent offenders by fine not exceeding $1,000 orimprisonment in the penitentiary not exceeding five years orboth.107 This comparison indicates that Virginia penalties could bemore severe than the average. Moreover, Virginia did notdistinguish in penalty between possession and sale of the drug,and violation of Virginia's separate marijuana law could be moreheavily penalized than violation of the Uniform Act. Footnotes and References 1. See p. 989 supra 2. STATE LAWS 13. Id at 8. Id. Id at 21 For example, compare ch. 337 [1929] NY Laws 881 with ch. 363 [1914] NY Laws 1120 See Appendix A, Tables II, III For example, in 1921 New York had repealed its general narcotics provision, ch. 708 [1921] NY Laws 2496. See note 35 at 1017-18 supra. Governor Miller of New York at that time stated: Being unable to resolve that conflict of opinion, I have deemed it the safest course to leave the subject to be governed by the Federal statute until such time at least as it shall more clearly appear in what way that statute might be wisely supplemented by the state. 48. REPORT OF THE NEW YORK STATE BAR ASSOCIATION 133 [1925](emphasis original) Commissioner Anslinger felt that the stateshad failed to do their part during this period: Notwithstanding the limited power of the Federal Government,state officers immediately became imbued with the erroneousimpression that the problem of preventing abuse of narcotic drugswas one now [after the Harrison Act] exclusively cognizable bythe National Government, and that the Federal Law alone,enforced, of course, by Federal agencies only, should representall the control necessary over the illicit narcotic drug traffic. Anslinger, The Reason for Uniform State Narcotic Legislation,21 GEO. L.J. 52, 53 (1932). 9 TERRY & PELLENS 969-91. See also 1928 HANDBOOK OF THENATIONAL CONFERENCE OF COMMISSIONERS ON UNIFORM STATE LAWS ANDPROCEEDINGs 77-78 (handbooks hereinafter cited as 19- HANDBOOK]. 10 King, The Narcotics Bureau and the Harrison Act, 62 YALEL.J. 736, 738 n.12 (1953). See also Schmeckbier, The Bureau ofProhibition in BROOKINGS INST. FOR GOVT RESEARCH, SERVICEMONOGRAPH.No. 57, at 143 (1929). 11 See JOINT LEGISLATIVE COMM. TO INVESTIGATE THE LAWS INRELATION TO THE DISTRIBUTION AND SALE OF NARCOTIC DRUGS, FINALREPORT, NEWYORK SENATE Doc. No. 3 (1918): No fixed policy exists for the enforcement of the Statestatutes except in the larger cities of the State but theirenforcement has been left to the desultory or spasmodic effortsof local police officials . . . . Quoted in TERRY & PELLENS 834. See also FT. BECKER,OUTSIDERS 137-38 (1963). 12 Sandoz, Report on Morphinism to the Municipal Court ofBoston, 13 J. CRIM. L. & CRIMINOLOGY 10, 54 (1922) (emphasisoriginal) 13 See STATE LAWS 31-34. 14 Id. at 28. 15 See SPECIAL COMMITTEE TO INVESTIGATE THE TRAFFIC INNARCOTIC DRUGS, U.S. TREASURY DEP'T, REPORT (1919) 16 H. ANSLINGER & W. TOMPKINS, THE TRAFFIC IN NARCOTICS159 (1953). 17. 1925 HANDB00K 977-85. 18 Id. at 975. 19 Id. at 305. 20 Id. 21 Id. at 978. 22 1928 HANDBOOK 323-33. 23 Id. at 75-78. 24 Ch. 672, [1927] N.Y. Laws 1695-1703. 25 1928 HANDBOOK 325. 26 Id. at 76-77. 27 Id. at 77. 28 1929 HANDBOOK 332-40. 29 Id. at 83. 30 1930 HANDBOOK 485-97. 31 The provision, which made an exemption for medicinal orscientific use, read in part as follows: Section 12. (Cannabis Indica, Cannabis Americana and CannabisSativa.) No person shall plant, cultivate, produce, manufacture,possess, have under his control, sell, prescribe, administer,dispense or compound cannabis indica, cannabis americans, orcannabis sativa, or any preparation or derivative thereof, oroffer the same for sale, administering dispensing or compounding. . . . Id. at 493. 32 Id. There is no evidence of what objections had beenraised. The authors feel certain that the dissenters werebirdseed and hemp growers who also objected to the passage of theMarihuana Tax Act. See pp. 1054, 1059 infra. 33 1930 HANDBOOK 126-27. 34 1931 HANDBOOK 390-402. 35 Id. at 398-99. 36 Id. at 127-28. 37 1932 HANDBOOK 95-107. 38 Id. at 326. 39 See Tennyson, Uniform State Narcotic Law, I FED. B. AssnJ., Oct. 1932, at 55; Illicit Drug Traffic, 2 FED. B. ASS'N J.208-09 (1935) (indicating that the simple amendments formarijuana were designed by the Bureau so that other drugs couldbe added in the same way). 40 1932 HANDBOOK 95-107. 41 Id. at 107. 42 From our own computations, the total time spent by all theCommissioners discussing this Act from 1927 to 1932 could nothave exceeded one hour. Moreover, the small number of statespresent at the time of the roll call, as compared with the 48that voted on the Uniform Machine Gun Act the day before,indicates that concern for this Act was less than overwhelming. 43 Tax, Act Hearings 25-26. 44 See H. BECKER, OUTSIDERS 135 (1963). 45 NEW YORK CITY MAYOR'S COMMITTEE ON MARIHUANA, REPORT,reprinted in THE MARIHUANA PAPERS 277-307 (D. Solomon Ed. 1966)[hereinafter cited as LAGUARDIA REPORT]. 46 id. at 292-94. The following exchange from the Hearings onthe Marihuana Tax Act indicates the low cost of the drug in 1937: Mr. Thompson: What is the price of marijuana? Mr. Anslinger: The addict pays anywhere from 10 to 25 centsper cigarette. In illicit traffic the bulk price would be around$20 per pound. Legitimately, the bulk is around $2 per pound. Tax Act Hearings 27. 47 Tax Act Hearings 20. 48 Mandel, Hashish, Assassins and the Love of God, 2 ISSUES INCRIMINOLOGY I49 (1966). 49 N.Y. Times, Oct. 7, 1928,  2, at 4, col. 6. 50 There is only one article even vaguely related to marijuanalisted prior to 1935 Our Home Hasheesh Crop, LITERARY DIGEST,Apr. 3, 1926, at 64. See H. BECKER, OUTSIDERS 141 (1963). 51 From 1923 to 1935 there were only thirteen short articlesrelated in any way to marijuana in the New York Times, eventhough New York City had banned marijuana as early as 1914 andthe state legislature had acted in 1927. 52 BUREAU OF NARCOTICS, U.S. TREASURY DEP'T, TRAFFIC IN OPIUMAND OTHER DANGEROUS DRUGS 59 (1937). See also H. BECKER,OUTSIDERS 140 (1963). 53 N.Y. Times, July 24, 1936, at 6, col. 3. 54 In 1923 the New York Times, in a short article, reported:"The latest habit forcing drug . . . marijuana, which issmoked in a cigarette-was exhibited" at a women's clubmeeting. N.Y. Times, Jan. 11, 1923, at 24, col. 1. 55 N.Y. Times, Sept. 16, 1934,  4, at 6, col. 3. 56 Id., Sept. 15, 1935, s 4, at 9, col. 4. 57 Tax Act Hearings 32. 58 Gomila, Marijuana-A More Alarming Menace to Society ThanAll Other Habit Forming Drugs, quoted in Tax Act Hearings 32-33.See also Gusfield, On Legislating Morals: The Symbolic Process ofDesignating Deviance, 56 CALIF. L. REv. 54, 69 (1968). 59Dickson, Bureaucracy and Morality: An Organizational Perspectiveon a Moral Crusade, 16 SOCIAL PROB. 143 (1968). 60 H. BECKER, OUTSIDERS 137-45 (1963); see T. DUSTER, THELEGISLATION OF MORALITY 17-19 (1970). 61 King, The Narcotics Bureau and the Harrison Act, 62 YALEL.J. 736, 737-39 (1953). 62 E.g., Anslinger, The Reason for Uniform State NarcoticLegislation, 21 GEo. L.J. 52 (1932); Tennyson, Uniform StateNarcotic Law, I FED. B. ASS'N J., Oct. 1932. at 55 (Mr. Tennysonwas Legal Advisor, Bureau of Narcotics). 63 See, e.g., N.Y. Times, Sept. 16, 193 1, at 37, col. 2. 64 It seems that if there were any public concern at all aboutthe Uniform Act and its adoption, it should appear at those timesin mention of the bill, marijuana or narcotic drugs in general.We used the papers of the larger cities under the assumption thatthey would usually contain the fullest and most accurate accountof the business of state legislatures. 65 VA. HOUSE JOUR. 324 (1934). 66 VA. SENATE JOUR. 300-01 (1934). 67 Any manufacturer or manufacturers of cigarettes who shallemploy opium, marihuana, loco weed, or any other sedative,narcotic or hypnotic drug, like chemical or substance, either inthe tobacco used or paper wrappers of cigarettes, cigars, tobaccoor any otherwise undiluted foodstuff or beverage, other than thatadvertised, sold and used as a drug or medicine, shall be guiltyof a misdemeanor, and upon conviction shall be fined not lessthan one hundred dollars nor more than one thousand dollars, orconfined in jail not less than six months nor more than twelvemonths, or both, for each offense. Ch. 268, [1934] Va. Acts ofAssembly 411 (H.B. 236). 68 Ch. 246, [1910] Va. Acts of Assembly 358 (codified asamended VA. CODE ANN. 18.1-345,-346 (Supp. 1970)). 69 On March 11, 1934, the day after the prohibition of use ofopium in cigarettes was amended to include marijuana, theRichmond Times-Dispatch did not mention the action, and anarticle entitled "Bills Passed by Assembly" did notmention any marijuana or narcotic laws. Richmond Times-Dispatch,Mar. 11, 1934, at 4, col. 2. A March 12, six-column article,entitled "Vital Measures Passed in Busy 1934 Assembly"also did not mention either the narcotics legislation or themarijuana amendment. id., Mar. 12, 1934, at 1, col. 2. 70 Id., Feb. 7, 1934, at 4, col. 1. 71 Id., Mar. 6,1934, at 2, col. 5. 72 VA. HOUSE JOUR. 827 (1936); VA. SENATE JOUR. 498 (1936). 73 Ch. 212, [19361 Va. Acts of Assembly 361. 74 Richmond Times-Dispatch, Mar. 1, 1936, at 12, col. 3. 75 The Newark Star Ledger was surveyed from May 20 to June 10,193 3, a period surrounding the passage of the statute, ch. 186,[1933] N.J. Acts 397, on June 5, 1933. On the day of the signingof the bill, there appeared a short article noting that theUniform Narcotic Drug Act had become law. Newark Star Ledger,June 5, 1933, at 2. 76 The statute, ch. 2096, [1934] R.I. Acts101, was approved April 26, 1934. The Providence journal wassurveyed from April 10 to April 28, 1934, and on April 12 thereappeared five sentences on the Uniform Act. providence journal,Apr. 12, 1934, at R. On April 21, the law was described in ashort article summarizing the business of the legislativesession. Id., Apr. 21, 1934, at 7. Neither article mentionedmarijuana. 77 The Salem Oregon Statesman in the period from February 8 toFebruary 28, 1935, had only one article dealing with drugs. SalemOregon Statesman, Feb. 21, 1935, at 2, col. 2. 78 The Uniform Act was passed in West Virginia on March 8,1935. Ch. 46, [1935] W. Va. Acts 179. The Charleston Daily Mail,which carried detailed legislative news, was surveyed from MarchI to March 20, 1935. On March 1, the legislature reconvened undera special calendar including the Uniform Act. During this period,the Act attracted little attention except for an editorial onMarch 7. Charleston Daily Mail, Mar. 7, 1935, at 10, co]. 1. Thebill was mentioned in passing in two other stories on upcominglegislation, and in a report that a federal judge criticized WestVirginia's failure to enact the Act. Id., Mar. 6, 1935, at 6,col. 4. 79 The Louisville Herald Post was surveyed from April 15 toJune 15, 1934. The marijuana section of the Uniform Act becameeffective on June 14, 1934. Ch. 142, [1934] Ky. Acts 562. Theonly reference to the Act was Louisville Herald Post. June 6,1934, at 10. 80 Id. 81 Charleston Daily Mail, Mar. 7,1935, at 10, col. 1. 82 Id., Mar. 11, 1935, at 1, col. 1, reports: "In theconfusion of the closing hours Saturday night the legislaturepassed many bills, many of them unread and unprinted and notunderstood." 83 In Missouri, the passage of the Uniform Act was attended bypressure on the legislature stemming from a hysteria campaign inthe St. Louis Star Times which contained 5 major articles urgingthe outlawing of marijuana and presenting lurid case studies ofthe evils of the drug. These articles were quoted in the Tax ActHearings. See St. Louis Star Times, Jan. 17-Feb. 19, 1935. 84 See, e.g., N.Y. Times, Sept. 16, 1931, at 37, col. 2(recording Commissioner Anslinger's statements on the need foruniform state laws to regulate marijuana). 85 In the Missouri case, the legislature, in response to thescare stories in the St. Louis Star Times, took only 10 days topresent the law, hold quick hearings, and unanimously pass theanti-marijuana legislation. 86 INDIAN HEMP DRUGS COMMISSION 1893-94, REPORT: MARIJUANA (J.Kaplan ed. 1969). 87 Id. at 264. 88 Id. at vi. 89 Quoted in Marijuana Smoking in Panama, 73 THE MILITARYSURGEON 274 (1933). 90 Id. at 279. 91 Fossier, The Marijuana Menace, 84 NEW ORLEANS MEDICAL &SURGICAL J. 247 (1931). 92 Stanley, Marihuana as a Developer of Criminals, 2 Am. J.POLICE Sci. 252 (1931). 93 Id. at 256. 94 See Tax Act Hearings 23-24, 37. 95 100 JA.M.A. 601 (1933). 96 Bromberg, Marijuana Intoxication: A Clinical Study ofCannabis Sativa Intoxication, 97 Am. J. PSYCHIATRY 303 (1934). 97 Id. at 309; see Facts and Fancies About Marijuana, LITERARYDIGEST, Oct. 24, 1936, at 7-8. This presentation begins bydigesting Dr. Bromberg's article for laymen: It is clear from this study [of 2,216 criminals convicted offelonies] that in this region the drug is a breeder of crime onlywhen used by psychopathic types in whom the drug allows theemergence of aggressive, sexual or antisocial tendencies. . . .It is quite probable that alcohol is more responsible as an agentfor crime than is marihuana. The article continues: The following facts stand out in social and medical reports: 1. Marihuana is not a habit-forming drug, as is heroin oropium. 2. It prolongs sensations; it is in high favor as anaphrodisiac. 3. It is the most inexpensive of drugs; marihuana cigarettesusually selling at from three to twenty-five cents each. The article then describes the effects of marijuana: After smoking from one to three "reefers," if onehas not been told what to expect, the first effects of the drugpass almost unnoticed-nothing, perhaps, but a slight twitching ofmuscles of the neck, back or legs. The mind remains calm andclear. Suddenly, without apparent cause, a chance remark . . .sends the subject into a spasm of violent laughter. Becoming calm again, while the drug continues to exert itsweird effects, the smoker finds ideas crowding through his brainwith bewildering rapidity; those around him become slow-dull. Noris the language of his own tongue swift enough to keep pace withhis lightning thoughts. Soon the self-esteem of the smoker begins to grow in likeproportion. . . . Paradoxically, trifling discomforts become unbearable evils;the flare of a match near-by brings a resentment that isimmediately transformed into an overwhelming desire for revenge.But before the "reefer man" could possibly climb to hisfeet, or even reach a hand for a gun or knife, new thoughts havecome crowding in.... Above all other distinguishing effects of marihuanaintoxication is the fact that all normal conceptions of time andspace are lost. As in the split-second dream that seems to last the nightthrough, time seems of interminable length; the clock standsstill for days. Vision, too, takes on new concepts. Inconsiderable distancesbecome tremendous.... Yet, throughout the intoxication, there is constant awarenessthat the strange fancies rushing through the mind are notnatural, but purely the effects of the drug; unlike theopium-cater, he is acutely conscious of those about him. He hasmany of the sensations of the gay "drunk" at the ball. Describing a pot-party: There is little noise; windows are shut, keeping the smell ofsmoking weeds away from what might be curious nostrils. Nor is there any of the yelling, dashing about, playing ofcrude jokes or physical violence that often accompany alcoholicparties; under the effects of marihuana, one has a dread of allthese things. 98 Ch. 86, [1934] Va. Acts of Assembly 81. 99 Ch. 212, [1936] Va. Acts of Assembly 361. 100 Id. 101 Ch. 86, S 20, [1934] Va. Acts of Assembly 90. 102 Ch. 212,  I (c), [ 1936] Va. Acts of Assembly 362. Thepenalty for violation of ch. 268, [1934] Va. Acts of Assembly411, which prohibited the use of marijuana in the manufacture ofcigars and cigarettes, was confinement in jail for from 6 to 12months and/or a fine of from $100 to $1000. 103 Ch. 186,  12, [1933] N.J. Laws 41 1. 104 Ch. 2096, S 14, [19341 R.I. Acts III. 105 Id.  15. 106 Ch. 142, [1934] Ky. Acts 562. 107 Ch. 46,  2 3, [1935] W. Va. Acts 192. Contents | Feedback | Search DRCNet Library | Schaffer Library | Major Studies The Forbidden Fruit and the Tree ofKnowledgeWT02-B02-8IA086-000614-B044-55http://206.61.184.43:80/schaffer/Library/studies/vlr/vlr4.htm 206.61.184.43 19970122021206 text/html 44103HTTP/1.0 200 OKDate: Wednesday, 22-Jan-97 02:11:58 GMTServer: WebSitePro/1.1f (S/N wpo-0deb)Allow-ranges: bytesContent-type: text/htmlLast-modified: Saturday, 28-Dec-96 06:47:55 GMTContent-length: 43885 Passage of the Marihuana Tax Act of 1937 Contents | Feedback | Search DRCNet Library | Schaffer Library | Major Studies The Forbidden Fruit and the Tree ofKnowledge THE FORBIDDEN FRUIT AND THE TREE OF KNOWLEDGE: AN INQUIRYINTO THE LEGAL HISTORY OF AMERICAN MARIJUANA PROHIBITION Richard J. Bonnie* & Charles H.Whitebread, II** V. PASSAGE OF THE MARIHUANA TAX ACT OF 1937 The first assertion of federal authority over marijuana usewas the Marihuana Tax Act, passed in 1937. The obvious question,from a historical point of view, is why such legislation wasthought to be necessary, especially after the brushfire passageof the Uniform Act and related legislation in every state in theprevious few years. Enforcement difficulty and public hysteriaare two reasons which have been propounded for the federalaction. We subscribe to a third, one which we rejected withrespect to the uniform acts-Congress was hoodwinked by theFederal Bureau of Narcotics. A. State Enforcement of the Uniform Law One of the primary arguments in support of the Marihuana TaxAct was that the legislation was required to permit andfacilitate adequate enforcement of the Uniform Narcotic DrugAct.1 Initial examination of enforcement statistics after passageof the Uniform Act suggests that marijuana seizures and arrestsin most states rose dramatically. However, we should be careful to note at the outset theinadequacies of most drug statistics, which, especially duringthis period, do not permit conclusive analysis regarding theextent of enforcement. Reporting officials frequently do not differentiate among thedrugs. Different jurisdictions employ different measures ofenforcement-number of arrests, convictions, kilograms of the drugseized, or number of seizures; even where the same measures areused, statistics are often compiled for different time frames. Inaddition, changes in the definitions in the laws-such as a changefrom considering cannabis as only the flowering top of the plantto considering it the whole plant-can wildly distort thestatistics from year to year. To add to the confusion,enforcement agencies can manipulate the data for their own uses;if they must appear to be attacking the drug problem or to needmore resources, they can change radically the statisticalappearance of the enforcement problem by using, for example,arrests as their enforcement measure. Finally, the mere passageof prohibitive legislation will in itself be reflected in theenforcement data. This is especially important for our study ofenforcement patterns in the states before passage of theMarihuana Tax Act. As one commentator has explained: A point that should be obvious but that is sometimes overlooked is that there are no official statistics relating to violations of a drug, law until the drug law is enacted. To compare official preenactment and postenactment data is to compare nothing to something, and naturally drug use will appear to rise.2 For all these reasons, the drug statistics from the period ofthe 1930's must be used somewhat hesitantly to support anycontention about the extent of state enforcement before theenactment of Marihuana Tax Act. With this caveat in mind, weshall proceed, nevertheless, to do so. Although Commissioner Anslinger testified at the hearings onthe Tax Act that state officials frequently asked for federalassistance 3 it appears from the Federal Bureau's own statisticsthat state and municipal agencies were proceeding with vigor tostamp out marijuana use.4 We do not have fully accurate data, butthere are indications that both New York and Louisiana weremoving against marijuana use. In 1934, the New York policediscovered a large field of marijuana growing near the BrooklynBridge. In making a related raid, the police also seized 1,000marijuana cigarettes.5 In 1935, the police burned a marijuanacrop found growing on the grounds of the Welfare Islandpenitentiary.6 Throughout 1936, the narcotics division of the NewYork police found and destroyed several marijuana crops growingin and around the city.7 Fragmentary figures are available on lawenforcement in Louisiana which indicate there were 219 arrests onmarijuana charges in New Orleans alone from 1930 until April of1936.8 In Louisiana as a whole for 1936 over 1,195 pounds of bulkmarijuana were seized.9 This evidence suggests that state authorities in areas wheremarijuana use had become common at all were dealing fairlyeffectively with the trade in the drug. Although some states mayhave hoped that passage of a federal law dealing with marijuanawould reduce the enforcement burden on state and local police andbring additional federal services and money,10 the law cannotreally be justified as filling an enforcement void. Nevertheless,this was one of the most effective arguments advanced byCommissioner Anslinger in the halls of Congress. B. Public Hysteria or Continued Public Ignorance? Some observers have attributed passage of the Tax Act topublic hysteria.11 In support of this contention they show thatthere was a marked increase in the number of titles dealing withmarijuana in the Readers' Guide to Periodical Literature from1936 until 1939, compared with the total absence of articles onthis subject in preceding years.12 It should be noted, however,that only seven articles treating marijuana or hashish appearedfrom 1920 to August 1937, when the Tax Act was passed.13 Withrespect to medical opinion, the AMA Journal presented an articleopposing the enactment of the Tax Act and arguing, as did theirrepresentative at the Tax Act hearings, 14 that existing statelaws were sufficient if properly enforced.15 It seems the national media and medical opinion were far fromhysterical at the time the Tax Act passed. There were a few localnewspaper campaigns against the drug, but they tended to peakabout two years before the passage of the Act and were isolatedinstances of public support for the Uniform Narcotic Drug Act.16Moreover, these atypical state scares did not draw nationalattention. In fact, whatever publicity the "marijuana problem"received during this period was attributable to CommissionerAnslinger and his office, who conducted an active educationalcampaign for federal legislation. They prepared press stories onthe dangers of the drug and traveled around the countrydisseminating propaganda.17 Despite these efforts, however,public knowledge of the marijuana proposals was minimal at best.The New York Times contained nine references to marijuana fromJanuary 1936 until it reported on August 3, 1937,18"President Roosevelt signed today a bill to curb traffic inthe narcotic, marihuana, through heavy taxes ontransactions." As in prior years, marijuana was still not a matter of publicattention, and the so-called "problem" and the federalproposal to cure it went virtually unnoticed by most of theAmerican public. At the same time, however, the"educational" campaign conducted by the Bureau toinform the Congress of the dimensions of the "problem"was highly successful. In this sense, the Bureau itself createdthe "felt need" for federal legislation; the Bureau-andnot public hysteria which it was unable to arouse-was the majorforce behind the Tax Act. We assign to the Bureau theinstrumental role with respect to passage of the Tax Act eventhough we did not do so with respect to the Uniform Act. Sosuccessful were the Commissioner's efforts in the Congress thatthe hearings before the House Ways and Means Committee and thefloor debate on the bill are near comic examples of derelictionof legislative responsibility. C. The Tax Act Hearings Note from Cliff Schaffer: Interested readers may referto the full text of the hearings for the Marihuana Tax Act, andrelated documents, also on this site. Although the Marihuana Tax Act was modeled after the HarrisonAct, marijuana was not simply included in the earlier actprimarily for three reasons. First, the importation focus of theHarrison Act was inappropriate for marijuana because there weredomestic producers.20 Second, since cannabis had been removed from the United StatesPharmacopoeia and had no recognized medicinal uses, the varietyof medical exceptions in the Harrison Act were inapplicable.21Third, even though the Supreme Court had upheld the HarrisonAct's prohibition against purchase by unregistered persons of thedesignated drugs, there was some uncertainty whether the earlier5-4 decision22 would be followed. Accordingly, the Marihuana TaxAct imposed a prohibitive tax of $100 an ounce on the designatedtransactions, rather than prohibit the purchases directly.23 The brief three days of hearings on the Act24 present a casestudy in legislative carelessness. At no time was any primaryempirical evidence presented about the effects of the drug, andthe participating congressmen seem never to have questioned theassumed evils. Furthermore, the only real concerns seem to havebeen that farmers would be inconvenienced by having to kill aplant which grew wild in many parts of the country, and that thebirdseed, paint and varnish, and domestic hemp industries wouldbe damaged by passage of the law.25 Finally, the one witnessappearing in opposition to the bill, Dr. William C. Woodward,legislative counsel of the American Medical Association and anearly and respected participant in the drafting of the UniformNarcotic Drug Act,26 was roundly insulted for his audacity indaring to question the wisdom of the Act. We reproduce in the following few pages some of the dialoguefrom the hearings, to give the reader the flavor of theseramshackle proceedings, and to allow him to understand more fullythe pyramiding of absurdity represented by the amendments of the1950's. From the hearings we extract contemporary perception ofuse patterns and harmful effects of marijuana, the quality ofmedical and other evidence presented, and a short glimpse at howthe witnesses were treated by the committee. 1. Who Were Users? The record of the hearings indicates quite clearly that theFederal Narcotics Bureau was anxious for the committeemen tobelieve marijuana use was a relatively new phenomenon that was onthe increase in America.27 Once again, marijuana use and theMexican minority were closely linked: "The Mexican laborershave brought seeds of this plant into Montana and it is fastbecoming a terrible menace, particularly in the counties wheresugarbeets are grown."28 Again, also, marijuana waspresented as the agent by which the underworld class hoped toenslave American youth.29 The youth of the marijuana users wascontrasted with the increasing age of the usual opiate addict.Perhaps most interestingly for later developments, CommissionerAnslinger succinctly noted that heroin addicts and marijuanausers came from totally different classes and that the use of onedrug was unrelated to use of the other: Mr. Anslinger. This drug is not being used by those who have been using heroin and morphine. It is being used by a different class, by a much younger group of people. The age of the morphine and heroin addict is increasing all the time, whereas the marihuana smoker is quite young. Mr. Dingell. I am just wondering whether the marihuana addict graduates into a heroin, an opium or cocaine user. Mr. Anslinger. No sir; I have not heard of a case of that kind. I think it is an entirely different class. The marihuana addict does not go in that direction30 The hearings shed no more light on who was using the drug andin what numbers. 2. What's Wrong with Marijuana? If the proceedings did not shed light on the patterns ofusage, this in no way was an obstacle to unanimity on the evilsof the drug-insanity, criminality and death. Three major sourceswere relied on to support this consensus (1) a variety of horrorstories from newspapers cited by Mr. Anslinger and others aboutatrocious criminal acts committed by individuals under theinfluence of the drug;31 (2) studies by Eugene Stanley, theDistrict Attorney of New Orleans, linking the drug and thepopulation of the Louisiana jails;32 and (3) some inconclusiveexperimentation on dogs.33 As we noted earlier, the newspaperstories about crimes committed under the influence of marijuanahave two things in common: The reports are unsubstantiated, andmany of the accused invoked their use of marijuana as a defenseto the charge .34 The New Orleans report concluded: "After an exhaustiveresearch on marijuana from its earliest history to the presenttime, this drug is in our judgment the one that must beeliminated entirely." 35 What was this exhaustive research?It appears to have been nothing but quotations from the mosthysterical series of newspaper articles to appear at that time36and reports of the number of marijuana addicts to be found in theprison population.37 The relation of these figures to theconclusion that the drug must be regulated was never established. The Stanley study38 was even less well documented and evenmore outrageous in its description of the effects of marijuanause. "It is an ideal drug to quickly cut offinhibitions." 39 For this proposition Stanley relied on thestory of the Persian "Assassins" who allegedlycommitted acts of terror while under the influence of hashish.Although Stanley included in his list of references the IndianHemp Drugs Commission Report, it is clear he made little effortto catalogue the then available data but contented himself with anumber of bold and undocumented assertions. In reading thehearings, one continues to expect some report of a medical orscientific survey, and instead one finds these two reports by NewOrleans law enforcers. The contrary conclusions of the Canal Zonestudies were not even mentioned. Finally, a scientific study of the effects of marijuana waspresented, but, in keeping with the overall tone of the hearings,this was the most preposterous evidence of all. The TreasuryDepartment presented a pharmacologist who had tested the effectsof the cannabis drugs on dogs. 40 He concluded that"[c]ontinuous use will tend to cause the degeneration of onepart of the brain." 41. One paragraph later, however, this scientist stated:"Only about 1 dog in 300 is very sensitive to thetest."42 Later in the doctor's testimony, after he hadstated over and over the potential evils found from the testingon dogs, he was unable to make the crucial link between a dog'sresponse to the drug and the human response. More incredibly, asthe following exchange points out, the doctor really had noknowledge of what effect the drug had on the dogs, since he wasnot familiar with the psychology of dogs: Mr. McCormack. Have you experimented upon any animals whose reaction to this drug would be similar to that of human beings. Dr. Munch. The reason we use dogs is because the reaction of dogs to this drug, closely resembles the reaction of human beings. Mr. McCormack. And the continued use of it, as you have observed the reaction on dogs, has resulted in the disintegration of the personality? Dr. Munch. Yes. So far as I can tell, not being a dog psychologist .... 43 Dr. Woodward, the sole witness representing the AmericanMedical Association, noted the inadequacy of these medicalstatistics. We include his statement on that point in full: That there is a certain amount of narcotic addiction of an objectionable character no one will deny. The newspapers have called attention to it so prominently that there must be some grounds for their statements. It has surprised me, however, that the facts on which these statements have been based have not been brought before this committee by competent primary evidence. We arc referred to newspaper publications concerning the prevalence of marihuana addiction. We are told that the use of marihuana causes crime. But yet no one has been produced from the Bureau of Prisons to show the number of prisoners who have been found addicted to the marihuana habit. An informal inquiry shows that the Bureau of Prisons has no evidence on that point. You have been told that school children are great users of marihuana cigarettes. No one has been summoned from the Children's Bureau to show the nature and extent of the habit, among children. Inquiry of the Children's Bureau shows that they have had no occasion to investigate it and know nothing particularly of it. Inquiry of the Office of Education-and they certainly should know something of the prevalence of the habit among the school children of the country, if there is a prevalent habit-indicates that they have had no occasion to investigate and know nothing of it. Moreover, there is in the Treasury Department itself, the Public Health Service, with its Division of Mental Hygiene. The Division of Mental Hygiene was, in the first place, the Division of Narcotics. It was converted into the Division of Mental Hygiene, I think, about 1930. That particular Bureau has control at the present time of the narcotics farms that were created about 1929 or 1930 and came into operation a few years later. No one his been summoned from that Bureau to give evidence on that point. Informal inquiry by me indicates that they have had no record of any marihuana or Cannabis addicts who have even been committed to those farms. The Bureau of the Public Health Service has also a division of pharmacology. If you desire evidence as to the pharmacology, of Cannabis, that obviously is the place where you can get direct and primary evidence, rather than the indirect hearsay evidence. 44 Dr. Woodward's testimony clearly manifests the deficiencies ofthe hearings, for at no time did the congressional committee hearprimary sources of competent medical evidence before labelingcannabis the producer of crime and insanity. 3. How Dare You Dissent! Following the testimony of the Treasury Department and itswitnesses, the only witnesses who came forward wererepresentatives of legitimate industries that feared the Tax Actwould damage their businesses, because manufacture of theirproducts required some part or parts of the cannabis plant.45These witnesses were assured that the Tax Act would have littleif any impact on their operations .46 The one witness who opposed the adoption of the Act wasroundly accused of obstructionism and bad faith. Dr. Woodward,one of the chief drafters of the Uniform Narcotic Drug Act,appeared on behalf of the AMA to suggest that, if there was to beany regulation of the cannabis drugs at all, it should be addedto the Harrison Act and not be the subject of this separate, andhe felt inadequately considered, legislative proposal.47 We havealready examined Dr. Woodward's skepticism on the dangers of thedrug. He added to this a thinly veiled attack on the lack ofcooperation the AMA had received from the Federal Bureau ofNarcotics.48 Finally, he advocated either assisting stateenforcement of their existing laws dealing with the drug or atmost including marijuana as a regulated and taxed drug under theHarrison Act. Either because of antipathy to the AMA or because of theaudacity of these suggestions, the Committee members savagelyattacked both Dr. Woodward and the AMA. Witness the followingexchange, starting with the doctor's answer to questions why, hehad not proposed marijuana legislation Dr. Woodward. In the first place, it is not a medical addiction that is involved and the data do not come before the medical society. You may absolutely forbid the use of Cannabis by any physician, or the disposition of Cannabis by any pharmacist in the country, and you would not have touched your Cannabis addiction as it stands today, because there is no relation between it and the practice of medicine or pharmacy. It is entirely outside of the those two branches. The Chairman. If the statement that you have made has any relation to the question that I asked, I just do not have the mind to understand it; I am sorry. Dr. Woodward. I say that we do not ordinarily come directly to Congress if a department can take care of the matter. I have talked with the Commissioner, with Commissioner Anslinger. The Chairman. If you want to advise us on legislation, you ought to come here with some constructive proposals, rather than criticism, rather than trying to throw obstacles in the way of something that the Federal Government is trying to do. It has not only an unselfish motive in this, but the), have a serious responsibility. Dr. Woodward. We cannot understand yet, Mr. Chairman, why this bill should have been prepared in secret for 2 years without any intimation, even, to the profession, that it was being prepared .49 After accusing Dr. Woodward of obstruction, evasion and badfaith, the Committee did not even thank him for his testimony.50 D. Congressional "Deliberation" and Action We noted earlier that the marijuana "problem" andthe proposed federal cure were virtually unnoticed by the generalpublic. Unable to arouse public opinion through its educationalcampaign, the Bureau of Narcotics nevertheless pushed theproposed legislation through congressional committees. TheCommittee members were convinced by meaningless evidence thatfederal action was urgently needed to suppress a problem that wasno greater and probably less severe than it had been in thepreceding six years when every state had passed legislation tosuppress it. The Committee was also convinced, incorrectly, thatthe public was aware of the evil and demanded federal action. The debate on the floor of Congress shows both the low publicvisibility of the legislation and the nonchalance of thelegislators. The bill passed the House of Representatives in thevery late afternoon of a long session; many of the members wereacquainted neither with marijuana nor with the purpose of theAct. When the bill first came to the House floor late on June 10,1937, one congressman objected to considering the bill at such alate hour, whereupon the following colloquy occurred: Mr. DOUGHTON. I ask unanimous consent for the present consideration of the bill (H.R. 6906) to impose an occupational excise tax upon certain dealers in marihuana, to impose a transfer tax upon certain dealings in marihuana, and to safeguard the revenue therefrom by registry and recording. The Clerk read the title of the bill. Mr. SNELL. Mr. Speaker, reserving the right to object, and notwithstanding the fact that my friend, Reed, is in favor of it, is this a matter we should bring up at this late hour of the afternoon? I do not know anything about the bill. It may be all right and it may be that everyone is for it, but as a general principle, I am against bringing up any important legislation, and I suppose this is important, since it comes from the Ways and Means Committee, at this late hour of the day. Mr. RAYBURN. Mr. Speaker, if the gentleman will yield, I may say that the gentleman from North Carolina has stated to me that this bill has a unanimous report from the committee and that there is no controversy about it. Mr. SNELL. What is the bill? Mr. RAYBURN. It has something to do with something that is called marihuana. I believe it is a narcotic of some kind. Mr. FRED M. VINSON. Marihuana is the same as hashish. Mr. SNELL. Mr. Speaker, I am not going to object but I think, it is wrong to consider legislation of this character at this time of night.51 On June 14 when the bill finally emerged on the House floor,four representatives in one way or another asked that theproponents explain the provisions of the Act. Instead of adetailed analysis, they received a statement of one of themembers of the Ways and Means Committee repeating uncriticallythe lurid criminal acts Anslinger had attributed to marijuanausers at the hearings. After less than two pages of debate. theAct passed without a roll call.52 When the bill returned asamended from the Senate, the House considered it once again, andadopted as quickly as possible the Senate suggestions, which wereall minor.53 The only question was whether the AMA agreed withthe bill. Mr. Fred Vinson not only said they did not object whenin fact their committee witness had dissented strenuously, but healso claimed that the bill had AMA support. After turning Dr.Woodward's testimony on its head, he also called him by anothername, Wharton.54 In summary, the Act passed the Congress with little debate andeven less public attention. Provoked almost entirely by theFederal Bureau of Narcotics and by a few hysterical state lawenforcement agents hoping to get federal support for theiractivities, the law was tied neither to scientific study nor toenforcement need. The Marihuana Tax Act was hastily drawn, heard,debated and passed; it was the paradigm of the uncontroversiallaw. E. Provisions of the Act Except for the three differences noted above, the MarihuanaTax Act is modeled directly after the earlier federal tax actregulating the opiates -the Harrison Act. As with that Act, theenforcement of the new marijuana tax was left to the Bureau ofNarcotics in the Treasury Department. Thus, as a result of the1937 statute, the jurisdiction of the Bureau was increasedsubstantially.55 The Marihuana Tax Act deals specifically with the seeds, resinand most other parts and derivatives of the plant Cannabis SativaL. The Act requires persons importing, producing,56 selling or inany other way dealing with the drug to pay an occupational taxand to register with the Internal Revenue Service. In addition,all transferees of marijuana are required to file a written orderform and to pay a transfer tax, $1 per ounce if registered and aprohibitive $100 per ounce if not registered . 57 Possession ofthe drug without a written order form constitutes presumptiveevidence of noncompliance with the Act. It is also unlawful for atransferor to transfer the drug to a person who has not securedthe order form and paid the tax. As originally enacted, section12 of the Act assessed a fine of not more than $2,000 and/orimprisonment for not more than five years for violation of eachprovision of the Act. Footnotes and References 1 The best example of this argument is contained inCommissioner Anslinger's statement to the congressional committeehearings on the Marihuana Tax Act: STATE LAWS All of the States now have some type of legislation directedagainst the traffic in marijuana for improper purposes. There isno legislation in effect with respect to the District of Columbiadealing with marijuana traffic. There is unfortunately a loopholein much of this State legislation because of a too narrowdefinition of this term. Few of the States have a specialnarcotic law enforcement agency and, speaking generally,considerable training of the regular peace officers will berequired together with increased enforcement facilities before areasonable measure of effectiveness under the State laws can beachieved. NEED FOR FEDERAL LEGISLATION Even in States which have legislation controlling in somedegree the marijuana traffic, public officials, private citizens,and the press have urged or suggested the need for nationallegislation dealing with this important problem. A partial listof States wherein officials or the press have urged the need forFederal legislation on the subject are Colorado, Kansas, NewMexico, Louisiana, and Oklahoma. The uniform State narcotic law has now been adopted by some 35States, many of these including cannabis or marijuana within thescope of control by that law. However, it has recently beenlearned that the legislative definition of cannabis in most ofthese laws is too narrow, and it will be necessary to have thedefinition amplified in amendatory legislation in most of theStates, to accord with the definition in the pending Federalbill. As is the case at present with respect to opium, cocaleaves, and their respective alkaloids, the uniform State lawdoes not completely solve the enforcement problem with respect tomarijuana but it will provide the necessary supplement to theFederal act and permit cooperation of State and Federal forces,each acting within its respective sphere, toward suppression oftraffic for abusive use, no matter in what form the traffic isconducted. The Bureau of Narcotics, under the Marijuana TaxingAct, would continue to act as an informal coordinating agency inthe enforcement of the Uniform State law, exchanging informationas between the respective State authorities in the methods ofprocedure and attempting to secure true uniformity in theenforcement of the act in the various States which have adoptedit. Tax Act Hearings 31. 2 Mandel, Problems with Official Drug Statistics, 21 STAN. L.REV. 991, 1002 (1969). This article is the most completediscussion of the present inadequacies of all official drugstatistics. 3 Tax Act Hearings 26-27. 4 The FBN statistics for 1935 through 1937 on quantities (inpounds) of harvested marijuana seized by state and municipalauthorities in the major states are as follows: 1935 1936 1937 Louisiana 20 1,196 30 Mississippi 5 1,309 * New York 372,000 1 * Ohio 17,314 431 86 Texas 216 463 20 All other states 2,232 1,972 120 TOTALS 391,787 5,372 256 BUREAU OF NARCOTICS, U.S. TREASURY DEP'T, TRAFFIC IN OPIUM ANDOTHER DANGEROUS DRUGS 63 (1935) [hereinafter cited as TRAFFIC INOpium]; id. at 90 (1936); id. at 81 (1937); Part of the erraticquality of these figures may stem from failure to weigh only thedried flowering tops of the plants seized. For example, 256pounds seized in 1937 may represent a larger quantity of totalplants than 391,787 pounds seized in 1935. See Mandel, supra note2, at 999. 5 N.Y. Times, Oct. 18, 1934, at 4, col. 4. The article goes onto refer to "mariajuana [sic], or loco weed, which producesa pleasant, relaxed sensation when smoked, and eventually drivesthe habitual user insane 6 Id., July 17, 1935, at 8, Col. 8. 7 See id., Aug. 19, 1936, at 16, col. 3; id., July 28, 1936,at 11, col. 6. 8 See Tax Act Hearings 3 S. 9 TRAFFIC IN OPIUM 90 (1936). 10 See Tax Act Hearings 26. 11 See, eg., THE MARIHUANA PAPERS at xv (D. Solomon ed. 1966).See also H. BECKER, OUTSIDERS 140-42 (1963). 12 Becker's survey of marijuana-related articles in theReaders' Guide to Periodical Literature between January 1925 andMarch 1951 indicates no articles written before July 1935, fourarticles written between July 1935 and June 1937, and seventeenwritten between July 1937 and June 1939. H. BECKER, OUTSIDERS 141(1963). 13 The Readers' Guide citations are: Anslinger & Cooper,Marihuana: Assassin of Youth, Am. MAGAZINE, July 1937, at 18;Parry, Menace: Marihuana, 36 Am. MERCURY 487 (1935); Simon, FromOpium to Hash Eesh, Sci. Am., Nov. 1921, at 14; Wolf, Uncle SamFights a New Drug Menace, POPULAR SCI, May 1936, at 14; Facts andFancies About Marihuana, LITERARY DIGEST, Oct. 24, 1936, at 7;Marihuana Menaces Youth, Sci. Am., Mar. 1936, at 150; Our HomeHasheesh, Crop, LITERARY DiGEST, .Apr. 3, 1926, at 64. 14 See text at notes 47-50 infra. 15 108 JA.M.A. 1543-44 (1937). 16 See St. Louis Star-Times, Jan. 17-Feb. 19, 1935. 17 See, e.g., N.Y. Times, Jan. 3, 1937, S 6, at 6, col. 4. Thearticle reported a meeting between Anslinger and the chairwomanof the New York Federation of Women's Clubs. After the meeting,the chairwoman started an all out campaign against marijuana,focusing on lobbying for the nationwide passage of statelegislation, and on an educational program aimed at educatinghigh school students on the dangers of the drug, Another New YorkTimes article described the appearance of a representative of theFederal Bureau of Narcotics at a meeting of the national Parentsand Teachers Association held in Richmond, Virginia, urging themembers of the association to help fight the menace of marijuanawhich produced in its users "a temporary sense of completeirresponsibility which led to sex crimes and other 'horrible'acts of violence." N.Y. Times, May 4, 1937, at 26, col. 1. 18 Id., July 24, 1936, at 6, col. 3; id., July 29, 1936, atII, col. 6; id., Aug. 14, 1936. at 12, co]. 3; id., Aug. 19,1936, at 16, col. 3; id., Oct. 4, 1936, S 1, at 3, col. 3; id.,Oct. 28, 1936, at 27, col, 6; id., Jan. 3, 1937,  6, at 6, col.4; id., Mar. 22, 1937, at 24, col. 1; id., May 4, 1937, at 26,col. 1. 19 Id., Aug. 3, 1937, at 4, col. 5. 20 Compare Tax Act Hearings 13-14 (testimony of ClintonHester, Office of the General Counsel of the Treasury Department)with State v. Bonoa, 172 La. 955, 136 So. 15 (1931). It should beasked whether the information at congressional disposal changedso drastically between 1937 and 1956 as to justify the statutorypresumption enacted at that time, 21 U.S.C. 5 176a (1964),providing that possession of marijuana was presumptive evidenceof knowing concealment of illegally imported marijuana. 21 Tax Act Hearings 13-14. Earlier state statutes,particularly Virginia's, had taken great pains to outline medicalexemptions from the marijuana prohibition. See p. 1040 supra. 22 United States v. Doremus, 249 U.S. 86 (1919). 23 Tax Act Hearings 13-14. 24 The hearings, including all material not actively discussedbut merely read into the record, cover only 124 pages. 25 Tax Act Hearings 77-86; see State v. Bonoa, 172 La. 955,136 So. 15 (1931). 26 See pp. 1030-32 supra. 27 See Tax Act Hearings 30-3 1. 28 Id. at 45. 29 Quoting Dr. Walter Bromberg, Mr. Anslinger stated: Young men between the ages of 16 and 25 are frequent smokersof marihuana; even boys of 10 to 14 are initiated (frequently inschool groups); to them as to others, marihuana holds out thethrill. Since the economic depression the number of marihuanasmokers was increased by vagrant youths coming into intimatecontact with older psychopaths. Tax Act Hearings 24. See also id. at 32-35, 39, 45. 30 Id. at 24. 31 Id. at 22-23. 32 Id. at 32-37. 33 Id. at 50-52. 34 See id. at 22-23. It is entirely likely that some of theseparticularly lurid stores were the product of desperatedefendants, who, upon being caught red-handed in the commissionof crime, sought mitigation of their penalties by claiming to beunder the influence of the drug. See Bromberg, Marijuana: APsychiatric Study, 113 J.A.M.A. 4 (1939). Bromberg cautions,"The extravagant claims of defense attorneys and the pressthat crime is caused by addiction to marihuana demands [sic]careful scrutiny, at least in this jurisdiction [New YorkCounty)." Id. at 10. 35 Tax Act Hearings 35. 36 A good example is the series run by the St, LouisStar-Times in early 1935 which featured such articles as the oneentitled "Young Slaves to Dope Cigaret Pay Tragic Price forTheir Folly" on Jan. 18, 1935. 37 See Gomila & Gomila, Marihuana-A More Alarming Menaceto Society Than All Other Habit-Forming Drugs, quoted in Tax ActHearings 32, 34. Mr. F. R. Gomila was public safety director ofNew Orleans. 38 Stanley, Marihuana as a Developer of Criminals, 2 Am. J.Police Sci. 252 (1931), quoted in Tax Act Hearings 37-42, isbased on, and indeed is nearly a word-for-word paraphrase of,Fossier's article in the New Orleans Medical journal, supra note91 at P. 1044. As we have seen, Fossier, in reaching hisconclusions, overlooked the Panama Canal Zone study. 39 Tax Act Hearings 39. 40 0ne assumes the drug was thought to be too dangerous torisk experimentation on people. 41 Tax Act Hearings 48. 42 Id. 43 Id. at 51. 44 Id. at 92. 45 Thus, the following witnesses appeared: Hon. Ralph E.Lozier, General Counsel of the National Institute of OilseedProducts; Raymond G. Scarlett of the birdseed industry; andJoseph B. Hertzfeld, Manager, Feed Department, The PhiladelphiaSeed Co. 46 See id. at 74. 47 Id. at 87-121. 48 Id. at 87-88 ("During the past 2 years I have visitedthe Bureau of Narcotics probably 10 or more times. Unfortunately,I had no knowledge that such a bill as this was proposed untilafter it had been introduced"). 49 Id. at 116. 50 See id. at 121. There is sonic indication in Fred Vinson'squestioning of Dr. Woodward that one cause of the hostilitydirected at the witness was the growing disfavor with which theNew Deal Congress viewed the fairly conservative AMA. Vinson wasparticularly pointed when he said that the AMA was trying toobstruct here as it had with the Health Care provisions of theSocial Security Act, Id. it 102-04. 51 81 CONG. REC. 5575 (1937). 52 Id. at 5689-92. 53 Id. at 7624-25. 54 Id. at 7625. 55 See Dickson, Bureaucracy and Morality: An OrganizationalPerspective an a Moral Crusade, 16 SOCIAL PROD. 143 (1968)(relating this expansion of the Bureau's area of enforcement totheir solid support for the need of such federal legislation). 56 Section 4 (b) of the Act (now INT. REV. CODE Of 1954, 4755 (a) (2) ) gives rise to a presumption that one is a producerof marijuana within the terms of the Act if marijuana is foundgrowing on his property. 57 The Act does not prohibit possession or purchase ofmarijuana per se. Contents | Feedback | Search DRCNet Library | Schaffer Library | Major Studies The Forbidden Fruit and the Tree ofKnowledgeWT02-B02-9IA086-000614-B044-85http://206.61.184.43:80/schaffer/Library/studies/vlr/vlr5.htm 206.61.184.43 19970122021241 text/html 62411HTTP/1.0 200 OKDate: Wednesday, 22-Jan-97 02:12:12 GMTServer: WebSitePro/1.1f (S/N wpo-0deb)Allow-ranges: bytesContent-type: text/htmlLast-modified: Saturday, 28-Dec-96 06:47:45 GMTContent-length: 62193 A New Rationale - The "Stepping Stone" Theory Contents | Feedback | Search DRCNet Library | Schaffer Library | Major Studies The Forbidden Fruit and the Tree ofKnowledge THE FORBIDDEN FRUIT AND THE TREE OF KNOWLEDGE: AN INQUIRYINTO THE LEGAL HISTORY OF AMERICAN MARIJUANA PROHIBITION Richard J. Bonnie & Charles H.Whitebread, II VI. THE 1950's: HARSHER PENALTIES AND A NEW RATIONALE-THE"STEPPING STONE" THEORY The 1950's witnessed the advent of an extremist legislativepolicy with respect to drugs generally and marijuana inparticular. For the first time in our national history, there waspublic interest in narcotic drugs. Apparently there had been anincrease in narcotic drug abuse in the late 40's, and the publicmind was ripe for the FBN propaganda. In the paranoid atmosphereof the times, the call for harsher penalties was soothing.Unfortunately, marijuana was caught in the turbulence of thisera. Although the pharmacological facts about the drug werebeginning to emerge, congressional furor was aroused by the novelassertion, rejected by Commissioner Anslinger in 1937, that useof marijuana led to use of harder drugs. This new plateau ofmisinformation was to provide the base for continual escalationof penalties and proliferation of offenses throughout the decade. A. The Boggs Act and Its Progeny: The First Escalation In 1951 Congress passed the next major piece of federalnarcotics legislation-the Boggs Act .2 The importance of thislegislation is that provided much harsher penalties for all drugviolators. Also, for the first time on the federal level,marijuana and other narcotics were lumped together as a result ofthe Act's provision for uniform penalties for violators of eitherthe Narcotic Drugs Import and Export Act3 or the Marihuana TaxAct.4 This indiscriminate treatment of marijuana as just anothernarcotic drug flew in the face of contemporary testimonychallenging the assumption that the hemp drugs were addictive,crime-producing, and likely to lead to insanity and death. Newtestimony that marijuana was unlikely to be addictive was buriedunder the new rationale for harsh penalties against offenders ofthe marijuana laws-that the drug inevitably is the stepping stoneto heroin addiction. Eventually, the states followed the federallead in striking out against drug violators with the samemindless fervor that characterized their anti-communistcampaigns. 1. The Problem: Increased Narcotics Use The hearings before the Subcommittee of the House Ways andMeans Committee and the floor debate show that the primary reasonfor passage of the Boggs Act was the increase in narcotic use inthe period 1948-1951. Testimony and evidence from a wide varietyof sources indicated an abrupt and substantial increase inaddiction, especially among teenagers, between 1947 and 1951.5Young people under 21 who had rarely been addicts suddenly becamea predominant group involved in addiction and narcotics crimes.6Representative Boggs, speaking during the congressional debateson his bill, enunciated a concern which was reflected in manyother quarters. After noting that there had been a 24 percentincrease in arrests for narcotics violations between 1949 and1950 and a 77 percent increase between 1948 and 1950,Representative Boggs stated: The most shocking part about these figures is the fact that there has been an alarming increase in drug addiction among younger persons. In the first- 6 months of 1946, the average age of addicted persons committed . . . at Lexington, Ky. was 37.5 years. Only 3 patients were under the age of 21. During the first 6 months of 1950, only 4 years later, the average had dropped to 26.7 years, and 766 patients were under the age of 21.... [I]n New York City alone it has been estimated that 1 out of every 200 teenagers is now addicted to some type of narcotics.7 Later he said, "We need only to recall what we have readin the papers in the past week to realize that more and moreyounger people are falling into the clutches of unscrupulous dopepeddlers . . . ." 8 Representative Boggs then proceeded to insert in the recordeleven newspaper and magazine articles dated between May 2 andJuly 16, 1951.9 The Washington Evening Star of July 16 (the dayof the debate) carried a story on the results of a mayor'scommittee report on drug addiction in New York City. According tothe newspaper, "between 45,000 and 90,000 persons in NewYork City are using illicit dope.... Based on the city'spopulation of 7,835,099, that would be 1 out of every 87 or 1 outof 174 persons." The paper indicated that the report showedan increase in addiction among teenagers, and it called for"more severe penalties for dope sellers, and for wholesalerevisions of Federal and State penal statutes relating tosale." An article in Time magazine of June 25, 1951, inserted by Mr.Boggs, related New York City School Superintendent WilliamJansen's statement that one out of every 200 high school studentsin the city was a user of habit forming drugs. The article wenton to describe the alarming increases in dope consumption"in other major cities and the ease with which school childrenobtained narcotics. Another article, in the Washington EveningStar of June 12, 1951, contained statements by a member of thestaff of the Attorney General of New York to the effect thatbetween 5,000 and 15,000 of New York City's 300,000 high schoolstudents were drug addicts. To supplement the stock figures,these articles included the testimony of witnesses who describedtheir own acts of prostitution and thievery, the loss ofeducational opportunities, the death of addicts from "hotshots," the horrors of withdrawal, and a wide variety ofother aspects of drug abuse. This evidence of increasing use of narcotics, especially amongthe young, and the fear that narcotics use would continue tospread, presented a problem that Congress felt needed a quick andeffective solution. 2. The Solution: Harsher Penalties In the same way that the congressional hearings,investigations and debates reflect the impetus for enactment ofthe Boggs Act, they also reveal the official and public consensusas to the solution-harsher penalties. Perhaps CommissionerAnslinger best described the prevailing climate when he stated: Short sentences do not deter. In districts where we get good sentences the traffic does not flourish.... There should be a minimum sentence for the second offense. The commercialized transaction, the peddler, the smuggler, those who traffic in narcotics, on the second offense if there were a minimum sentence of 5 years without probation or parole, I think it would just about dry up the traffic.10 This statement before the Committee was quoted byRepresentative Boggs during the congressional debate on his bill,along with the Kefauver Committee's recommendation that"mandatory penalties of imprisonment of at least 5 yearsshould be provided for second offenders." 11 RepresentativeBoggs indicated that his bill was to incorporate the KefauverCommittee recommendations of mandatory minimum sentences for drugpeddlers and had as its principal purpose ... to remove the powerof suspension of sentence and probation in the cases of secondand subsequent offenders against the narcotics and marijuanalaws, and to provide minimum sentences .... 12 Moreover, Representative Boggs and others supported themandatory minimum sentences because they felt some federal hadbeen lax in enforcing the narcotic laws 13 and because theybelieved harsher penalties had reduced crimes, particularlykidnapping and the white slave trade, in other areas.14Representative Edwin Arthur Hall of New York urged substitutionof his bill, which provided for minimum sentences of 100 yearsfor dope peddlers.15 Although there was some opposition to theBoggs Act, notably by Representative Celler, who thought that themandatory minimum sentence provision would be unjust foraddicts,16 the majority opinion was clearly that mandatoryminimum sentences were necessary to insure punishment ofpeddlers.17 In response to Mr. Celler's contention that youngaddicts could be subjected to long prison terms because of theloss of judicial discretion in sentencing, Representative Jenkinsstated: The enforcing officers will always have sympathy for the unfortunate consumer, especially if he is harmless. These enforcing officers are going to protect the little boys and little girls. They are not going to drag the high school boys and girls before the criminal courts until they know that they are collaborating with the peddlers18 Mr. Boggs presented a more reasonable justification formandatory minimums: [I]t is not the intention of this legislation to affect a teen-ager or any such person who has possession of narcotics. But the gentleman also knows that if we try to make a distinction between possession and peddling that we immediately open the law to all types of abuses.19 The Act as passed provided uniform penalties for violations ofthe Narcotic Drugs Import and Export Act and the Marihuana TaxAct. The penalties prescribed were: First offense 2 - 5 years Second offense 5 - 10 years Third and subsequent offenses 10 - 20 years Fine for all offenses $2,000.00 The relatively low fines reflected a congressional belief thatmonetary penalties were an insignificant deterrent.20 Anessential provision of the Act removed judicial discretion insentencing by providing that upon conviction for a second orsubsequent offense the imposition or execution of the sentencecould not be suspended nor probation granted. As in the nontaxpredecessors of the Boggs Act since 1909 and the Marihuana TaxAct, possession of a narcotic drug was sufficient for convictionunless the defendant could explain the possession to thesatisfaction of the jury.21 3. Marijuana and the Boggs Act Congressional and public attention was clearly focused on hardnarcotics use, primarily the opiates. Judging from the recordedproceedings, especially the floor debate in the House, marijuanaseems to have been along for the ride, much as it had been duringenactment of the Uniform Narcotic Drug Act. However, here therewas a conscious decision to include marijuana violations in thenew penalty provisions. Underlying this decision weredeterminations that marijuana use had also increased during thelater 1940's, that it too was spreading to white teenagers, andthat the drug's dangers, warranted the harsh treatmentcontemplated by the Act. (a) Increased Use.-To test the allegation of an increase inmarijuana use during this period, we have used the seizure andenforcement figures used by the proponents of the legislation.These figures tend to sustain the hypothesis that marijuanatraffic increased from 1948 to 1951, following a declinethroughout the early 40's. However, the figures are alsoconsistent with other hypotheses, for example that improvedenforcement techniques and increased state-federal cooperationhad increased arrests. Federal agents of the Narcotics Bureau began vigorouslyenforcing the Marihuana Tax Act almost as soon as PresidentRoosevelt signed it into law. From October 1 to December 31,1937, alone, the FBN made 369 seizures totaling 229 kilograms ofthe drug.22 Moreover, state officials made extensive seizures either inconjunction with FBN agents or in pursuance of their newly-passedstate controls over marijuana's Marijuana seizures by federalauthorities hit their low point in 1945 when only 257 kilogramswere taken, 128 of which were seized by the FBN and the rest byUnited States Customs agents .24 At this time the FBN hadapproximately 180 agents.25 This low seizure figure suggests adecrease in marijuana use throughout the early 1940 's.26 Beginning in about 1948, however, the arrest and seizure 27figures rose dramatically, the arrest figures rising 33 percentfrom 1947 to 1948. These figures tend to corroborate theCommissioner's assertion that there was a drastic increase innarcotics use between 1948 and 1951 28 and to justify thesimultaneous calls for amendment of the narcotics and marijuanalaws.29 On the other hand, these figures could reflect increasedor I improved enforcement. For example, in 1949 the FBN had begunto encourage the largest cities to form special narcotics squadsto deal especially with the drug problem.30 By 1951, however,only New York and Los Angeles had formed the separate policedetail the FBN had requested .31 Thus even if one were tempted totry to correct for improvements in the law enforcement machinery,the seizure figures for the late 40's and 50's do sustain thenotion that the traffic in marijuana increased from 1948 to 1951. (b) Youthful Users.-As with the hard narcotics, Congress wasespecially alarmed by the alleged spread of marijuana to whiteteenagers and school children. Militating against thisproposition is evidence that marijuana use was not widespreadamong the young as late as 1944. In that year, the famous LaGuardia Report reached the following conclusions among others:Marijuana use was widespread in the Borough of Manhattan buttended to be limited to certain areas, notably Harlem; themajority of marijuana smokers were Negroes and Latin-Americans,and marijuana smoking was not widespread among school children.32 The La Guardia study portrays marijuana use in this period asa rather casual adjunct to ghetto life. Since it was not costly,this euphoriant was well within the reach of ghetto residents. Itappears that throughout the early 40's marihuana use in the Westas well as in the East continued to be associated with the ethnicminorities, especially in the inner city.33 The fear that marihuana use would spread to white teenagers isone that has recurred since the earliest legislative cognizance.In fact, it was probably a factor in the early opium laws .34 Wehave been unable to confirm whether the fear was justified atthis time, but in light of the documentation of increasednarcotics use among the young, we shall presume the same usepatterns to be true of marihuana. (c) The Danger: A New Rationale.-The FBN had begun itseducational campaign for harsher marihuana penalties immediatelyafter passage of the Tax Act." In the early years, thecampaign was particularly effective with judges. For example, inone of the first cases under the Tax Act, a Colorado judgestated: I consider marihuana the worst of all narcotics-far worse than the use of morphine or cocaine. Under its influence men become beasts, just as was the case with [the defendant]. Marihuana destroys life itself. I have no sympathy With those who sell this weed. In the future I will impose the heaviest penalties. The Government is going to enforce this new law to the letter.36 The crime, pauperism and insanity rationale was acceptedunquestioningly as late as 1951.37 Under this rationale, harsherpenalties were certainly as imperative for marijuana offenders asthey were for opiate offenders. However, in a paper filed as anexhibit to the hearings38 on the Boggs Act, Dr. Harris Isbell,Director of Research at the Public Health Service hospital inLexington, Kentucky, exploded the traditional rationale. Hestated that marijuana was not physically addictive.39 Although hepostulated a definition of addiction which amounts to nothingmore than chronic intoxication 40 and noted the possibility of"temporary psychoses" in "predisposedindividuals," Isbell's description of marijuana wasextraordinarily favorable. Before the Kefauver Committee hetestified: Marijuana smokers generally are mildly intoxicated, giggle, laugh, bother no one, and have a good time. They do not stagger or fall, and ordinarily will not attempt to harm anyone. It has not been proved that smoking marijuana leads to crimes of violence or to crimes of a sexual nature. Smoking marijuana has no unpleasant after-effects, no dependence is developed on the drug, and the practice can easily be stopped at any time. In fact, it is probably easier to stop smoking marijuana cigarettes than tobacco cigarettes. In predisposed individuals, marijuana may precipitate temporary psychoses and is, therefore, not an innocuous practice with them.41 Dr. Isbell's statements that marijuana does not cause aphysical dependence were supported by other doctors, 42 prisonofficials,43 and perhaps most significantly by the statement of anumber of narcotics addicts .44 Despite this testimony the legislators approved greatlyincreased penalties for marijuana users. The crucial reason forthis severe treatment can be seen in the following colloquyduring the House subcommittee hearings: Mr. Boggs. From just what little I saw in that demonstration, I have forgotten the figure Dr. Isbell gave, but my recollection is that only a small percentage of those marijuana cases was anything more than a temporary degree of exhilaration .... Mr. Anslinger. The danger is this: Over 50 percent of those young addicts started on marijuana smoking. They started there and graduated to heroin; they took the needle when the thrill of marijuana was gone.45 Many others -doctors ,46 crime prevention experts,47 policeand narcotics bureau officials48 -testified to the link betweenmarijuana use and ultimate heroin addiction. Representative Boggshimself summed up this novel danger of marijuana in one of thefew statements even to mention marijuana in House floor debate: Our younger people usually start on the road which leads to drug addiction by smoking marijuana. They then graduate into narcotic drugs-cocaine, morphine, and heroin. When these younger persons become addicted to the drugs, heroin, for example, which costs from $8 to $15 per day, they very often must embark on careers of crime . . . and prostitution . . . in order to buy the supply which they need.49 The passage of this new Federal Act marked a significant shiftin rationale for the illegal status of marijuana; that statusbecame more entrenched by the indiscriminate lumping of marijuanawith the other narcotic drugs. 4. The State Response: Mindless Escalation While the Boggs Act was still pending in Congress, the Bureauof Narcotics encouraged the states to modify their existingnarcotic and marijuana legislation to enact "penaltiessimilar to those provided for in the Boggs bill [which] would beof material assistance in the fight against the narcotictraffic." 50 Seventeen states (including Virginia) and theTerritory of Alaska responded by passing "little BoggsActs" by 1953, and eleven other states increased theirpenalties by 1956. In 1951, seven states and the Territory of Alaska passedpenalty provisions similar to those contained in the BoggsAct.,51 In addition, nine other states amended their drug laws toprovide for more severe penalties, but the provisions wereneither uniform nor identical to those provided for under thefederal measure. 52 In 1952, four more states, includingVirginia, amended the penalty provisions of their drug laws tobring them in line with the Boggs Act.53 Six more states followedsuit in 1953.54 Finally, in 1955 and 1956 two states, Ohio andLouisiana respectively, enacted penalty provisions which weresubstantially more severe than those passed previously in anyJurisdiction.55 The Virginia "little Boggs Act" was signed into lawon April 1, 1952 ,56 after having passed both housesunanimously.57 The measure was regarded as routine, and as one ofthe "less controversial" proposals to come before thelegislature during the 1952 session.58 It cleared the House on aday when bills were being passed "at the rate of about one aminute during some periods" 59 and won Senate approvalduring the final rush to complete business in the waning hours ofthe 1952 General Assembly. The Act produced three basic changes in Virginia's scheme ofnarcotics control. It added marijuana to those drugs whose salewas forbidden under the state's version of the Uniform NarcoticDrug Act; it created the new substantive crime of sale to aminor; and it provided for harsher penalties for violations ofthe drug laws.60 Prior to 1952, the Virginia anti-marijuana provision wasseparate from those provisions governing the sale of"hard" drugs. But the 1952 Act repealed this provisionand included marijuana under the state's general narcotic controllaw. As a result, a person illegally selling marijuana becamesubject to the same penalties imposed upon a person legallyvending such drugs as heroin, morphine and cocaine .61 The heart of the 1952 Act was the provision for stifferpenalties for the violation of Virginia's general narcotic lawsprohibiting the sale of drugs without a prescription. For thefirst offense, the penalty was imprisonment in the penitentiaryfor not less than three nor more than five years plus a fine ofnot more than $1,000. For the second offense, the penalty wasimprisonment for not less than five nor more than ten years and afine of not more than $2,000. For the third and succeedingoffenses, the penalties were fines of not more than $3,000 andimprisonment for not less than ten nor more than twenty years. The 1952 Act also made it a felony to sell, barter, peddle,exchange or otherwise dispense marijuana or any other narcoticdrug to a minor. Any person found guilty of such offense wassubject to imprisonment for a term of not less than ten years normore than thirty years, no part of which could be suspended, anda fine of not more than $ 1,000 for the first offense, $2,000 forthe second offense and $3,000 for the third and subsequentoffenses. Such a provision exemplifies the increasedsophistication of anti-narcotic legislation during the 1950's.Thus, the continued escalation of penalties for drug lawviolators was followed in Virginia. Moreover, despite the publicconcern and attention in the national media, in Virginia it isplain that the 1952 amendments to the narcotic laws passedvirtually unnoticed in the press .62 B. The Late 1950's: Another Escalation of the Penalties Whether because use had decreased or because the propagandistshad accomplished their main mission, the narcotics problemdropped almost entirely from public view after the Boggs Act waspassed. Nevertheless, state and federal police authorities, armedwith data suggesting that the strengthening of the drug laws hadat least halted the increase in drug use, pressed for furtherincreases in penalties in order entirely to root out the drugmenace. 63 Without significant debate or public interest,Congress responded by passing the Narcotic Control Act of 1956.64 Although the legislators paid even less attention to marijuanathan they had in 1951, the precedent there established ofclassifying marijuana with hard narcotics resulted in aproliferation of marijuana offenses and a further increase inpenalties. In some ways, this legislation represents thehigh-water mark of uninformed public policy regarding marijuana.In almost every respect, the provisions of the Act and thelegislative motivation bear absolutely no rational relation tomarijuana's pharmacology and to the drug's actual use and trafficpatterns. I. Provisions of the Narcotic Control Act of 1956 Public Law 728, an act intended to make more effective controlof the narcotic drugs and marijuana, was approved on July 18,1956. It amended the Internal Revenue Code of 1954 and theNarcotic Drugs Import and Export ACt65 primarily in the directionof increasing still further the penalties for violation of thoseacts and proliferating the scope of federal control over the use,possession and sale of narcotic drugs and marijuana. The new law raised the potential fine for all narcotics andmarijuana offenses to $20,000 66 and increased the mandatoryminimum sentences for offenses in the prescription, registrationand possession categories to two, five and ten years forsuccessive offenses.67 No distinction was made between addictsand traffickers with regard to these types of violations.Violations of the sale, transfer and smuggling provisions of theAct carry a minimum sentence of five years for first offenses andten years for all subsequent offenses. 68 In this connection theAct created a new offense by prohibiting illegal importation ofmarijuana and forbidding knowing receipt, concealment, purchase,sale, and facilitation of transportation or concealment of suchillegally, imported marijuana .69 Simple possession was bystatute sufficient evidence of guilt to convict.70 Thisprovision, now 21 U.S.C.  176a, paralleled a similarimportation provision for narcotics originally passed in 1909. In addition, any sale or transfer of any drug by an adult to awas made punishable by a minimum ten-year sentence.71 Finally,the Act made suspension, probation and parole unavailable to alloffenders except those convicted of a first offense forpossession, prescription or registration.72 In addition to the increases in offenses and penalties, thelaw contained wide variety of provisions relating to enforcement.Customs and Narcotics Bureau agents were authorized to carryweapons and to make arrests without a warrant on belief that adrug violation had been committed .73 The Government was allowedto appeal unfavorable decisions suppressing evidence74 and tocompel testimony from witnesses by a grant of immunity.75 In aconcession to those legislators who favored a wiretappingprovision, the new law created a category of offense based on theuse of communications instrumentalities in violation of the druglaws.76 This provision carried penalties of a minimum two-yearsentence and up to a $5,000 fine. The Act required that citizenswho are drug users and drug law violators must register with theimmigration authorities upon entering or leaving the UnitedStates .77 The Act also amended the Immigration and NationalityAct to provide for deportation of alien drug users and drug lawviolators .78 2. Marijuana-Along for the Ride The Narcotic Control Act of 1956 was premised on the samebeliefs as was the Boggs Act. Few if any of the legislatorsrecognized that marijuana was in any way different from thephysically addictive narcotics.79 The stepping stone concept wasnow so widely accepted that only once during the extensivecongressional debates on the House and Senate versions of thebill was the subject of marijuana as a separate substance evenraised. In a statement reflecting both ignorance of the basiccharacteristics of marijuana and naive acceptance of the steppingstone concept, Senator Daniel, Chairman of the Senatesubcommittee that investigated the drug problem, describedmarijuana: That is a drug which starts most addicts in the use of drugs. Marihuana, in itself a dangerous drug, can lead to some of the worst crimes committed by those who are addicted to the habit. Evidently, its use leads to the heroin habit and then to the final destruction of the persons addicted.80 Because Congress bought the FBN's propaganda lock, stock andbarrel, it is not surprising that there was no dissent from theproposition that harsher penalties were the means to eliminateillicit use and sale of all drugs.81 3. Trafficking Patterns The 1956 Act reflected an unsupported conception of the natureof the marijuana traffic. Under the assumption that"peddlers" of all drugs, marijuana included, arecontrolled by organized crime, the Act assessed extremely heavypenalties for sale, especially to minors. For example, the HouseWays and Means Committee report noted that "narcotictraffickers ... are in most cases well organized professionalracketeers." 82 Similarly, in recommending prohibition ofprobation or suspension of sentence for first-offender peddlers,the House subcommittee had asserted that if the first offenderpeddler problem was not solved, there would eventually be"large scale recruiting of our youth by the upper echelon oftraffickers." 83 While the reference to organized crime was undoubtedly validwith respect to hard drugs, the assumption that marijuana trafficwas controlled by large-scale racketeers was completelyunsupported. The marijuana distribution pattern today is fardifferent than the distribution pattern for "hard"drugs. On college campuses today, the marijuana seller is likelyto be a smoker who has a small amount he wants to sell. Unlessone is to believe that organized crime has abdicated adistribution role to "amateurs," it is difficult toimagine that it controlled the distribution of marijuana in 1956.Accordingly, the 1956 Act's widely divergent treatment of saleand use of marijuana may not have been justified at the time ofenactment, and it certainly makes little sense today. 4. Origin and Use A related misconception about the marijuana trade concerns thenew importation offenses. Underlying the presumption of knowingconcealment of smuggled marijuana arising from possession are twofindings that the mainstay of marijuana traffic is imported fromMexico and that possessors are likely to be aware of that fact.Even in 1956, such findings were dubious.84 As to the presumptionof importation, Commissioner Anslinger's estimate that 90 percentof all marijuana seized by federal authorities had been smuggledfrom Mexico85 was grossly misleading. The Federal Bureau ofNarcotics had practically abandoned the responsibility formarijuana control to increasingly effective state narcoticssquads and to the Customs agents.86 Of course, federal figurestaken alone would suggest a high percentage of importation.Furthermore, the Commissioner's conclusion was inconsistent withan essential premise of the Tax Act87 and with other materialsbefore the Congress,88 all of which emphasized the large degreeof domestic cultivation. As to the possessor's knowledge, the underlying assumptionagain was that there was an organized trade pattern so that eachuser knew where his drug came from. As we know, marijuana wasthen a casual adjunct to ghetto life. It was a social, ratherthan an economic, phenomenon limited almost exclusively tounemployed or menially employed members of racial minorities inthe center cities.89 As applied to such a class of people, thepresumption is farcical.90 5. Enforcement Patterns Although the proliferation of federal offenses suggests on itsface that state enforcement was inadequate to cope with marijuanatrade or that increased use of the drug presaged increasednarcotics addiction, nothing could be farther from the truth.Considering marijuana alone, the 1956 legislation was passed inresponse to no need at all. The enforcement statistics confirmour hypothesis that marijuana was simply "along for theride." First, as we noted above, federal arrests declined continuallyafter 1952.91 Although attributable in part to increased stateenforcement92 and to a conscious FBN decision to concentrate onnarcotics, the figures do suggest a decline in or at least astabilization of marijuana use by the middle fifties, even inareas in which narcotics use continued unabated. Second, theclass of users does not seem to have changed at all during thisperiod. Arrest statistics still indicate that use was centered inthe ghetto areas of major cities93 in California, Texas,Louisiana, Michigan, New York, and Illinois.94 However, becausestatistics were not refined according to race, age, sex and ofteneven the drug used,95 we cannot state categorically that therewas no change in use patterns. 96 6. The Epitome of Irrationality: Virginia's 1958 Amendment In 1958, Virginia's Uniform Drug Act was further amended tomake the "possession of illegally acquired narcotic drugs[which included marijuana] in any quantity greater thantwenty-five grains, if in solid form, or eight ounces, if inliquid form," a crime punishable by a fine of not more than$5,000 and imprisonment for not less than twenty nor more thanforty years .97 The effect of this enactment was to provide apenalty for illegal possession that was more than twice as severeas the penalty for unlawful sale and one and one-half times morestringent than that for sale to a minor. It is incredible thatdespite the extreme harshness of this penalty, themeasure passed both houses of the General Assembly with but onedissenting vote, and no mention was made of it in the RichmondTimes-Dispatch during the period of February 14 to April 7, 1958. In conclusion, the Federal Narcotic Control Act of 1956 andsubsequent state legislation reflect the same basic congressionaland public misconceptions about the nature and dangers ofmarijuana that characterized the early fifties. Even moreunchanged, and in fact strengthened by results under the BoggsAct, was the assumption that the key to the solution of thenarcotic drug problem was the imposition of harsher penalties onboth users and traffickers in illicit drugs. Classification ofmarijuana with narcotic drugs was now a foregone conclusion. Infact, legislators seemed less aware that marijuana was a distinctsubstance than they had been in 1951. Footnotes and References 1 Between 1937 and 1951, the Uniform Narcotic Drug Act wasamended to change the definition of cannabis from the floweringor fruiting tops of just the female plant to include thecorresponding parts of the male plant. See 1942 HANDBOOK 172-73. 2 Act of Nov. 2, 1951, ch. 666, 65 Stat. 767. 3 21 U.S.C.  174 (1964). 4 26 U.S.C.   4741-76 (1964). 5 Hearings Before the Special Senate Committee to InvestigateOrganized Crime in Interstate Commerce, 82d Cong., 1st Sess., pt.14, exhibit 1, at .131, 240-41, 266 (1951) [hereinafter cited asKefauver Committee Hearings). Senator Kefauver stated at the June26, 1951, session of the hearings: Illegal drug use has reached epidemic proportions, accordingto information secured by this committee from different parts ofthe country. One of the most alarming aspects is the reportedincrease in addiction among the younger generation, some ofschool age. Id., pt. 14, at 235. See also N.Y. Times, June 19, 1951, at25, col. I ("the present wave of juvenile addiction struckus with hurricane force in 1948 and 1949, and in a short time hadthe two Federal hospitals bursting at the seams") (statementof Commissioner Anslinger). 6 A 57 year-old addict witness, who had started smoking opiumaround 1912, stated that he had never seen significant use ofdrugs by young people until recently and theorized that marijuanawas the cause. Kefauver Committee Hearings, pt. 14, at 382. 7 97CONG. REC. 8197 (195 1). 8 Id. at 8198. 9 Id. at 8198-8204. 10 Id. at 8198 (as quoted by Representative Boggs). See alsoKefauver Committee Hearings, pt. 14, at 430-31 (testimony ofCommissioner Anslinger). 11 97 CONG. REC. 8198 (1951). 12 Id. at 8196. 13 See id. at 8197, 8207. One of the most critical statementson this point came from Representative Harrison of Virginia who,after noting that narcotics laws violations had been increasing"only" in those jurisdictions where federal judges hadfailed to impose adequate sentences on recidivists, stated:"Where the judiciary is abusing its discretion, it is theduty of the law-making body to limit the discretion in order thatthe public may be protected." Id. at 8211. 14 Id. at 8207. 15 Id. at 8209. 16 Id. at 8210. 17 Representative Celler suggested that harsh mandatorysentences would have "two results: grand juries will refuseto indict and petit juries will refuse to convict." Id. at8206. 18 Id. at 8207. 19 Id. at 8206. 20 Id. at 8197. 21 Representative Keating Questioned the constitutionality ofthe provision. Id. at 8206. Apparently Keating acceptedRepresentative Harrison's statement that the language had been inthe statutory predecessors for years and had been passed on bythe Supreme Court. Id. at 8211. 22 TRAFFIC IN Opium 80 (1937). For a full and effectivediscussion of the flaws in these drug statistics from 1937 untilthe mid 1940's due to a confusion over what parts of themarijuana plant were to be weighed in determining how much of thedrug had been seized, see Mandel, Problems with Official DrugStatistics, 21 STAN. L. REV. 991, 998-99 (1969). 23 The following figures are available from 1936 to 1941.After 1941 the FBN ceased publication of the number of seizuresby state and municipal authorities: Year Number of seizures Amount seized 1935 unreported 195+ tons 1936 377 386 tons 1937 335 116 Kg. 1939 289 22,807 Kg. 1940 433 71,129 Kg. 1941 193 19 Kg. TRAFFIC IN Opium 63 (1935); id. at 57 (1936); id. at 81(1937); id. at 80 (1939); id. at 73 (1940); id. at 38 (1941). Thegreat discrepancy in these numbers may be one reason the FBNceased their publication in 1941. 24 Id. at 80 (1945). 25 Hearings on Dep'ts of Treasury and Post OfficeAppropriations for 19S1 Before a Subcomm. of the House Comm. onAppropriations, 81st Cong., 2d Sess., pt. 1, at 128 (1950). 26 The figures on the amount seized by federal agents from1939-1945 are as follows: Year FBN No. of Kgs. Seized Customs No. of Kgs. Seized 1939 419 63 1940 495 100 1941 396 12 1942 289 44 1943 150 168 1944 247 78 1945 128 129 TRAFFIC IN Opium 78 (1939); id. at 72 (1940); id. at 37(1941); id. at 49 (1942); id. at 42 (1943); id. at 34 (1944); id.at 23 (1945). 27 The figures for the period 1946-1951 are as follows: Year Seized No. of Arrests for Violations of Marijuana Laws Year No. of Kgs. Seized FBN Customs 1946 293 331 953 1947 307 466 911 1948 422 1023 1278 1949 384 1165 1643 1950 323 933 1490 1951 447 558 1177 TRAFFIC IN Opium 23, 27 (1946); id. at 23, 29 (1947); id. at23, 28 (1948); id. at 22, 26 (1949); id. at 29, 33 (1950); id. at25. 29 (1951). 28 See Teen-Age Dope Addicts New Problem?, U.S. NEWS &WoRLD REPORT, June 29, 1951, at 18 (interview with CommissionerAnslinger). 29 See text at note 10 supra. 30 See Teen-Age Dope Addicts New Problem?, supra note 28, at19. 31 Anslinger, The Facts About Our Teen-Age Addicts, READERSDigest, Oct. 1951, at 139. 32 The conclusions of the LaGuardia Report are discussed in THE MARIHUANA PAPERS 277-410(D. Solomon ed. 1966). The thirteen conclusions on the sociologyof marijuana use are so significant we include them in full: From the foregoing study the following conclusions are drawn: 1. Marihuana is used extensively in the Borough of Manhattanbut the problem is not as acute as it is reported to be in othersections of the United States. 2. The introduction of marihuana into this area is recent ascompared to other localities. 3. The cost of marihuana is low and therefore within thepurchasing power of most persons. 4. The distribution and use of marihuana is centered inHarlem. 5. The majority of marihuana smokers are Negroes andLatin-Americans. 6. The consensus among marihuana smokers is that the use ofthe drug creates a definite feeling of adequacy. 7. The practice of smoking marihuana does not lead toaddiction in the medical sense of the word. 8. The sale and distribution of marihuana is not under thecontrol of any single organized group. 9. The use of marihuana does not lead to morphine or heroin orcocaine addiction and no effort is made to create a market forthese narcotics by stimulating the practice of marihuana smoking. 10. Marihuana is not the determining factor in the commissionof major crimes. 11. Marihuana smoking is not widespread among school children. 12. Juvenile delinquency is not associated with the practiceof smoking marihuana. 13. The publicity concerning the catastrophic effects ofmarihuana smoking in New York City is unfounded. Id. at 307. 33 The New York trend was also typical of Los Angeles.California Division of Narcotic Enforcement, Marijuana-Our NewestNarcotic Menace, April 11 1940, at 12. See also Note, Youth andNarcotics, 1 U.C.L.A. L. Rev. 445, 453 (1954) (reporting abreakdown by race of narcotics arrests by the Oakland policedepartment). 34 For example, in 1895 New York had passed a statute, ch.1041, 5 1, [1895 ] N.Y. Laws 972, requiring instruction in publicschools on the effect of narcotics. 35 For full accounts of the FBN "educationalcampaigns" up through the present day, see TRAFFIC IN Opiumfrom 1937 to the present. For the full exposition of the FBN'sposition on the drug user as a criminal before he becomes anaddict, see Recidivism on Narcotic Law Violators, in Traffic inOpium for each year. 36 Judge J. Foster Svmes of Denver, Colorado, quoted inTRAFFIC IN OPIUM 57 (1937). 37 See, e.g., G. CREIGHTON, NARCOTICS: THEIR LEGITIMATE ANDILLICIT USE (I 95 1). 38 Hearings an H.R. 3490 before the Subcomm. on Narcotics ofthe House Comm. on Ways and Means. 82d Cong., 1st Sess. 147(1951) [hereinafter cited as Boggs Act Hearings). 39 Dr. Isbell's paper stated: Any definition [of addiction] which makes dependence anessential feature will also not include intoxications with suchsubstances as cocaine, marijuana, and amphetamine. becausedependence on these substances is no more marked than isdependence on tobacco and coffee and yet, in some ways,intoxication with cocaine or marijuana is more harmful than isaddiction to morphine. Furthermore, definitions which excludecocaine and marijuana from the list of addicting drugs wouldcause endless confusion because, in common parlance and legally,both drugs arc regarded as addicting. Id. at 147-48. 40 Id. at 148. 41 Kefauver Committee Hearings, pt. 14, at 119. 42 Id. at 136. See also Boggs Act Hearings I 01. 43 Boggs Act Hearings 96 44 Kefauver Committee Hearings, pt. 14, at 73, 101, 109(statements of three addicts). See also id. at 190, 204 forstatements by addicts to the effect that upon Moving frommarijuana to hard drugs they did not know that the Latter wereaddictive. The implication is clear that marijuana is notaddictive. See id. at 91. 45 Boggs Act Hearings 206. 46 Kefauver Committee Hearings, pt. 14, at 133. 47 Boggs ActHearings 105. 48 Kefauver Committee Hearings, pt. 14, at 449; Boggs ActHearings 62. 49 97 CONG. REC. 8197-98 (1951). The linkage of marijuana useto heroin was also supplied by sonic of the testimony by addictsthemselves. Of 27 addicts interviewed in part 14 of the KefauverCommittee Hearings, 15 testified that they had started their druguse with marijuana. This figure is misleading because asubstantial majority of the 12 who had not used marijuana wereaddicts because of illness or were older addicts who had begunusing drugs before marijuana was readily available. See KefauverCommittee Hearings, pt. 14, at 11, 29, 54, 62, 71, 84, 93, 99,104, 108, 153, 157, 160, 162, 167, 171, 182, 189, 194, 203, 211,216, 220, 367, 380, 432, 436. Approximately 5 of the addictwitnesses indicated that marijuana did in fact lead to the use ofthe harder drugs but only one gave definite reasons why hethought this transition inevitably took place. One male addict,after stating that the average age of marijuana smokers was 13 or14, stated: You would very seldom find a person smoking marijuana who doesjust that, he keeps on, and he gets to the point where he doesnot have the same drive or feeling that he first had, and it islike a stepping stone, he graduates to heroin. Kefauver CommitteeHearings, pt. 14, at 199-200. Note that among many of these addicts curiosity and peer grouppressure was the primary factor in starting them into the use ofhard drugs. Id. at 12, 32, 94, 109, 254. Moreover, RepresentativeBoggs introduced some mystery into his statements during theHouse debates by stating: A study in February of 1950 of 602 case reports indicates that53 percent . . . started their addiction to drugs by reason ofassociation with other addicts, and 7 percent of them started onmarijuana. 97 CONG. REC. 8197 (1951). This study is cited on the samepage with Representative Boggs' statement that our young peopleusually start on the road to drug addiction by smoking marijuana. 50 TRAFFIC IN Opium 6 (1950). 51 Alabama, Indiana, Maryland, New Jersey, Oklahoma, Tennesseeand West Virginia. Id. at 8 (1951). 52 Connecticut, Illinois, Louisiana, Michigan, New York,Pennsylvania, Utah, Washington and Wisconsin. Id. at 8-9. 53 Colorado, Georgia, Kentucky and Virginia. Id. at 6 (1952). 54 Delaware, Iowa, Minnesota, Nebraska, Pennsylvania andWyoming. Id. at 9 (1953). 55 The Ohio law, approved June 16,1955, provided for imprisonment of any one found guilty ofillegally selling narcotic drugs for a period of not less thantwenty nor more than forty years. Id. at 7 (1955). The Louisianameasure, adopted the following year, provided severe prisonsentences without parole, probation or suspension for the illegalsale, possession or administration of a narcotic drug. Sentencesranged from a five year minimum to a ninety-nine year maximum.Id. at 28 (1956). 56 Ch. 451, [1952) Va. Acts of Assembly 736. 57 The bill, H.B. 132, passed the House 65-0 on February 23,1952, and the Senate 34-0 on March 7, 1952. 58 Richmond Times-Dispatch, Mar. 2, 1952, 5 2, at 1, col. 6. 59 Id., Feb. 24, 1952,  2, at 5, col. 3. The House passedfifty bills and advanced thirty-five more during its session ofFebruary 23, 1952. Id. 60 Ch. 212, [1936] Va. Acts of Assembly 361. 61 Ch. 451, [1952] Va. Acts of Assembly 736. 62 See also Proffit, An Analysis of the Missouri Narcotic DrugLaws, 17 Mo. L. REV. 252 (1952), in which the author shows thatnarcotic hysteria was closely linked to the general hysteria and"Red Scare" of the early fifties: "The opinion hasbeen advanced that the recent upsurge in consumption [of drugs]is fostered by Communists in an effort to undermine the morals ofour youth." Id. at 252-53. He cites a Missouri official whoso testified before a state legislative committee. For more ofthe same, see W. OURSLER & L. SMITH, NARCOTICS: AMERICA'SPERIL 266 (1952). The Missouri case parallels the Virginia datain that great public concern is expressed about the possiblespread of narcotics addiction but little if any separate noticewas given marijuana. Everywhere the narcotics evil was linked byveiled references to international communism, especially that ofChina, the traditional home of the opium habit. 63 Hearings on Illicit Narcotics Traffic Before the Subcomm.on Improvements in the Federal Criminal Code of the Senate Comm.on the judiciary, 84th Cong., 1st Sess. 57 (1955) [hereinaftercited as Daniel Committee Hearings]; see H. ANSLINGER & W.OURSLER, THE MURDERERS (1962). 64 Ch. 629, 70 Stat. 567. 65 Ch. 202, 42 Stat. 596 (1922). 66 Ch. 629,   103, 105-06, 108, 70 Stat. 568, 570, 571(codified at 26 U.S.C.  7237 (1964); 21 U.S.C.  174, 176a,184a (1964)). 67 Id.  103, 70 Stat. 568 (codified at 26 U.S.C.  7237(1964)). 68 Id. 69 Id.  106, 70 Stat. 570 (codified at 21 U.S.C.  176a(1964)). 70 Id. (declared unconstitutional in Leary v. United States,395 U.S. 6 (1969)) 71 Id.  103, 70 Stat. 568 (codified at 26 U.S,C.  7237 (b)(1) (1964)). The statute also provided that a seller peddlingheroin to a minor may be subject to a sentence of lifeimprisonment imposed by a court, or to a death sentence imposedby a jury. Id.  107, 70 Star. 571 (codified at 21 US.C.  176b(1964)). 72 Id. S 103, 70 Stat. 569 (codified at 26 U.S.C. 7237(d)(Supp. 111, 1966)). 73 Id.  104, 70 Star. 570 (codified at 26 U.S.C.  7607(1964)). 74 Id.  201, 70 Star. 573 (codified at 18 U.SC. S 1404(1964)). 75 Id., 70 Star. S74 (codified at 18 U.S.C. S 1406 (1964)). 76 Id., 70 Star. 573 (codified at 18 U.S.C. 5 1403 (1964) ). 77 id., 70 Stat. 574 (codified at 18 U.S.C.  1407 (1964)). 78 Id. S 301, 70 Stat. 575 (codified at 8 U.S.C.  1182(a)(5), (23) (1964)). 79 The House Subcommittee on Narcotics, which produced whatbecame the essentials of the Narcotic Control Act of 1956,revealed its knowledge of the distinction between marijuana andnarcotics solely by a footnote to the major heading"Narcotics" which stated in fine print that the termnarcotics included marijuana. See U.S. CODE CONG. & Am News3294 (1956). 80 102 GONG. REC. 9015 (1956). 81 Representative Boggs, father of the Boggs Act and Chairmanof the Subcommittee on Narcotics of the House Ways and MeansCommittee, stated that '[e]ffective steps to eliminate theunlawful drug traffic requires ... the imposition of severepunishment by the courts." Id. at 10689. The subcommittee,which had set out to determine the effect of the Boggs Act onnarcotics traffic, U.S. CODE CONG. & AD. News 3291 (1956),began its recommendations with calls for further increases in thepenalties for narcotics law violations. Id. at 3309. In fact, thesubcommittee felt that this was the only way to eliminate thedrug menace, and recommended that educational programs on theevils of narcotics not be instituted in the schools for fear ofexciting the curiosity of young people. Id. at 3305. Both theHouse Ways and Means Committee report and the subcommittee reportare filled with statements to the effect that harsher penaltiesare the most effective weapons in the war against illicitnarcotics. Id. at 3281-3303 passim. The Ways and Means Committeeconclusion was succinct: "Experience with the Boggs law . .. has clearly demonstrated the efficacy of severe punishment inreducing the illicit commerce in drugs." Id. at 3286. Finally, Senator Daniel, speaking for the Senate subcommitteeinvestigating the drug situation in the United States, found"it absolutely necessary for the Congress of the UnitedStates to strengthen the hands of our law enforcement officersand provide higher penalties if we are to stop the narcoticstraffic in this country." 102 CONG. Rec. 9014 (1956). Hissubcommittee also recommended the kind of across-the-boardincreases in penalties that the Act eventually contained. 82 U.S. CODE CONG. & AD. News 3283 (1956); see id. at3302. 83 Id. at 3304. 84 In holding unconstitutional the presumption of knowledgethat marijuana was smuggled, the Supreme Court in Leary v. UnitedStates, 395 U.S. 6 (1969), relied on the change in use patternsfrom 1959 to 1967. We think the presumption was unconstitutionalwhen passed in 1956, both as to importation and knowledge. 85 Daniel Committee Hearings 18. 86 The decline in the number of FBN arrests and seizures isdirectly related to the increase in local and state enforcementpersonnel. This thesis is supported by data from California wherestatewide arrests soared while federal arrests remained stable.Bureau of Criminal Statistics, California Dep't of Justice, Crimein California (1956). See also A. LiNDESMITH, THE ADDICT AND THELAW 238 (1963). One commentator has suggested that except for theyears immediately after the passage of the Marihuana Tax Act,when the Bureau wanted to concentrate on its newly acquiredenforcement field, the FBN arrest data show clearly its emphasison the hard narcotics. Mandel, Problems with Official DrugStatistics, 21 STAN. L. REV. 991, 1019-20 (1969). 87 See note 20 at p. 1053 supra. 88 Written materials inserted into the record of the Senatehearings included the testimony of an experienced federal Customsofficial that high quality marijuana was being grown near theTexas cities of Laredo and Brownsville. Daniel Committee Hearings3488-89. In addition, the Attorney General of Ohio noted thatmarijuana may grow unnoticed along roadsides and vacant lots inmany parts of the country." Id. at 4814. Also, a bulletinissued by the Philadelphia Police Academy recited that"[plenty of marijuana is found growing in this city."Id. at 599. 89 Blum, Mind-Altering Drugs and Dangerous Behavior: DangerousDrugs, in THE PRESIDENT'S COMMISSION ON LAW ENFORCEMENT ANDADMINISTRATION OF JUSTICE, TASK FORCE REPORT: NARCOTICS AND DRUGABUSE 21, 24 (1967); Bouquet, Cannabis, 3 U.N. BULL. ONNARCOTICS, Jan. 1951, at 22, 32-33. 90 This is especially true with respect to the young and blackminorities. The presumption has validity only as applied torecently immigrated Mexicans. Cf. Chein, The Status ofSociological and Social Psychological Knowledge ConcerningNarcotics, in NARCOTIC DRUG ADDICTION PROBLEMS 146, 155 (R.Livingston ed. 1963). Mr. Chein reports a shift in drug use from1930-1960 from old to young and a continued increase in thepercentage of drug users who are Black or Spanish-speaking. 91 The number of federal arrests for marijuana violations fellfrom 1288 in 1952 to 169 in 1960. TRAFFIC IN Opium 26 (1952); id.at 69 (1960). 92 By 1954, many major states and cities had special narcoticssquads. See Daniel Committee Hearings 13 -14, 1 10. 93 Cf. TRAFFIC IN Opium 66 (1956); id. at 41 (1959). The FBNcharts show clearly the extraordinary incidence of drug abuseamong Blacks, Mexican-Americans and other minority communities. 94 Daniel Committee Hearings, exhibit 7, at 267-71. Localarrests in those six states accounted for 2,822 of the 3,205marijuana arrests made by local law enforcers in 1954. 95 For example, the statistics in TRAFFIC IN Opium seldom evendistinguish among the drugs involved, and the FBI Uniform CrimeStatistics frequently report all drug related arrests together,with no delineation of the type of drug used or the nature of theoffender. 96 Chein, supra note 90, at 152, suggests that whateverpatterns of drug use existed in the fifties were merelycontinuations of patterns observed in the thirties. 97 Ch. 535, (19581 Va. Acts of Assembly 675. Contents | Feedback | Search DRCNet Library | Schaffer Library | Major Studies The Forbidden Fruit and the Tree ofKnowledgeWT02-B02-10IA086-000614-B044-119http://206.61.184.43:80/schaffer/Library/studies/vlr/vlr7.htm 206.61.184.43 19970122021307 text/html 42800HTTP/1.0 200 OKDate: Wednesday, 22-Jan-97 02:12:59 GMTServer: WebSitePro/1.1f (S/N wpo-0deb)Allow-ranges: bytesContent-type: text/htmlLast-modified: Saturday, 28-Dec-96 06:47:31 GMTContent-length: 42582 Marijuana Users in the Courts: 1930-1965 Contents | Feedback | Search DRCNet Library | Schaffer Library | Major Studies The Forbidden Fruit and the Tree ofKnowledge THE FORBIDDEN FRUIT AND THE TREE OF KNOWLEDGE: AN INQUIRYINTO THE LEGAL HISTORY OF AMERICAN MARIJUANA PROHIBITION Richard J. Bonnie & Charles H.Whitebread, II VII. MARIJUANA USERS IN THE COURTS: 1930-1965 Having studied the evolution of legislative hostility tomarijuana from a regional phenomenon with racial overtones to anationwide paranoia, it is worthwhile to consider the fate ofmarijuana users in the courts during this evolutionary period.After the courts had summarily rejected the substantiveconstitutional arguments, appeals in marijuana cases tended tofocus on three contentions particularly germane to drugviolations: procedural objections arising from interrelatedstatutory schemes on the state and federal levels punishingessentially the same conduct; objections to police conductintrinsic to victimless crimes; and objections to sufficiency ofevidence at trial. Like their legislative colleagues, state andfederal translated what they knew of the drug's mythical effectsinto overt hostility. Coupled with the traditionally conservativetreatment afforded the rights of criminal defendants, especiallyin state prosecutions, this judicial hostility producedever-lengthening sentences and few reversals. A. Statutory Fantasies: The Complications ofFederal Legislation 1. Quadruple "Jeopardy" and the "KillerWeed" When Congress passed the Marihuana Tax Act in 1937, marijuanahad already been included in the Uniform Narcotic Drug Act andevery state had enacted some form of marijuana prohibition.1 Inaddition to its ostensible revenue-raising function, the Act wasobviously designed both to deter further use of the drug 2 and tofacilitate enforcement of the state laws.3 The statute assuredthe availability to state prosecutors of the order forms filedwith the IRS at the time of payment of the tax. 4 Congress hadthought that the order forms and registration requirements woulddevelop an "adequate means of publicizing dealings inmarihuana in order to tax and control the trafficeffectively."5 Thus, after 1937, possession of marijuana without filing thetransfer form and paying the federal tax constituted a violationof both state and federal law;- yet filing the form and payingthe tax would probably not have eliminated the buyer's exposureto prosecution under state law. Indeed, compliance would probablyhave readily identified the buyer to state officials. To thisunfairness the courts paid no heed, noting that exposure to stateand federal prosecution for the same act did not constitutedouble jeopardy7 and that the fifth amendment did not protectdefendants from prosecution for violation of state law.8 After passage of the 1956 federal narcotic drug legislation9possession of marijuana constituted at least one, and often two,additional crimes. First, the Narcotic Drugs Import and ExportAct was amended10 in 1956 to punish directly illegalimportation11 of marijuana or other dealings in the drug withknowledge that it had been illegally imported. Since merepossession was sufficient evidence to convict under the Act, 12possession without registration and order form now constitutedthree crimes, and compliance with the filing and tax provisionswould have exposed the defendant to liability under state law andunder the importation provision if the original importation wasillegal. Again the courts saw no fifth amendment violation.13Second, another provision of the 1956 package required everyperson addicted to or using narcotics or convicted of a violationof the narcotics or marijuana laws punishable by over one year'simprisonment to register upon leaving the country. 14 Designed toaid the Government in identifying potential smugglers. thestatute was upheld, as a strict liability offense, 15 against amultitude of constitutional challenges. 16 Since penalties formarijuana possession almost uniformly exceeded one year'simprisonment during this period, a first offense possessionconviction by either sovereign triggered the registrationprovision. 2. Statutory Presumptions Because the federal statutes punished sale and possession ofmarijuana only indirectly, each had to bridge the gap betweenthose acts and the technical crimes-tax violations andimportation-related acts. As a bootstrap from the federal taxingpower to a federal police power, Congress chose presumptions.Thus, under the Marihuana Tax Act, possession plus failure toproduce the required forms was presumptive evidence of thecriminal act-failure to pay the tax17 -and the courts had notrouble upholding this provision. 18 In addition, under theImport and Export Act possession of marijuana constitutedpresumptive evidence of illegal importation and of defendant'sknowledge of such importation.19 Against a rash of attacks on the rationality of thispresumption, the lower federal courts20 noted that the SupremeCourt had upheld the same statutory language in the originalFederal Import and Export Act with respect to opium 21 and thatthere was sufficient general knowledge that most marijuana wasimported from Mexico to make the presumption rational. Althoughthe Ninth Circuit at one time indicated that a defendant couldrebut the presumption by showing that the marijuana in hispossession was manicured and therefore more likely to have beendomestically grown,22 that court later held that such proof wasinsufficient and that the defendant must also show actualdomestic production. 23 B. Attacks on State Legislation Most attacks on the state statutes focused on the vagueness ofstatutory terms-marijuana, however spelled, or cannabis or IndianHemp24 -both as a scientific matter and in terms of commonexperience.25 Predictably, however, few state courts were of amind to inhibit legislative proscription of the "killerweed." Due in part to greatly exaggerated conceptions aboutthe effects of the drug26 and in part to the ease with which themature plant is processed for the outlawed purposes,27 the courtsconstrued these statutory definitions as broadly as possible 28despite the traditional rule of strict construction of criminalstatutes. With the progressive increase in the severity of penaltieswhich accompanied adoption of the Uniform Act in the 1930's and1940's and the surge of amendments in the 1950's in the wake ofthe Boggs Act.29 Some problems of application arose.Interestingly enough. some courts, applied the lesser penaltywhere one of two penalties could be imposed.30 Similarly manycourts tended to impose minimum sentences until the late 1950'swhen they , too, lost all sense of proportion.31 C. Procedural Defenses and Entrapment Statutory attacks during this period tended to reflect thecomplicated interrelation of state and federal law and thescientific imprecision of legislative drafting. These attackswere usually rebuffed, and defendants, caught in a squeeze ofjudicial and legislative hostility, had few, if any, viabledefenses based on whether or not they had violated the regulatoryscheme. Both state and federal statutes merely required theprosecution to prove that the particular defendant was found inpossession of a substance which when chemically tested was foundto be marijuana. There were few tricky problems of proof, and theprosecution usually had a clear case. If these offenders werecaught dead to rights on the merits, the energetic attorney hadto look elsewhere for his defense. Fortunately, the exigencies of police practice in the field ofnarcotics law enforcement provided a defendant's attorney with anew area of attack-procedural irregularities in the arrest andapprehension of his client. The possession and sale of marijuanaepitomize the crime without a victim; neither seller nor buyer isapt to complain of the transaction. In order to promote vigorouslaw enforcement in this area, the police have had to use a seriesof undercover agents, surprise raids and often questionablesearch and arrest techniques. Because of the nature of theconduct they are trying to stifle, the police must intrude into aprivate social relationship where none of the parties wants it-thus, the police have found it essential to employ highlysecretive and often patently deceitful practices. It is nocoincidence that the vast developments in the law of criminalprocedure-especially in the fourth amendment area-have beenoutgrowths primarily of narcotics and marijuana cases. 1. Search and Seizure Today the major remedy for an illegal search is exclusion ofthe seized items as evidence. Some states and the federal courtshave used this exclusionary rule since early in the twentiethcentury. However, before the 1961 decision in Mapp v. 0hio32required all states to adopt this remedy, many state courts didnot exclude illegally seized evidence. In jurisdictions withoutthe rule, it scarcely helped the victim of an illegal search toraise the point. So, for example, in a 1945 Louisiana case, thecourt permitted introduction of marijuana seized without awarrant from defendant's room while he was out of town .33 Because of the scope permitted the searching officer, thingswere not much better in jurisdictions adhering to theexclusionary rule. In states using the rule before Mapp, thecrucial issue when the lawfulness of a search was questioned waswhether or not the search was reasonable under thecircumstances.34 One might expect, in view of the judicialhostility toward marijuana defendants, that the reasonablenessstandard provided sufficient leeway for circumvention of theexclusionary rule in more than a few cases.35 Other end runsaround the rule were developed in the federal system and in thestates purporting to apply the rule to evidence seized in anillegal search. First, courts upheld searches if there wasarguably an untainted source for seizure of the evidence. Forexample, a court might admit marijuana seized in a concededlyillegal search where a police officer saw the marijuana beforebeginning the illegal search .36 Second, in order to havestanding to assert the inadmissibility of seized items, one hadto admit the narcotics in question belonged to hirn.37 Third,courts often permitted searches pursuant to a warrant to extendfar beyond the items named in the warrant 38 under what came tobe known as the contraband theory. This theory reasoned thatcertain items could never lawfully be possessed and belonged onlyto the government; thus any seizure of these items waspermissible.39 2. Entrapment In order for federal and state agents to detect narcoticstraffic and use, it is essential that they infiltrate the drugculture. Obtaining this inside information may often involvepolice use of special employees - informers-or may require thatthe police become directly involved in the commission of thecriminal act .40 Many defendants in narcotics cases have claimedthat they were forced into sales or purchases of narcotics by thepolice or their agents. These charges led to the affirmativedefense of entrapment, first recognized in federal courts by theSupreme Court in Sorrels v. United States.41 Since that time, theprinciples of the defense, as stated in that decision, werereaffirmed by the Supreme Court in Sherman v. United States .42In Sherman, a government informer induced the defendant, who wastrying to quit his use of narcotics and was undergoing treatmentat a narcotics rehabilitation center, to resume his use andsupply the informer. The Court held that the conduct of thepolice informer constituted entrapment. The entrapment defense would seem the ideal defense tactic inmarijuana cases, because so often the defendant has beenapprehended due to some police informer or police trick .43However, the theoretical and practical outlines of the defensenarrowly restrict its scope and make it rarely successful.Moreover, because it may entail an admission that defendantcommitted the act charged 44 it is usually the last resort. From the beginning there have been two conflicting views ofthe entrapment defense. The majority view has consideredentrapment an exception to the given criminal statute on theground that the legislature could not have intended entrapment tofall within the statutory definitions of the crime. With this asthe theoretical justification of the defense, the inquiry focuseson the innocence of the defendant but for the police conduct. Thepractical question is whether the police merely supplied anopportunity for a person with a preexisting prediliction to thecriminal act. In the majority view this question of fact is to beresolved by the jury. 45 Throughout the years a substantial minority position hascontended that the entrapment defense should be considered apolice control mechanism. Under this view, the focus is on thepolice and their conduct rather than on the character of thedefendant. This rationale is premised on the court's supervisorypowers over tile administration of justice, and the question ofentrapment is one of law to be decided by the not by the jury.46 The focus of the defense on the character of the defendant andthe use of usually unsympathetic juries to decide the issue havegreatly hindered the successfulness of the entrapment defense.Since the defense must be raised affirmatively, the defendantbears a heavy burden in proving that he would not have committedthe crime but for the police inducement. Thus, in Gilmore v.United States47 the defendant was unable to carry the burden ofproving that he would not have otherwise committed the marijuanaoffense. A government agent approached the defendant andrequested marijuana, but the jury found no entrapment and thecourt could not declare that there was entrapment as a matter oflaw. With the entrapment defense, as with illegal searches, thecourt has a known lawbreaker before it and for this reason isreluctant to free him unless there is an overwhelming reason todismiss the charges, As a California court stated, It is not theentrapment of a criminal upon which the law frowns . . . . "48 The focus upon the defendant and his mental state, rather thana focus on the government enforcement practices and theirpossible effect of creating a particular crime, places anincredible burden on the defendant to try to convince the jurythat he is otherwise blameless. The use of informers and specialagents who become friendly with those suspected of dealing inmarijuana, and the use of this friendship to try to purchasemarijuana, often by supplying the cash,49 are bound to have adetrimental effect on the lay enforcement officers as well as toassure a slight increase in the supply of marijuana which wouldotherwise not have entered the trade. Nevertheless, the defenseas presently structured remains virtually impossible for thedefendant to raise with any real hope of success. D. The Pro Forma Trial When the marijuana defendant had exhausted his motions fordismissal or suppression of the evidence and was brought totrial, he was usually in deep trouble, faced with judicialhostility, lax methods of identification, and loose standards ofproof. Convictions were rarely reversed for any reason andespecially not for insufficient evidence. And penalties, nomatter how harsh, were never set aside. The first line of defense in the marijuana trial ofteninvolved the defendant's claim that the substance seized from himwas not really marijuana. In general, the state had no difficultyproving the substance to be marijuana. In the important case,expert evidence of chemical tests may have been introduced,50 butmore commonly courts permitted the testimony of policeofficers,51 undercover agents and other lay witnesses52 to besufficient to create a question of fact for the jury to decide.53 Thus, when chemical evidence was not introduced, juries werestrongly inclined to believe the policeman or a disinterestedprosecution witness as against the defendant.54 This ease of identification combined with the uncriticalacceptance of uncorroborated testiniony,55 produced what amountedin fact to a very low standard of proof. Thus, in a Californiacase, People v. Janisse,56 the conviction was upheld on thetestimony of teenage boys, though the defendant's co-workerstestified for an alibi. The evidence of rookie police officerswho later failed their civil service exams57 has been acceptedover the word of the defendant. Finally, even the testimony ofwitnesses who stand to benefit only from the conviction of thedefendant has been accepted without corroboration, whether thebenefit was indirect58 or direct.59 The wisdom of allowing suchtestimony by itself to be legally sufficient for a conviction isdoubtful. Although in theory the state must prove the defendant'spossession was knowing,60 through the use of circumstantialevidence the state usually encountered few problems in meetingits burden of proof. The state was permitted to usecircumstantial evidence to link the defendant to a quantity ofmarijuana, but where only circumstantial evidence existed theremust have been an instruction to the that all other reasonableinferences of innocence had been overcome.61 For example,behavior such as running away from police, if marijuana was foundalong the path run, was sufficient to link the defendant topossession 62 though mere proximity without other guilty behaviorwas not enough to prove possession. 63 Finally, judicial hostility to the "morallydepraved" marijuana user was so strong that often judgescondoned inflammatory statements by the prosecution to the juryabout the nature of the drug and its users. Indeed, some judgesthemselves often participated in these highly emotionalstatements. For example, one judge in instructing a juryannounced: Marijuana is a vicious, demoralizing substance that robs a person of morality honor, integrity, decency, and all the virtues that are the foundation of good character and good citizenship. The Government is constantly engaged in an effort to stamp out traffic in this and in narcotic drugs. Officers of the Government are employed in this effort usually and are entitled to credit for their loyalty and integrity.64 In the same way, direct aspersions toward a defendant'scharacter were tolerated .65 For instance, courts overlookedprosecution comments that the defendant sold his drugs near a'junior high school" or that drug use among teenagers mustbe stopped .66 In sum, then, defendants in marijuana cases had greatdifficulties at trial during this period. Easy identificationmethods, jury acceptance of uncorroborated testimony, use ofcircumstantial evidence to prove defendant's possession wasknowing, and the 'judicial participation in inflammatorystatements to the jury made defense success at trial a virtualimpossibility. Footnotes 1 See p. 1034 supra. 2 See, e.g., Hearings on H.R. 006 Before a Subcomm. of the SenateComm. on Finance, 75th Cong., 1st Sess. 5-7 (1937); H.R. REP. No.792, 75th Cong., 1st Sess. 1-3 (1937). 3 See Leary v. United States, 395 U.S. 6, 26-27 (1969). 4 26U.S.C.  4773 (1964). 4 H.R. REP. No. 792, 75th Cong., 1st Sess. 2 (1937); S. REP.No. 900, 7Sth Cong., 1st Sess. 3 (1937). 5 With minor exceptions, the Marihuana Tax Act requires alltransactions in marijuana to be carried out by written orderform. 26 U.S.C.  4741-44 (1964). It is unlawful for atransferor to transfer except by such form obtained by thetransferee, 26 U.S.C. S 4742 (1964), and for the transferee toacquire, transport or conceal marijuana without filing thetransfer form, registering with the IRS and paying the applicabletransfer tax. 26 U.S.C.  4744 (a) (1964). For heretoforeunregistered persons, that tax is $100 an ounce. 26 U.S.C. 4741 (1964). Since marijuana was excised from the United StatesPharmacopoeia, there have been few legitimate transactions byregistered persons. THE PRESIDENTS COMMISSION ON LAW ENFORCEMENTAND ADMINISTRATION OF JUSTICE, REPORT: THE CHALLENGE OF CRIME INA FREE SOCIETY 214 (1967). Since .the tax is otherwiseprohibitive, the Act is in effect almost entirely a criminal law;the crime is having anything to do with marijuana-possession,sale, acquisition or importation-since proof of possessioncoupled with failure, after reasonable notice and demand by theSecretary of the Treasury or his delegate, to produce thetransfer form is "presumptive evidence" of guilt. 26U.S.C.  4744(a) (1964). 7 Cf. Abbate v. United States, 359 U.S. 187 (1959); Bartkus v.Illinois, 359 U.S. 121 (1959); United States v. Lanza, 260 U.S.377 (1922). One state court held, as an interpretation of statelegislative policy rather than under constitutional compulsion,that acquittal of a federal marijuana possession charge wouldconstitute a defense to the same state charge. State v. Wortham,63 Ariz. 148, 160 P.2d 352 (1945). 8 See Leary v. United States, 383 F.2d 851, 870 (5th Cir.1967), revd, 395 U.S. 6 (1969); Haynes v. United States, 339 F.2d30, 31-32 (5th Cir.), cert. denied, 380 U.S. 924 (1965). 9 See pp. 1077-78 supra. 10 21 U.S.C.  176a (1964). 11 Importation "contrary to law` was that in violation ofthe Marihuana Tax Act, 26 U.S.C. S 4755 (1964), or the CustomsAct, 19 U.S.C. S 1496-97 (1964). 12 See note 19 infra and accompanying text. 13 See, e.g., Rule v. United States, 362 F.2d 215 (5th Cir.1966), cert. denied, 385 U.S. 1018 (1967). 14 18 U.S.C.  1407 (1964). 15 Application of the statute was particularly harsh. Eventhough defendant, found guilty of a drug offense and sent to theCalifornia Youth Authority for several months, had been told uponrelease that his record was clean, the court held that he hadviolated the statute by failing to register. Adams v. UnitedStates, 299 F.2d 327 (9th Cir. 1962). 16 See Palma v. United States, 261 F.2d 93 (5th Cir. 1958');Reyes v. United States, 258 F.2d 774 (9th Cir. 1958); UnitedStates v. Eramdjian, 155 F. Supp. 914 (S.D. Cal. 1957). Thecourts struggled mightily with arbitrariness, vagueness, right totravel, self incrimination, and equal protection arguments, butupheld the statute. But cf. Russell v. United States, 306 F.2d402 (9th Cir. 1962) (gun registration requirementunconstitutional since it required admission of presumptivelyunlawful possession). 17 26 U.S.C. S 4744 (a) (1964). 18 E.g., Manning v. United States, 274 F.2d 926 (5th Cir.),rcv'd on other grounds on rehearing, 280 F.2d 422 (5th Cir.1960). This provision was early interpreted not to require governmentagents to request the transfer form at the time of arrest, thecourts holding that possession of the form was an affirmativedefense. E.g., Hill v. United States, 261 F.2d 483 (9th Cir.1958); Hensley v. United States, 160 F.2d 257 (D.C. Cir.), cert.denied, 331 U.S. 817 (1947). 19 21 U.S.C.  176a (1964). 20 Leary v. United States, 383 F.2d 851, 869 (5th Cir. 1967),rev'd, 395 U.S. 6 (1969); Borne v. United States, 332 F.2d 565(5th Cir. 1964); United States v. Gibson, 310 F.2d 79 (2d Cir.1962); Claypole v. United States, 280 F.2d 768 (9th Cir. 1960);Butler v. United States, 273 F.2d 436 (9th Cir. 1959); Caudillov. United States, 253 F.2d 513 (9th Cir.), cert. denied, 357 U.S.931 (1958). 21 Yee Hem v. United States, 269 U.S. 178 (1925). 22 Caudillo v. United States, 253 F.2d 513 (9th Cir.), cert.denied, 357 U.S. 931 (1958). Implying that the presumption ofimportation was a rule of evidence, not of substantive law, thecourt noted that imported marijuana was ordinarily composed ofmixed twigs and stems since the growers waited until maturitybefore harvesting. In the United States, on the other hand,growers avoided police detection by picking individual leavesbefore the plant matured, Since appellant possessed mixed twigsand stems, the court upheld application of the presumption; theclear suggestion, however, was that the presumption would not beapplied to manicured marijuana. 23 Costello v. United States, 324 F.2d 260 (9th Cir. 1963),cert. denied, 376 U.S. 930 (1964). 24 Use of the Latin word "cannabis" was challengedas an unconstitutionally vague definition of the prohibitedsubstance in People v. Oliver, 66 Cal. App. 2d 431, 152 P.2d 329(Dist. Ct. App. 1944), on the basis of an early holding that theuse of Latin to define a sex crime was unconstitutionally vague,Ex parte Lockett, 179 Cal. 581, 178 P. 134 (1919) (fellatio andcunnilingus). -In rejecting the vagueness argument, the courtheld that "cannabis" was later explained in the statuteby the use of the word "marijuana" and that the twowords were synonymous. See People v. Martinez, 117 Cal. App. 2d701, 256 P.2d 1028 (Dist. Ct. App. 1953) ("Indian Hemp"not unconstitutionally vague); cf. People v. Johnson, 147 Cal.App. 2d 417, 305 P.2d 82 (Dist. Ct. App. 1957)("lophophora" not unconstitutionally vague reference topeyote). 25A related issue was whether the charge of possession of"marijuana" was specific enough where there werestatutory exceptions to protect the bird seed and hempindustries. The general rule was that the state need not allegethat the parts possessed were not within the statutoryexceptions. E.g., Simpson v. State, 129 Fla. 1279 176 So. 515(1937). Contra, People v. Sowrd, 370 111. 140, 18 N.E.2d 176(1938'). 26See, e.g., Simpson v. State, 129 Fla. 127, 131, 176 So. 515,517 (1937) (marijuana causes erotic hallucinations, loss ofsense, false conviction, loss of values, a general weakening ofpowers, making it dangerous to mind and body). In Commonwealth v.LaRosa, 42 Pa. D. & C. 34, 36-37 (Fayette County Dist. Ct.1941), the court stated: The deleterious, even vicious, qualities of the plant whichrender it highly dangerous to the mind and body, upon which itoperates to destroy the will, to produce imaginary delectablesituations, and gradually to weaken the physical powers, residein a sticky resin of great narcotic power that pervades theentire plant .... 27 State v. Bonoa, 172 La. 955, 136 So. 15(1931). 28 See State v. Hall, 41 Wash. 2d 446, 249 P.2d 769 (1952);Commonwealth v. LaRosa, 42 Pa. D. & C. 34 (Fayette CountyDist. Ct. 1941). LaRosa held that the statute, passed two yearsearlier, created a duty to cut down marijuana plants before theycould seed and that defendant had no right to plant marijuanaeven if he meant to cut the plants before maturity. Defendant'sconviction for possession of two thousand mature plants and onehundred fifty thousand immature plants was accordingly affirmed. 29 See pp. 1074-75 supra. 30 E.g., State v. Economy, 61 Nev. 394, 130 P.2d 264 (1942). 31 This was particularly true in the Southwest, where usecases were more numerous and appeals more frequent. Indicative ofthis trend are the following Texas cases in chronological order:Gonzales v. State, 108 Tex. Crim. 253, 299 S.W. 901 (1928) ($25fine); Baker v. State, 123 Tex. Crim. 209, 58 S.W.2d 534 (1933)(5-year sentence reversed); Horton v. State, 123 Tex. Crim. 237,58 S.W.2d 833 (1933) (2-year sentence reversed); Spangler v.State, 135 Tex. Crim. 36, 117 S.W.2d 63 (1938) 1-year sentenceaffirmed); Ramirez v. State, 135 Tex. Crim. 442, 125 S.W.2d 597(1938) (3-year sentence affirmed) (possession of a crop of 300plants); Fawcett v. State, 137 Tex. Crim. 14, 127 S.W.2d 905(1939) (2-year sentence reversed); Anderson v. State, 137 Tex.Crim. 461, 131 S.W.2d 961 (1939) (5-year sentence affirmed)(defendant tried to dispose of marijuana in station house);Martinez v. State, 138 Tex. Crim. 51, 134 SW.2d 276 (1939)(6-year sentence reversed); Carrizal v. State, 138 Tex. Crim.103, 134 S.W.2d 287 (1939) (2-year sentence affirmed); Lufkin v.State, 144 Tex. Crim. 501, 164 S.W.2d 709 (1942) (2-yearaffirmed); Cornelius v. State, 158 Tex. Crim. 356, 256 S.W.2d 102(1953) (2-year sentence affirmed); Sparks v. State, 159 Tex.Crim. 111, 261 S.W.2d 571 (1953) (2-year sentence reversed); Raov. State, 160 Tex. Crim. 416, 271 S.W.2d 426 (1954) (2-10 yearsentence); Brewer v. State, 161 Tex. Crim. 28, 274 S.W.2d 411(1954) (8-year sentence affirmed); Torres v. State, 161 Tex.Crim. 480, 278 SW.2d 853 (1955) (3-year sentence affirmed); Gomezv. State, 162 Tex. Crim. 30, 280 SW.2d 279 (1955) (5-25 yearsentence affirmed); McWhorter v. State, 163 Tex. Crim. 318, 291SW.2d 329 (1956) (2-3 year sentence affirmed); Crosco v. State,164 Tex. Crim. 257, 298 S.W.2d 134 (1957) (2-year sentenceaffirmed); Garcia v. State, 166 Tex. Crim. 482, 316 S.W.2d 734(1958) (life sentence affirmed); Sherr2d v. State, 167 Tex. Crim.119, 318 SW.2d 900 (1958) (13-year sentence reversed); Leal v.State, 169 Tex. Crim. 222, 332 S.W.2d 729 (1959) (75-yearsentence affirmed) (one prior conviction); King v. State, 169Tex. Crim. 34, 335 S.W.2d 378 (1959) (7-year sentence affirmed);Locke v. State, 169 Tex. Crim. 361, 334 S.W.2d 292 (1960)(15-year sentence affirmed); Massiate v. State, 365 S.W.2d 802(Tex. Crim. App. 1963) (life sentence affirmed) (two priorburglary convictions). 32 367 U.S. 643 (1961). 33 State v. Shotts, 207 La. 898, 22 So. 2d 209, cert. denied,326 U.S. 730 (1945). 34 See, e.g., United States v. Rabinowitz, 339 U.S. 56 (1950).The Court here upheld the search of a one-room office on thegrounds that the search was incident to a lawful arrest, and saidthat the scope of such searches must turn on the reasonablenessof the search considering all the underlying circumstances. 35 Cf. Anderson v. State, 137 Tex. Crim. 461, 131 S.W.2d 961(1939). See also Lea) v. State, 169 Tex. Crim. 222, 332 S.W.2d729 (1959), holding it reasonable for a policeman to searchdefendant's shorts where he suspected from an informer's tip thatthe "out of the ordinary bulge" in defendant's pantsconcealed marijuana. 36 Ramirez v. State, 135 Tex. Crim. 442, 125 SW.2d 597 (1938).Eventually, courts began to allow the admission of illegallyseized evidence if there was any untainted source whatsoever.Thus, where defendant testified that the police had foundmarijuana in a dresser drawer in his house, the court permittedthe state to introduce the marijuana based on the untaintedsource of defendant's own statements in court. Rao v. State, 160Tex. Crim, 416, 271 S.W_2d 426 (1954). 37 See Connolly v. Medalie, 58 F.2d 629 (2d Cir. 1932). Inthat case judge Learned Hand wrote: Men just wince at admitting that they were the owners, or inpossession, of contraband property; may wish at once to securethe remedies of a possessor, and avoid the perils of the part;but equivocation will not serve. If they come as victims, theymust take on that role, with enough detail to cast them withoutquestion. The petitioners at bar shrank from that predicament;but they were obliged to choose one horn of the dilemma. Id. at 630 38 See King v. State, 169 Tex. Crim. 34, 335 SAV.2d 378(1959). Here the Texas court held, with one dissent, that asearch warrant for the premises of the husband authorized asearch of the wife's bag in the house; her conviction for thematerials found in the bag was affirmed, In the field of search incident to an arrest, courts went evenfarther. Thus, a Texas court affirmed a conviction based upon thearrest and search of a defendant, even though the police officeradmitted he had arrested the defendant solely for the purpose ofsearching him. The officer ostensibly arrested the defendant fora knife fight, but later admitted that he had arrested himbecause he suspected him of possession of marijuana. The courtnoted that the defendant was unable to give any authority for hiscontention that the state should be bound by the officer'sstatement as to the purpose of the arrest. Gonzales v. State, 160Tex. Crim. 548, 272 S.W.2d 524 (1954). 39 It had been held that contraband may be seized in a searchincident to arrest although the items taken had no relationshipto the crime for which the arrest was made. Harris v. UnitedStates, 331 U.S. 145 (1947). overruled, Chimel v. California, 395U.S. 752 (1969). 40 THE PRESIDENT'S COMMISSION ON LAW ENFORCEMENT ANDADMINISTRATION OF JUSTICE, TASK FORCE REPORT: NARCOTICS AND DRUGABUSE 8. See also MASS PRODUCTION JUSTICE AND THE CONSTITUTIONALIDEAL 52-53 (C. Whitebread ed. 1970). 41 287 U.S. 435 (1932). 42 356 U.S. 369 (1958). 43 See A. LITTLE, DRUG ABUSE AND LAW ENFORCEMENT (1967). 44 See Henderson v. United States, 237 F.2d 169, 172 (1956);State v. Taylor, 375 S.W.2d 58, 62 (Mo. 1964). But see People v.Perez, 62 Cal. 2d 769, 401 P.2d 934, 44 Cal. Rptr. 326 (1965)(Traynor, C.J.). 45 Sherman v. United States, 356 U.S. 369, 377 & n.8(1958) (Warren, GJ.). 46 Id. it 378 (Frankfurter, J., concurring); Sorrells v.United States, 287 U.S. 435, 453-59 (1932) (Roberts, J.,dissenting). 47 228 F.2d 121 (5th Cir. 1955), See also United States v.Davis 272 F.2d 149 (7th Cit. 1959). Davis was not strictly anentrapment case; the government agents had arranged for thetransportation of a hag of marijuana front Texas to Chicago. Thedefendant argued that the agents' activities were illegal, andfor that reason, the government was estopped from prosecuting himand that the evidence was inadmissible. The trial court foundthat the defendant had arranged for the deal and instructed thejury to acquit if the agents had illegally caused theimportation. As in Gilmore, the jury was not willing to condemnthe police, 48 People v. Branch, 119 Cal. App. 2d 490, 494, 260 P.2d 27,30 (Dist. Ct. App. 1953), where the police had their witness callthe defendant and ask to buy some marijuana and then accompaniedthe witness to the defendant's home. 49 See People v. Williams, 146 Cal. App. 2d 656, 304 P.2d 100(1956); Commonwealth v. Jones, 46 Dauph. 300 (Dauphin County,Pa., Dist. Ct. 1938). 50 See, e.g., People v. Agajanian, 97 Cal. App. 2d 399, 218P.2d 114 (Dist. Ct. App. 1950); People v. Oliver, 66 Cal. App. 2d431, 152 P.2d 329 (Dist. Ct. App. 1944); Valdez v. State, 135Tex. Crim. 201, 117 S.W.2d 459 (1938). 51 McWhorter v. State, 163 Tex. Crim. 318, 291 S.W.2d 329(1956). 52 People v. Sanchez, 197 Cal. App. 2d 617, 17 Cal. Rptr. 230(Dist. Ct. App. 1961); People v. Haggard, 181 Cal. App. 2d 38, 4Cal. Rptr. 898 (Dist. Ct. App. 1960); People v. Janisse, 162 Cal.App. 2d 117, 328 P.2d 11 (Dist. Ct. App. 1958). Even minors whoreceive the marijuana from the defendant are competent toidentify the substance. People v. Sanchez, supra. 53 See Hernandez v. State, 137 Tex. Crim. 343, 129 S.W.2d 301(1938). 54 See, e.g., cases cited at note 52 supra. 55See, e.g., People v. Ballejos, 216 Cal. App. 2d 286@ 30 Cal.Rptr. 725 (Dist. Ct. App. 1963); People v. Johnson, 99 Cal. App.2d 559, 222 P.2d 58 (Dist. Ct. App. 1950). overruled, People v.Perez, 62 Cal. 2d 769, 401 P.2d 934, 44 CA Rptr. 326 0965)(Traynor, C.J.). See also People v. Sanchez, 197 C21. App, 2d617, 17 Cal, Rptr. 230 (Dist. Ct. App. 1961); People v. Alinnns,110 Cal. .@,\pp. 2d 310, 242 P.2d 331 (Dist. Ct. App.), ccrt.dcnied, 344 U.S. 846 (1952). 56 162 CA App. 2d 117, 328 P.2d 11 Misr. Ct. App. 1958) (itwas not too improbable that defendant would have given marijuanaaway to a near stranger). But see People v. MacCagnan, 129 Cal.App, 2d 100, 276 P.2d 679 (Dist. Ct. App. 1954) (evidence of theprice admitted to show the unlikelihood that defendant was giventhe marijuana). 57 People v. Gebron, 124 C21. App, 2d 675, 208 P.2d 1068(Dist. Ct. App. 1954). 58 People v. Mimms, 110 Ca]. App. 2d 310, 242 P.2d 331 (Dist.Ct. App.), cert. denied, 344 U.S. 846 (1952). 59 People V. JA7irlSton, 46 Ca]. 2d 151, 293 P.2d 40 (1956)(witnesses against defendant for sale to minor were due to go ontrial themselves); People v. Ballejos, 216 Cal. App. 2d 286, 30Cal Rptr. 725 (Dist, Ct. App. 1963) (agent alleged to be paid bygovernment if successful was only witness against defendant). 60 See People v. Carrasco, 159 Cal. App. 2d 63, 32i P.2d 129(Dist. Ct. App. 1958), People v. Antista, 129 Cal. App. 2d 47,276 P.2d 177 (Dist. Ct. App. 1954) (defendant never reportedhaving previously used marijuana and apartment used by many otherpersons); People v. Candiotto, 128 Cal. App. 2d 347, 275 P.2d 500(Dist. Ct. App. 1954); People v. Savage, 128 Cal. App. 2d 123,274 P.2d 905 (Dist. Ct. App. 1954) (maid found marijuana wrappedin napkins two days after a party held to be insufficientevidence) (trial judge held to be prejudiced); Fawcett V. State,137 Tex. Crim. 14, 127, S.W.2d 905 (1939) (reversed for failureto give instruction on ignorance as a defense). 61 Gonzales v. People, 128 Colo. 522, 264 P.2d 508 (1953);State v. Walker, 54 N.M. 302, 223 P.2d 943 (1950). 62 Perez v. State, 34 Ala. App. 406, 40 So. 2d 344 (Ct. App.1949) (paper in apartment matched paper on marijuana). See alsoPeople v. Rodriguez, 151 Cal. App. 2d 598, 312 P.2d 272 (Dist.Ct. App. 1957) (defendant knowingly helping owner move marijuanais sufficient for possession). 63 People v. Miller, 162 Cal. App. 2d 96, 328 P.2d 506 (Dist.Ct. App. 1958) (reversible error to introduce marijuana founddown the street from the defendant's apartment without furtherproof of defendant's ownership) - In Sherrad v. State, 167 Tex.Crim. 119, 318 S.W.2d 900 (1958), defendant's conviction wasreversed for the failure of the prosecutor to connect the paymentto the defendant with the later payment to another defendant whomade delivery of the marijuana to the agent. The court noted thatdefendant had been charged as the principal, and that no proof ofany conspiracy had been made. See also People v. Vasquez, 135Cal. App. 2d 446, 287 P.2d 385 (Dist. Ct. App. 1955) (defendantchargeable with transporting, not possession, where he toldco-defendant to throw marijuana away and co-defendant did not doso). 64 Lake v. United States, 302 F.2d 452 (8th Cir. 1962). 65 See, e.g., People v. Sykes, 44 Cal. 2d 166, 280 P.2d 769,cert. denied, 349 U.S. 934 (1955) (evidence of defendant'sactivities as a pimp admissible in a trial on charge of marijuanasale to minor in order to prove that there was a plot tosubjugate both the body and mind of the minor) (Traynor, CJ,dissented, stating that the evidence was prejudicial and of noprobative value); Escamilla v. State, 162 Tex. Crim. 346, 285SW.2d 216 (1955) (permissible for prosecutor to call defendant apeddler and then to withdraw statement); People v. Salo, 73 Cal.App. 2d 685, 167 P.2d 269 (Dist. Ct. App. 1946); Medina v. State,149 Tex, Crim. 249, 193 S.W.2d 196 (1946) (no error to calldefendant a dealer in marijuana in possession trial). 66 Torres v. State, 161 Tex. Crim. 480, 278 S.W.2d 85 3 (1955). 67 People v. Head, 108 Cal. App. 2d 734, 239 P.2d 506 (Dist.Ct. App. 1952). Contents | Feedback | Search DRCNet Library | Schaffer Library | Major Studies The Forbidden Fruit and the Tree ofKnowledgeWT02-B02-11IA086-000614-B044-137http://206.61.184.43:80/schaffer/Library/studies/vlr/vlr8.htm 206.61.184.43 19970122021316 text/html 44984HTTP/1.0 200 OKDate: Wednesday, 22-Jan-97 02:13:12 GMTServer: WebSitePro/1.1f (S/N wpo-0deb)Allow-ranges: bytesContent-type: text/htmlLast-modified: Saturday, 28-Dec-96 06:47:20 GMTContent-length: 44766 The Public Discovers The Truth About Marijuana Contents | Feedback | Search DRCNet Library | Schaffer Library | Major Studies The Forbidden Fruit and the Tree ofKnowledge THE FORBIDDEN FRUIT AND THE TREE OF KNOWLEDGE: AN INQUIRYINTO THE LEGAL HISTORY OF AMERICAN MARIJUANA PROHIBITION Richard J. Bonnie & Charles H.Whitebread, II VIII. THE PUBLIC DISCOVERS THE TRUTH ABOUT MARIJUANA We need not belabor the point, but sometime after 1965the wisdom of the marijuana laws suddenly became dinner-tableconversation in most American middle-class homes along with theIndochina war and campus dissent. Many sons and daughters, andeven mothers and fathers, of the middle class had tried the drug,and those who had not were certainly familiar with"pot" and the law. The medical profession finallycommenced a research effort to determine who was right-the userwho said the drug was a harmless pleasant euphoriant or thelawmakers, who by their actions had condemned it as a noxiouscause of crime, addiction and insanity. A. Marijuana and the Masses Although marijuana arrests arid seizures hit their all-timelow point in 1960,1 the middle and late sixties witnessed arevolution in marijuana use. Vast numbers of people have recentlyadopted the drug as their principal euphoriant; however, by allestimates, the new users are the sons and daughters of the middleclass, not the ethnic minorities and ghetto residents formerlyassociated with marijuana.2 Student marijuana use is now socommon that it has been associated in the public eye with theoverall campus life style.3 Accompanying the growth of widespreadmarijuana use on campus has been an increasing experimentationwith the drug by intellectuals, professors, young professionalsand members of several other social groups who would never haveconsidered using the drug ten years ago.4 Dr. Stanley F. Yolles, former Director of the NationalInstitute of Mental Health, testifying before a Senatesubcommittee, said, "A conservative estimate of persons inthe United States, both Juvenile and adult, who have usedmarihuana, at least once, is about 8 million and may be as highas 12 million people."5 Other estimates have run as high astwenty to twenty-five million users.6 This vast increase in thenumber of people using marijuana seems to have begun in the earlyand middle sixties. It is likely that this new use pattern wasinitially precipitated by the publicity surrounding the LSDexperimentation of Doctors Alpert and Leary at Harvard in 1963.7As a growing segment of the academic fringe began to preachconsciousness-expansion, students began to find marijuanaavailable on campus. From that point the phenomenon snowballed.As more novice marijuana users reported no ill effects from itsuse, more students tried it, and in turn those who used andenjoyed the drug began to "turn on" those who had not.By 1970, some campuses reported that over seventy percent of thestudent body were users.8 More recently, marijuana use spreadbeyond the student subculture; reportedly its use has becomecommon even among young professionals on Wall Street.9 Moreover,since it is readily available and widely used in Vietnam,marijuana has become popular with many soldiers.10 3 See, e.g., R. DEBoLD& R. LEAF, LSD,MAN AND SOCIETY(1967); R. GOLDSTEIN, ONE IN SEVEN: DRUGS ON CAMPUS (1966); K.KENNISTON, THE UNCOMMITrED: ALIENATED YOUTH INAMERICAN SOCIETY(1967); D, LOURIA, THEDRUG SCENE (1968); L. SIMMONS & B.WINEGRAD, IT'S HAPPENING (1967). 4 See Malabre, Drugs on the Job, Wall St. J., May 4, 1970, at1, Col. 6. This article deals not only with drug use byprofessionals but also details the increasing trend of drug useon the job. 5 Hearings Before the Subcomm. to Investigate juvenileDelinquency of the Senate Comm. on the Judiciary, 91st Cong., 1StSess. 267 (1969) [hereinafter cited as Narcotics LegislationHearings]. 6 Id. at 268. 7 See R. DEBOLD & R. LEAF, LSD, MAN AND SOCIETY 130-31(1967). 8 TIME, Sept. 26, 1969, at 69; Yale Daily News, Jan. 14, 1970. 9 Malabre, supra note 4. 10 D. LOURIA, THE DRUG SCENE 10 (1968). The general public is clearly aware that there has been both avast increase in the number of users and a shift from lower- tomiddle-class use of the drug. These great changes in the natureof marijuana use have had important social consequences. First,with the sharp rise in the number of users and the tendency ofmarijuana users to share common life styles and often politicalopinions, the drug has become associated ill the past few yearswith a major counter-culture, Many proponents of thatcounter-culture have contended that the illegal status ofmarijuana -which puts large numbers of people oil the wrong sideof the criminal law-is the most significant unifying andrecruiting agent for the New Left and the other political andsocial causes of the late sixties." Some New Left leadershave gone so far as to oppose reduction in the penalties formarijuana possession because they feel severe penalties aid theirrecruiting ends by making marijuana users outraged against asociety that overacts so strongly to a nonexistent danger."We feel the general disrespect for marijuana laws may be causinga dangerous disrespect for all laws in a sizeable segment of thepopulation. The credibility of government suffers on all issueswhen its handling of the use of this drug seems to so many so farremoved from reality. This opinion is supported by the increasingmedical evidence that the dangers of tile drug are de minimus. Secondly, the new middle-class use of marijuana has inducedthe first significant medical inquiry into the nature of thedrug; has spawned increasing numbers of challenges to theconstitutionality of marijuana laws and penalties, and hasspurred the passage of more lenient legislation. One commentator has stated: Nobody cared when it was a ghetto problem. Marijuana -well, itwas used by jazz musicians or the lower class, so you didn't careif they got 2-to-20 years. But when a nice, middle-class girl orboy in college gets busted for the same thing, then the wholecommunity sits up and takes notice. And that's the name of thegame today. The problem has begun to come home to roost-in allstrata of society, in suburbs, in middle-class homes, in thecolleges, suddenly, the punitive, vindictive approach wastouching- all classes of society. And now the most exciting thingthat's really happening is the change in attitude by the people.Now we have a willingness to examine the problem, as to whetherit's an experimentation, or an illness rather than "anevil." With this change I think we can come to a morerational approach to methods of drug control.13 Without doubt, the new class of users has successfullydemanded more favorable attention from the legislatures and thecourts than the lower class could have attracted. In fact, eventhe slightest circumscription of the reach of a state marijuanalaw is now national news.14 A third result of the widespread use of marijuana has been asubstantial challenge to the traditional picture of the nationalmarijuana trade. Over the past three decades, law enforcementofficials continued to convince legislators that the traffic inmarijuana was controlled by professional criminals.15 Confrontedwith this portrait of the marijuana trade, legislators naturallystereotyped the "seller" as the vicious criminalpushing his wares for high profit and felt that extraordinarilyharsh penalties were justified for sellers.16 From several recentstudies it appears that the structure of marijuana traffic bearslittle or no relation to the traditional stereotype. In a recentsurvey of 204 users it was found that 44 percent had sold tofriends at least once. Many casual users sell to leave themselvesenough profit to cover the amount of their own use. 17 The studyfurther finds that even at the very top, profits are too smalland the product too bulky to interest the criminal class thatprobably underwrites sales of heroin and other "harddrugs." 18 Thus even at the top, amateurs-composed generallyof the students, young professionals and soldiers who constitutethe users-are the main source of the drug.19 It is also importantto note that marijuana is typically sold by the ounce20 ratherthan by the cigarette as was traditionally assumed. Thus, eventhe relatively casual experimenter was likely to have at least anounce of the drug in his possession. B. Enforcement of the Marijuana Laws:1960-1970 As a result of the rapid spread of marijuana use, fullenforcement of the marijuana laws has become impossible.21 By1967 the Federal Bureau of Narcotics had 299 agents, roughly 50more than in 1956.22 In the same period the use of marijuanaprobably increased 1,000 fold. It seems obvious from both FBNstatistics and the best available state and local statistics thattwo enforcement patterns emerged in the sixties: concentration on"sellers" and selective enforcement. Since 1960 the FBN and major state and municipal narcoticsquads have concentrated on the larger sellers. In the earlysixties this trend was less pronounced,23 but by 1968 theCommissioner of the FBN said that 75 percent of federal marijuanaarrests were of dealers and that even the remaining 25 percentwere sellers but were charged with possession as a result of pleabargains. Statistics from California show the same concentrationon sellers nevertheless the California bureau found that most ofthese sellers were young and first offenders.26 Thus, at least by1968 it became clear that sellers were quite often neophytes. At the same time that the police have abandoned fullenforcement for concentration on dealers, enforcement of the lawshas remained necessarily haphazard and somewhat selective. Sincemarijuana use has become so common, there are certain student andhippy communities in which the police could arrest nearlyeveryone. Here the problem of selective enforcement necessarilyarises-the police arrest those they dislike for other reasons,either political disagreement or suspicion of use of other drugs.This inevitable practice, although perhaps not consciouslyplanned, has brought outcry from some victimized communities.27This policy-if not a policy by the police at least a perceptionby the hippies-of selective enforcement has provided themincreased impetus toward the anti-establishment life style theyhave adopted. Their attitude is aggravated when the police engagein particularly aggressive tactics, such as use of informers, totrap the offenders. 28 By 1970, the unenforceability of the marijuana laws was mostclearly evidenced by the failure of President Nixon's OperationIntercept which was designed to seal off the Mexican border andthe supply of marijuana coming into the United States fromMexico.29 Both national and international tensions led to thefailure of the "Noble Experiment." By now, themarijuana trade is so scattered and at the same time sofragmented (with no real hierarchy in the trade) that theunenforceability of these laws has reached Prohibitionproportions. C. Emergence of Medical Opinion One of the most significant causes of widespread middle-classuse of marijuana was the lack of any medical proof of theallegedly evil effects of its use. In fact, what authoritativestudies had been conducted up to this time were inconsistent withthe assumptions underlying anti-marijuana legislation. In thissituation, users viewed themselves as experimenters with a mildeuphoriant, not criminals endangering themselves or society atlarge. The inevitable consequence was increased medical inquiryinto the effects of the drug, beginning in about 1967.31 Concurrently, the National Institute of Mental Healthsignificantly Increased its funding for grants and contracts formarijuana research.32 Despite this intensified inquiry, uncertainty about theeffects of the drug persists. There are several major researchobstacles responsible for continued absence of reliable research.After outlining the impediments to conclusive findings, we shallextract from the existing studies the present state of medicalknowledge. 1. Research Obstacles The major obstacle is the nature of the marijuana plantitself. Marijana is a derivative of the plant Cannabis Sativa,commonly denoted the hemp plant. It is classified as a dioeciousplant, that is, the male reproductive parts are on one individualplant and the female parts are on another. The differentiation ofthe male and female plants is exceedingly significant because thechemical compounds responsible for the euphoric effect ofmarijuana are found primarily in the sticky resin that covers theunfertilized female flowers and adjacent leaves. The male plantmay contain a small amount of this active resin, but it is grownmainly for hemp fiber.33 The hemp plant yields three rough grades of intoxicatingsubstances, the least potent of which is "marijuana."34 Yet, because the classifications are imprecise, confusion isengendered by attributing to "marijuana" the effectsproduced by the excessive use of the more potent forms ofcannabis.35 In addition, the psychic potency of the plant differsdepending upon where the marijuana is grown, 36 and uponcultivation variables such as occurrence of fertilization andtime of harvesting: If the male plants are not removed and fertilization occurs, the female plants which carry the main intoxicating properties are considerably weakened in that respect. In addition, unless harvesting is carried out immediately before the blossoming of the flowers there is further weakening and variation in the potency of the produce.37 It is interesting to note in this connection that themarijuana used in the United States is among the weakest in theworld.38 These factors frustrate the creation of a standardizeddosage in any given experiment and preclude the comparison of theresults of independent studies.39 In addition to the problems engendered by the great variancein potency and dosage, meaningful marijuana research alsoinhibited by differences in means of consumption. Sincestandardized doses are generally considered impossible if thedrug is smoked,40 most studies, including the La Guardia Report,are based upon oral administration of marijuana to the subjects.Yet smoking is the method of consumption among nearly allAmerican users. Furthermore, standardized dosage is not evenassured by the oral method since "little is known about thegastrointestinal absorption of the highly water-solublecannabinals in man." 41 Finally, "there is considerableindirect evidence from users that the quality of the intoxicationis different when marijuana or its preparations are ingestedrather than smoked. In particular, ingestion seems to cause morepowerful effects . . . . " 42 2. Current Medical Knowledge It is perhaps best to begin with the medical data concerningthe traditional allegations about marijuana. (a) The Myths.-First, it is universally accepted among medicalauthorities that marijuana is not physically habit-forming.43Although some researchers have asserted that a psychologicaldependence may result from continued use of the drug, thishypothesis has not been established and its relevance has beenquestioned. One authority has noted that "habituation tomarihuana is not as strong as to tobacco or to alcohol." 44Another has commented that "[a] psychological dependence anddesire for the drug may occur, but this is inconsistent and isnot uncontrollable.... Perhaps the dependence is even less thanthe dependence on cigarettes." 45 Second, there is no evidence whatsoever that the use ofmarijuana has a direct relationship to the commission of crime.One commentator has noted that " during the high themarihuana user may say things he would not ordinarily say, but hegenerally will not do things that are foreign to his nature. Ifhe is not normally a criminal, he will not commit a crime underthe influence of the drug." 46 In fact, it is entirelylikely that the characteristic passive reaction to the use ofmarijuana tends to inhibit criminality. A recent study has shownthat juvenile "potheads" tend to be nonaggressive andto stay away from trouble.47 Similarly, there is no scientificevidence for the proposition that marijuana is an aphrodisiac. Ithas been suggested to the contrary that the most potent form ofcannabis, pure ganja, has the reverse effect, being taken byIndian priests to quell the libido.48 Finally, the evidence is at best inconclusive regarding thecontention that use of marijuana leads to the use of"hard" narcotics. Some of the early studies claiming tohave established a valid connection were scientificallyunreliable. One authority has observed in this regard: Supposedly scientific studies of this problem have been conducted in the past, such as the one done in a deprived area of a large city where the use of heroin was widespread, and indicating that many users of marijuana went on to the use of more hazardous drugs. I am sure that without previous marijuana, the use of such drugs in that environment would be just as high, and that if such a study were done on a college population, it would be found that the subsequent use of "hard" drugs would be negligible.49 Referring to a presidential task force investigation, anotherauthoritv has commented: It is true that the Federal study showed that among heroin users about 50% had had experience with marijuana- the study also found, however, that most of the heroin addicts had been users of alcohol and tobacco. There is no evidence that marijuana is more likely than alcohol or tobacco to lead to the use of narcotics.50 On the basis of the available information, most authoritieshave concluded that there is no scientific basis for the theorythat the use of marijuana is a causal factor in the use of"hard" narcotics.51 In any event, as a matter of commonsense, it would appear that the phenomenon in dispute is verycomplex, including both individual personality features andenvironmental factors. As one commentator put it "Several ofthe studies indicate that the precious statistics have beenmisleading and exaggerated." Whether or not the propositioncan be scientifically established, there is probably a slightlygreater chance that an individual who has used marijuana could goon to opiates, but statistically this is not . . . an importantsocial consideration."52 Thus, it appears that none of the traditional allegationsabout marijuana has been scientifically established, that itsalleged addictive qualities have been disproved, and that theoverwhelming weight of authority disputes its allegedly crimeproducing and stepping stone tendencies. We will now brieflysurvey the medically recognized effects of the drug, physical,psychomotor and psychological. (b) Physical Effects.-The acute physical effects of marijuanaare the subject of much debate. Various studies have reacheddifferent conclusions. Nearly all authorities, however, are inagreement that the bodily symptoms accompanying the"high" are very slight. The most commonly noted effectsare a slight rise in blood pressure, conjunctival vascularcongestion, slight elevation in blood sugar, urinary frequencyand an increase in pulse rate.53 In general, these acute symptomsare relatively short-lived, and there are no known lastingphysical effects.54 On the other hand, there is evidence thatprolonged smoking could lead to "marijuana bronchitis,"and that communal smoking has the tendency to encourage thespread of communicable diseases. (c) Psychomotor Effects.-Varying results have also beenreported in studies of the acute effects of marijuana uponpsychomotor functions. Although the researchers have sometimesfound some slight impairment in performance tests,55 there isapparently no general depressing or stimulating effect on thenervous system and no influence on speech and coordination.56 Inthe most recent study, Doctors Well, Zinberg and Nelson of theBoston University School of Medicine found that marijuana usersare able to compensate nearly 100 percent for whatever adverseeffects may result on ordinary psychomotor performance. 57 Such findings suggest that marijuana is not likely to be acausal factor in driving accidents, a hypothesis that issupported by a recent simulated driving test comparing theperformance of subjects under the influence of marijuana andalcohol.58 There seems to be no contention in the medical fieldthat there are any lasting effects from marijuana in thepsychomotor area. The Well study reported that noticeable effects"were diminished between 30 minutes and I hour, and theywere largely dissipated 3 hours after the end of smoking. Nodelayed or persistent effects beyond 3 hours were observed orreported." 59 (d) Psychological Effects.-The acute psychological effects ofthe use of marijuana are more complex. At the outset, it can bestated with certainty that "marijuana is definitelydistinguishable from other hallucinogenic drugs such as LSD, MIT,mescaline, peyote, and psilocybin. Although it produces some ofthe same effects, it is far less potent than these other drugs.It does not alter consciousness to nearly so great an extent asthey do nor does It lead to increasing tolerance to the drugdosage." 60 Furthermore, the subjective effects of cannabisare dependent upon the personality of the user, his expectations,and the circumstances under which the drug is taken, as well aslearning to smoke marijuana properly.61 There is general agreement about the pleasurable psychologicaleffects. Users uniformly experience greatly enhancedperception-whether real or delusory-of visual, auditory, tasteand touch effects, increased sense of humor or hilarity, feelingsof well-being or wonderment, and distorted time and spaceperceptions.62 In this connection, it is interesting to note thateven the pleasurable phenomena are dependent on individualcircumstances, particularly ivlicii the drug is taken for thefirst time. Many, if not most, people do not become"high" on their first exposure to marijuana, even if itis smoked correctly.63 The probable explanation for this curiousphenomenon is that repeated exposure to marijuana reducespsychological inhibition, as part of, or as a result of, alearning process.64 Medical knowledge is most tentative with reference to adversepsychological effects. Recent studies, however, have vehementlydisputed an earlier tendency to attribute psychoses and severepanic reactions to marijuana use.65 As Dr. Well has noted: Because reliable information about the acute effects of marijuana has been as scarce within the medical profession as without, many of these reactions have been misinterpreted and incorrectly treated. For example, simple panic states, which doubtless would be properly diagnosed in other circumstances, are often called "toxic psychoses" when doctors elicit immediate histories of marijuana use.66 Medical experts now generally agree that the possibility ofdepression, panic and psychoses depends entirely on thecircumstances of use and the personality of the user.67 In hismost recent study, Dr. Weil concluded that "serious adversereactions are uncommon in the 'normal' population,"68 butnoted three exceptions. First, simple depressive reactions whichrarely occur in regular users may occur in novices who approachtheir initial use ambivalently.69 Second, the most frequentadverse reaction is apprehension, more often described asanxiety, and sometimes reaching a degree of panic. Again, suchreactions are closely related to the attitude of the user and tothe social setting.70 The social setting also influences thefrequency of panic reactions, suggesting again that thisphenomenon correlates with the degree of reluctance with whichpeople approach initial use of the drug: In a community where marijuana has been accepted as a recreational intoxicant, they may be extremely rare (for example, one per cent of all responses to the drug). On the other hand, at a rural Southern college, where experimentation with the drug may represent a much greater degree of social deviance, 25 per cent of persons trying it for the first time may become panicked.71 The panicked person normally believes that he is either dyingor losing his mind, and simple reassurance will end most suchreactions.72 The reaction normally is short-lived, but it may beprolonged by an attitude encouraging the underlying fears.73 Inshort, "panic reactions . . . seem more nonpharmacologicthan pharmacologic."74 Third, psychotic reactions occur rarely, if at all, in normalusers,75 and occur mainly in persons with a low psychosisthreshold or a history of psychosis76 or hallucinogenic drugexperimentation.77 Even in such cases, marijuana is a precipitantrather than a primary cause of this type of reaction 78 whichlasts at most a day or two.79 Footnotes 1 TRAFFIC IN Opium 69 (1960). 2 In reporting the marijuana arrests of Robert Kennedy, Jr.,and R. Sargent Shriver, Jr., Walter Cronkite noted that"This case is not unusual; more and more parents across thenation find themselves going to court with their children on drugcharges. It's becoming an incident of modern living." CBSEvening News, Aug. 6, 1970, See also J. Rosevear, Pot: A HANDBOOKOF MARIHUANA 117-31 (1967); TRAFFIC IN OPIUM 2, 40 (1966). 11 Perhaps the best statement the authors have yet encounteredto this effect was made by Jerry Rubin, one of the Chicago Seven,in Charlottesville, Virginia, on May 6, 1970, when he said:"Smoking pot miles you a criminal and a revolutionary-assoon as you take your first puff. you are an enemy ofsociety" See also J. Rubin. Do It! (1970). 12 Wash. Post, Feb. 24, 1970, at III, col. 3. 13 N.Y. Times, Feb. 15, 1970,  6 (Magazine), at 14(statement of Dr. Stanley Yolles). 14 See, e.g., Wash. Post, May 16, 1970, at A3, col. 8(reporting a Minnesota Supreme Court decision holding thatpossession of small amount of marijuana does not necessarilyjustify conviction). This case is discussed at P. 1122 infra. 15 N.Y. Times, Oct. 19, 1969,  4, at 8, col. 2. 16 Narcotics Legislation Hearings 4 (statement of SenatorDodd). 17 Goode, The Marijuana Market, 12 Colum. F., Winter 1969, at7. 18 Id. at 8. 19 Hearings Before the Subcomm. to Investigate JuvenileDelinquency of the Senate Comm. on the judiciary, 90th Cong., 2dSm. 4510 (1968) [hereinafter cited as Juvenile DelinquencyHearings]. At these hearings, former Commissioner of the Bureauof Narcotics, Henry Giordano, stated: "We have not seen anyevidence of criminal syndicates such as the Mafia being involved[in the marijuana trade]." Id. 20 Goode, supra note 17, at 4, 5. See also Leary, thePolitics, Ethics, and Meaning of Marijuana, in The MARIHUANAPAPERS 121 (D. Solomon ed. 1966). 21 See Los Angeles Times Dec. 4, 1967, s. 2 at 6, col. 1(statement by Los Angeles Police Chief). 22 See Mandel, Problems with Official Drug Statistics, 21Stan. L. Rev. 991, 1021 n. 114 (1969). 23 See TRAFFIC IN OPIUM 72 (1960); id. at 65 (1961) id at 78(1963) Hearings on Depts of Treasury and Post Office and the Executive Offic Appropriations for 1969 Before a Subcomm. Of the Hose Comm. On Appropriations, 90th Cong. 2d sess., pt. 1, at 624 (1968) 25 The state of California has kept excellent statistics since1959. In 1968. as a typical year of the late sixties, the policeseized over 30,000,000 grams of marijuana of all kinds in only10,000 arrests. The larger amount seized relative to the numberof arrests seems to indicate the concentration on dealers. BUREAUOF CRIMINAL STATISTICS, DEPT OF JUSTICE, STATE OF CALIFORNIA,DRUG ARRESTS AND DISPOSITIONS IN CALIFORNIA 41, 43 (1968) 26 Id. at 37-39. 27 See Fort, Social Problems of Drug Use and Drug Policies, 56CALIF. L. Rev. 17, 23 (1968). See also H. BECKER, OUTSIDERS 159(1963); T. DUSTER, T14E LEGISLATION OF MORALITY: LAW, DRUGS ANDMORAL JUDGMENT (1970). 28 See LITTLE, DRUG ABUSE AND LAW ENFORCEMENT 1313 -15 (1967);Project, Marijuana Laws: An Empirical Study of Enforcement andAdministration in Los Angeles County, 15 U.C.L.A. L. Rev. 1507,1522-31 (1968). 29 TIME, Sept. 26, 1969, at 70. 30 One commentator has charged that those most knowledgeableabout marijuana have "dodged" the topic. Kaplan, TheSpecial Case of Marihuana (Or, It's the Doctor's Fault), 9 J.CLINICAL PHARMACOLOGY 349, 351 (1969). 31 At the end of 1968 there existed only four known studies onhuman subjects conducted by Americans. See Weil, Zinberg &Nelson, Clinical and Psychological Effects of Marihuana in Man,162 SCIENCE 1234, 1235 (1968) [hereinafater cited as Weil Study].The previous lack of concern with marijuana call also be observedby 211 examination of the number of articles appearing in medicalperiodicals. During the decade between 1942 and 1951, only sixarticles dealing with the subject are listed in the index formedical journals. Eleven reports were noted as being published inthe next ten years. From 1962 to 1966, an average of threematerials per year were available. It was not until 1967 that thesubject became of sufficient interest to occupy the time of areasonable number of medical authors. In that year, elevenarticles appeared in medical periodicals. By 1968, this numberhad increased to 30, and in 1969 more than 60 articles dealingwith the topic of human marijuana consumption have appeared. Inother words, more than three times the number of articlesappeared in the last three years than in the 25 preceding years. 32 In Fiscal year 1967, NIMH obligated $786,000 for marihuanaresearch grants and contracts. Comparable figures for 1968 and1969 respectively were S1,239,000 and $1,330,000. In Fiscal year1970, if funds are available, the institute proposes to obligate$2,550,000 to support grant and contract studies of marihuana,which means that there will have been a more than three-foldincrease for support of these studies in the last fouryears." Statement by Dr. Roger 0. Egcberg, AssistantSecretary for Health and Scientific Affairs, M.S. Dep't of HEW,before the Select Committee oil Crime, U.S. House ofRepresentatives (mimeographed press release). 33 Weil Study 1234. 34 The three substances are charas-pure unadulterated resinthat has been scraped from the leaves and flowering tops of thefemale plant; hashish or ganja-an agglomeration of femaleflowering tops and stems with whatever resin is attached to theirsurfaces, thought to contain about 40% resin; and marijuana-a lowpotency preparation consisting of dried mature leaves andflowering tops of both male and female plants, thought to containbetween 5 and 8% resin. Schwarz, Toward a Medical Understandingof Marihuana, 14 CAN. PSYCHIATRIC ASS'N J. 591, 592 (1969). 35 As long as the term marihuana is used indiscriminately torefer to cannabis of all kinds and potencies, confusion willcontinue. . . . In this country some of the vigorous opponents ofmarihuana seem to foster this confusion by attributing to any useof marihuana the effects produced primarily by the excessive useof the more potent forms of cannabis in an attempt to preserve astrongly negative public image of marihuana. H. NOWLIS, DRUGS ON THE COLLEGE CAMPUS 93 (1969). 36 "The major botanical feature of the plant is theextreme variability in its appearance, characteristics andproperties when grown in different geographical and climaticcondition." Schwarz, supra note 34, at 591. In the UnitedStates and Mexico, for example, the production of the more potentforms is relatively uncommon, and there appears to be no demandfor them. J. ROSEVEAR, POT: A HANDBOOK OF MARIHUANA 31-33 (1967). 37 Schwarz, supra note 34, at 592. 38 Zunin, Marijuana: The Drug and the Problem, 134 MILITARYMED. 104, M. 7 (1969). According to the author, several factorscontribute to this phenomenal: (1) The amount of resin found inthe flowering tops markedly decreases as the plants are grown inmore temperate areas. It is estimated that the resin content ofIndian cannabis is 20%; Mexican 15% or less; that grown inKentucky 8%; and that found in Wisconsin 6% or less. (2) The activity of the resin in the female is greatly reducedif fertilized by the male. In this country, because of aninability to distinguish between the two plants, inattention tocultivation and lack of knowledge, the female plants arefertilized. (3) The resinous content is highest prior to"going to seed" of the female plant. The marijuana inthis country has gone to seed prior to harvesting. (4) The male plant contains little or no resin content. Inthis country, the male plant is indiscriminately mixed with thefemale plant in the final preparation. (5) The most active portion of the plant is the flowering top.In this country, preparations of marijuana are composed primarilyof leaves, twigs, and seeds which are crushed. (6) The potency of marijuana decreases with time. It isreduced at the end of one year, markedly reduced at the end oftwo years, and nonexistent at the end of three years. Inaddition, it keeps better in cold, dry climates. Most of themarijuana in the United States is several months to several yearsold by the time it has been harvested and has passed through thesmuggling operation. 39 Given the above variations in the plant and in its productsand extracts, together with the continuing ignorance of itschemistry it is not surprising that it is virtually impossible tomake direct comparisons between the various studies on theeffects on human beings who are even more individually variable. Schwarz, supra note 34, at 593. Recently. what is believed to be the active ingredient inmarijuana has been isolated and synthesized. However, thissubstance denominated (THC), is only available for research invery limited quantities. Weil Study Furthermore, it has not beenproven that THC is the sole ingredient contributing to theeffects caused by marijuana. 40 "[M]any pharmacologists dismiss the possibility ofgiving marihuana by smoking because, they sav, the dose cannot hestandardized." Weil Study 1235. 41 Id. 42 Id. 43 "-There is now an abundance of evidence that marihuanais not an addictive drug. Cessation of its use produces nowithdrawal symptoms, nor does a user feel any need to increasethe dosage as he becomes accustomed to the drug." Grinspoon,Marihuana 221 Sci. Am. 17, 21 (1969). 44 Id. 45 Zunin, supra note 38, at 108. 46 Grinspoon, supra note 43, at 22. 47 McGlothlin & West, The Marihuana Problem: An Overview,125 Am. J. PSYSH. 370, 372-73 (1968). This supports the findingof the La Guardia Report that marijuana is not a direct causalfactor in criminal misconduct, but that the "high"leads to sociable attitudes. 48 THE MARIHUANA PAPERS 44 (D. Solomon ed. 1966). Sincemarijuana has a tendency to produce drowsiness, it is difficultto see how it could lead to an act of violent sex. J. ROSEVEAR,supra note 36, at 61. See also La Guardia Report, in THEMARIHUANA PAPERS 296-97 (D. Solomon ed. 1966). 49 Radoosky, Marijuana Foolishness, 280 NEW ENG. J. MED. 712(1969). 50 Grinspoon, supra note 43, at 21-23. 51 THE PRESIDENT'S COMMISSION ON LAW ENFORCEMENT ANDADMINISTRATION OF JUSTICE, TASK FORCE REPORT: NARCOTICS AND DRUGABUSE 13-14 (1967); Council on Mental Health and Committee onAlcoholism and Drug Dependence, Dependence on Cannabis(Marijuana), 201 JAM.A. 368-71 (1967). 52 Zunin, supra note 38, at 108. 53 L. GOODMAN & A. GILMAN, THE PHARMACOLOGICAL BASIS OFTHERAPEUTICS ch. 16 (3d ed. 1965). Nausea, vomiting and diarrheahave also been reported, but it is felt that these symptoms aremainly the result of oral administration. Grinspoon, supra note43, at 20. Increased appetite and dryness of the mouth are alsosaid to be common. 54 Usually the reports of chronic ill effects are to be foundin Eastern studies of individuals using the stronger hashish orpure resinous substances over prolonged periods of time and arecomplicated by the immeasurable effects of many other social,economic, personality and cultural factors. Schwarz, supra note34, at 595. 55 Tests by Robert S. Morrow in the 1930's revealed that evenlarge doses of marijuana did not affect performances on tests ofthe speed of tapping or the quickness of response to simplestimuli. Grinspoon, supra note 43, at 20. "The drug didaffect steadiness of the hand and body and the reaction time forcomplex stimuli." Id. The most recent study in this area wasdone by Andrew Weil, Norman Zinberg and Judith Nelson of theBoston University School of Medicine. Their conclusions were thatregular users of marijuana may show some slight degree ofimpairment in performance tests, but that the aptitude of thesubjects may even improve slightly after smoking marijuana. WeilStudy 1242. Marijuana-naive subjects tended to show someimpairment in performance. Id. 56 N.Y. Times, May 11, 1969, 6 (Magazine), ' at 92, Col. 2. 57 We were struck by the difficulty of recognizing when asubject is high unless he tells you that he is . . . . It seemspossible to ignore the effects of marihuana on consciousness, toadapt to them, and to control them to a significant degree. Id. 58 Comparison of tbe Effects Of Marijuana and, Alcohol OnSimulated Driving Performance 164 SCIENCE 851 (1969) (concludingthat subjects under a "social marijuana high" showed nosignificant differences from control subjects in accelerator,brake, signal, steering, and total errors). In addition,"unlike alcohol drinkers, most pot smokers studiously avoiddriving while high." J. ROSEVEAR, supra note 36, at 135. 59 Weil Study 1238. 60 Grinspoon, supra note 43, at 19. 61 H. NOWLIS, DRUGS ON THE COLLEGE CAMPUS 96-101 (1969). 62 L. GOODMAN & A. GILMAN, supra note 53, at ch. 16;Dependence on Cannabis (Marijuana), supra note 51, at 368-71. 63 Weil Study 1241; Wash. Post, May 24, 1970, at A26, col. 1. 64 "The subjective responses of our subjects indicatethat they had imagined a marihuana effect to be much moreprofoundly disorganizing than what they, experienced." WeilStudy 1241. This subjective control over the effects extended asfar as the reporting of no effects when in actuality the subjecthad received a large dose. Id. 65 Grinspoon, supra note 43, at23-24. 66 Weil, Adverse Reactions to Marijuana, 282 NEW ENG. J. MED.997 (1970). 67 See, e.g., Schwarz, supra note 34, at 595; Weil, supra note66. 68 Weil, supra note 66, at 997. 69 Marihuana depressions I have seen have occurred mainly inobsessive-compulsive persons who are ambivalent about trying thedrug or who invested the decision to experience marihuana withgreat emotional meaning. In interviewing these patients, I havethought that they used marihuana as an excuse for lettingthemselves be depressed, not that their depressions werepsycho-pharmacological. Id. at 998. 70 Dr. Weil has stated that "panic reactions occurredmost often among novice users of marijuana-frequently olderpersons who are ambivalent about trying the drug in the firstplace." N.Y. Times, May 1, 1970, at 18C, col. 2. 71 Id. These panic reactions may emulate acute psychoses inhospital emergency wards "where the patient may feeloverwhelmed, helpless and unable to communicate hisdistress." Weil, supra note 66, at 998. 72 Id. 73 N.Y. Times, May 1, 1970, at 18C, col. 3. 74 Weil, supra note 66, at 1000. 75 Dr. Weil is of the opinion that "all adverse reactionsto marihuana should be considered panic reactions until provenotherwise," id. at 998, and that he has never seen a toxicpsychosis following the smoking of marijuana by a normal user.Id. at 9199. 716 Id. at 1000. 7-7 Id. at 999-1000. 78 H. Nowlis, DRUGS ON THE COLLEGE CAMPUS 96-101 (1969);Schwarz, supra note 34 at 595. 79 McGlothlin & West, The Marijuana Problem: An Overview,125 Am. J. Psych. 370,372 (1968). Contents | Feedback | Search DRCNet Library | Schaffer Library | Major Studies The Forbidden Fruit and the Tree ofKnowledgeWT02-B02-12IA086-000614-B042-4http://206.61.184.43:80/schaffer/Library/studies/lag/symp.htm 206.61.184.43 19970122020209 text/html 13070HTTP/1.0 200 OKDate: Wednesday, 22-Jan-97 02:02:02 GMTServer: WebSitePro/1.1f (S/N wpo-0deb)Allow-ranges: bytesContent-type: text/htmlLast-modified: Saturday, 28-Dec-96 07:01:41 GMTContent-length: 12852 LaGuardia Committee Report on Marijuana -- Symptoms andBehavior Contents | Feedback | Search DRCNet Library | Schaffer Library | Major Studies | LaGuardiaCommittee Report LaGuardia Committee Report on Marihuana Medical Aspects SYMPTOMS AND BEHAVIOR Samuel Allentuck, MD IN PRELIMINARY GROUP The preliminary study of the 5 volunteer subjects had for itspurpose the establishment of methods of procedures to be followedfor the main group, and the obtaining of a general picture of thephysical and mental effects induced by the drug. Having noknowledge of the safe limits of marihuana dosage, the dosagegiven to this group was restricted to from 1 to 4 cc. of theconcentrate, and for smoking from 1 to 3 cigarettes. When ingested, 1 cc. of marihuana was slightly effective, themultiples of this more so. There was noted in all subjects someincrease in pulse rate and in blood pressure, dilated andsluggish pupils, dryness of the mouth and throat, ataxia, andsome clumsiness and incoordination of movement. Symptomsdistinctly disagreeable were dizziness in 3 subjects, a sense ofheaviness of the extremities in 2, nausea in 2 and faintness in2. Three showed motor restlessness. A state classed as euphoria,characterized by laughter, witticisms, loquaciousness, andlowering of inhibitions occurred in 3 subjects. This was notsustained but alternated with periods during which disagreeablesymptoms were dominant. In one of the subjects (V.C.) there wasno euphoric state, but a feeling of discomfort and depressionthroughout. Finally in one of the 5 (A.V.) with 2 cc. There was astate of depression with anxiety and with 4 cc. a psychoticepisode with fear of death. With the exception of the one individual during his psychoticepisode, the subjects gave no evidence of abnormal mental contentat any stage of the drug action, the only change noted being adelay in focusing attention on questions asked and difficulty insustaining mental concentration. While there was objection attimes to carrying out repetitious tests, there was no definiterefusal. There was no sexual stimulation giving rise to overtexpression. With the cigarette smoking, ataxia and charges in the pulserate, blood pressure, and pupils corresponded to those followingoral administration. In only one of the subjects, however, wasthere definite euphoria. The common symptoms were dizziness anddrowsiness. Two of the subjects found it difficult toconcentrate. The duration of the effects of marihuana was variable. When itwas ingested, the effects usually passed off in from two to fourhours, but in one instance persisted for seven hours and inanother for fourteen hours. After smoking, the duration ofeffects was from one to three hours. IN MAIN GROUP The evidence of the effects of marihuana was obtained by thesubject's statement of symptoms and sensations, by the nurses'reports and by the examiner's observations and interpretation ofchanges in the subject's mental state and behavior. The dosage of the marihuana concentrate ranged from 2 to 22cc. and in each subject the effects of more than one dose werestudied. Dosage ranging from 2 to 5 cc. was used for the largestnumber of subjects, and that from 14 to 21 cc. on only sevenoccasions. It is known that marihuana intoxication may bringabout a comatose state, but no attempt was made to determine thedosage required for this. The number receiving each of theselected doses is shown in Table 2. (TABLE 2) While the duration of action and its intensity tended toincrease with dosage, this was not always the case and equaldoses did not bring about uniform effects in all those receivingthem. Thus, 3 cc. produced a striking effect in one individual,much less in another in still another, 10 cc. produced lesseffect than S cc. Such variations are to be explained bydifferences in the mental make-up of the subject, and theparticular state of his responsiveness at the time when marihuanais taken. The number of cigarettes smoked ranged from one to eleven. Thesmoking of a single cigarette took about ten minutes and up toeight could be smoked in an hour. In smoking, increasing thenumber of cigarettes usually increased the sensation described as"high," but here also there was no uniformity inindividuals or groups. When marihuana was ingested, in dosages from 2 cc. up, itsactions became evident in from one half to one hour. The maximumeffects were seen in from two to three hours. These subsidedgradually, but the time of disappearance was variable, usuallythree to five hours, in some instances twelve hours or more. When marihuana cigarettes were used the effects appearedalmost immediately. After one cigarette, these had usuallydisappeared in an hour. After several cigarettes had been smokedthe effects increased progressively in intensity and reached amaximum in about an hour. In most instances they disappeared infrom three or four hours. The Concentrate Behavior Symptoms. The effects on the general behavior of the subjects taking theconcentrate were variable. If left undisturbed some remainedquietly sitting or lying, showing little interest in theirsurroundings. Others were restless and talkative. Under theheading "Euphoria" there are listed those marihuanaeffects which give rise to pleasurable sensations or experiences.These are a sense of well-being and contentment cheerfulness andgaiety, talkativeness, bursts of singing and dancing,daydreaming, a pleasant drowsiness, joking, and performingamusing antics. The drowsiness, daydreaming and unawareness ofsurroundings were present when the subject was left alone. Othereuphoric expressions required an audience and there was muchcontagiousness of laughing and joking where several of thesubjects under marihuana were congregated. The occurrence of aeuphoric state, in one or another form, was noted in most of thesubjects. But except for those who were allowed to pass the timeundisturbed, the pleasurable effects were interrupted from timeto time by disagreeable sensations. Quite commonly seen, as with the preliminary group, was adifficulty in focusing and sustaining mental concentration. Thus,there would occur a delay in the subject's answers to questionsand at times some confusion as to their meaning. There was,however, except in a few isolated instances, no abnormal mentalcontent evident and the responses brought out by the examinerwere not different from those in the pre-marihuana state. Altered mental behavior which would give rise to more concernwas seen in a relatively small number of subjects. In some thistook the form of irritation at questioning, refusal to complywith simple requests and antagonism to certain of the examiners.There was, however, only verbal and no active opposition in anyof these behaviors, caused by the subject's desire to be leftundisturbed and his disinclination to carry out certain testswhich in his pre-marihuana period he had considered tiresome andmeaningless. With this came antipathy to those conducting thetests. The occurrence of the disagreeable physical symptomsaccompanying marihuana action would naturally lead to a feelingof disquietude and some alarm as to significance andconsequences. This, however, was a prominent feature in relatively fewinstances. A pronounced state of anxiety reaching a panic stage,associated usually with fear of death or of insanity, wasobserved only in those subjects experiencing psychotic episodesand here the anxiety state led to pleas for escape and not toacts of aggression. Even in the psychotic states there were nouncontrollable outbursts of rage or acts of violence. Some evidence of eroticism was reported in about 10 per centof the 150 instances in which marihuana was administered to thegroup. The presence of nurses, attendants and other womenassociated with the study gave opportunity for frank expressionof sexual stimulation, had this been marked. There was no suchexpression even during the psychotic episodes. In some isolated instances there was evidence of markedlowering of inhibitions such as loud discharge of flatus,urinating on the floor instead of in the vessels supplied, and inone instance frank exhibitionism. In the last instance thesubject, who was not a regular marihuana user, had been arrestedon three occasions for indecent exposure. The frequency with which significant changes in behavioroccurred is indicated in Table 3 (TABLE. 3) As used in Table 3, anxiety means the subject's expressedworry concerning what might happen to him. Excitement, shown byphysical restlessness, muscular twitchings and jerky movements,and loud talking, and some degree of antagonism are known to beexpressions of an "alarm" or "fear" state. It is seen from this table that, except for euphoria, theeffect of marihuana was definitely more pronounced on thenonusers. This might be taken as evidence of a persistingtolerance to the drug in the user group, but, on the other hand,it may have as its basis a feeling of greater apprehension in thenonusers. Such a feeling would undoubtedly arise among those whohave had no previous experience with marihuana and are in a stateof uncertainty as to its possible harmful effects. Physical Symptoms. Of the subjective symptoms, a feeling described as lightness,heaviness, or pressure in the head, often with dizziness, was oneof the earliest and occurred in practically all subjects,irrespective of dose. Dryness of the mouth and throat werereported by over half of the subjects as was also a floatingsensation. Unsteadiness in movement and a feeling of heaviness inthe extremities were commonly experienced as was a feeling ofhunger and a desire for sweets especially. Less commonly notedwere nausea, vomiting, sensations of warmth of the head or body,burning of the eyes and blurring of vision, tightness of thechest, cardiac palpitation, ringing or pressure in the ears, andan urge to urinate or defecate. From observation by the examiner, tremor and ataxia werepresent in varying degrees in practically all instances and inall dosages used, as were also dilatation of the pupils andsluggish response to light. These effects were often present on the day followingmarihuana administration. The frequency of the more common subjective symptoms and theirrelation to dosage is shown in Table 4. The figures are takenfrom the subject's reports. There is a tendency for the symptoms to be more frequent inthe non-users than in the users but the differences are variableand in general not striking. Contents | Feedback | Search DRCNet Library | Schaffer Library | Major Studies | LaGuardiaCommittee ReportWT02-B02-13IA086-000615-B001-348http://206.61.184.43:80/schaffer/Library/studies/ota/appc.htm 206.61.184.43 19970122024349 text/html 22824HTTP/1.0 200 OKDate: Wednesday, 22-Jan-97 02:43:41 GMTServer: WebSitePro/1.1f (S/N wpo-0deb)Allow-ranges: bytesContent-type: text/htmlLast-modified: Saturday, 28-Dec-96 06:51:40 GMTContent-length: 22606 Perspectives On Defining Substance Abuse Contents | Feedback | Search DRCNet Library | Schaffer Library | Major Studies Technologies for Understanding andPreventing Substance Abuse and Addiction TECHNOLOGIES FOR UNDERSTANDING AND PREVENTING SUBSTANCEABUSE AND ADDICTION US Government Office of Technology Assessment APPENDIX C: PERSPECTIVES ON DEFINING SUBSTANCE ABUSE Four broad arenas that encounter substance abuse-relatedissues include, mass communications, criminal justice, medicine,and public health. These entities often operate independently ofone another and use substantially different terms when describingthe use of illicit substances or the illegal use of licitsubstances. MASS COMMUNICATIONS The traditional realm of mass communications includestelevision, radio, and popular journals and newspapers. Withinthese media, the term substance abuse has become a catch-allphrase, with no clear boundaries. Much of the general public hasbecome familiar with the term substance abuse within thisambiguous context. CRIMINAL JUSTICE While it is well-known that many crimes are committed bypersons with substance use disorders and that these disorders canbe major contributors to their crimes, there is no systematicpolicy within the criminal justice system for the evaluation ofthese disorders. In many jurisdictions, whether federal, state,or local, the prevailing sentiment is that any use of an illicitsubstance and/or use of a licit substance in an illegal manner,is considered criminal abuse. A limited set of quantitativeanalyses including blood, urine, and breath tests can beperformed to detect illegal levels of alcohol and/or the presenceof illicit substances. The Blood Alcohol Concentration (BAC) is0.10 grams/deciliter for all States excluding Oregon, California,Utah, Vermont, and Maine, where the level is 0.08grams/deciliter. As of December 1992, 15 states had lower BAClevels for youthful offenders charged with driving whileintoxicated. These levels range from 0.00-0.02 grams/deciliter,which is considered "zero tolerance," up to 0.04grams/deciliter (6). The alcohol breath test, while a differentprocedure from the BAC, converts the results into BAC units.Thus, the levels of intoxication for BAC and breath test areidentical. However, there are limitations to these analyses. In somejurisdictions, these tests can be performed only with the writtenconsent of the person. In others, the urine test measures thepresence of only one or two drugs rather than looking for theentire range of abusable substances. Besides the limited amount of testing and evaluation, there islittle use of psychological screening examinations or structuredinterviews to determine the level and severity of use, abuse, ordependence. PUBLIC HEALTH The traditional public health model incorporates the host-agent-environment relationship. Each of these factors has anindividual, as well as an interrelated role in the potential useand/or harmful use of a substance. Host factors may include possible genetic, psychological, andbiological susceptibility. Agent factors incorporate thesubstance's abuse liability capacity, as well as how thesubstance is marketed. Lastly, environmental factors encompassnot only the availability of the substance, but the social,cultural, political, and economic climate as well (3,4). Over the past 20 years, professionals within the field ofpublic health have attempted to deemphasize the strict medicalconcept of substance abuse. Attention had previously focusedalmost exclusively on individual drug use patterns, rather thanfeaturing the diverse problems of drug, alcohol, and tobacco useas being intimately tied into communities and society as a whole. Even the term "substance abuse" has come underscrutiny. While the word "substance" may at firstappear quite generic, in many fields, this term has come toincorrectly infer illicit drug use--reinforcing the misperceptionof many individuals that alcohol and tobacco are not drugs."Abuse" generally denotes the more severe forms ofaddiction. In reality, there is a continuum that begins withinitial drug use and may progress to harmful use and addiction,with various problems present along the spectrum. In lieu of theterm "abuse," public health professionals prefer termssuch as "alcohol and drug problems" or the"harmful/hazardous use" of a drug. The focus of the public health perspective is to understandthe importance social norms, environment, and availability playin the shaping of alcohol- and drug-related problems both on anindividual and societal level. MEDICAL Within the fields of medicine, the two most frequently citedtexts for the definitions of substance abuse and dependence arethe Diagnostic and Statistical Manual of Mental Disorders (DSM)issued by the American Psychiatric Association and theInternational Classification of Diseases (ICD) published by theWorld Health Organization (WHO). Each successive version of theDSM and ICD has been given a number signifying its order in theoverall sequence of manuals; DSM uses Roman numerals and ICD usesordinary numbers. The newest version of ICD, ICD-10, waspublished in 1992. The current version of DSM is the ThirdEdition- Revised (DSM-III-R), which will shortly be superseded byDSM-IV. ICD While the current ICD and DSM definitions of substancedependence are nearly identical, the two manuals differ sharplyon the concepts of abuse, which ICD classifies as harmful use. The ICD manual is intended to be used on an internationalbasis, and the socially defined "American" criteriapresent in the DSM manual for substance abuse cannot beadequately transferred to a wide range of cultures. The currentICD-10 category of harmful use, while applicablecross-culturally, is limited to: "A pattern of psychoactivesubstance use that is causing damage to health. The damage may bephysical (as in cases of hepatitis from the self-administrationof injected drugs) or mental ( e.g.,episodes of depressivedisorder secondary to heavy consumption of alcohol)." DSM In the early 1950s the first DSM manual grouped alcohol anddrug use disorders under the broad category of "SociopathicPersonality Disturbances." At that time, a substance usedisorder was considered a moral weakness or the manifestation ofa "deeper" psychological problem, rather than adisorder in-and-of itself with social, psychological, and perhapseven genetic determinants. Throughout the 1970s and 1980s clinical research identifiedthe need for separate categories for substance use disorders. TheDSM-III manual, in 1980, was the first manual in this series toclearly identify substance abuse and dependence as pathologicalconditions different from substance use alone. DSM-III alsoalluded to the fact that social and cultural factors arecontributors to the onset and continuation of abuse anddependence. The DSM-III definition of dependence emphasizedtolerance (needing to take much higher doses of the substance toobtain the same effect) and withdrawal (having a distinct patternof physiological arousal upon abrupt discontinuation or reductionin dosage), and required the presence of one or both of thesephenomena to make a dependence diagnosis. Substance abuse wasdefined as problematic use with social or occupationalimpairment, but with the absence of significant tolerance and/orwithdrawal. In both disorders, impairment in social andoccupational function was a prominent aspect of the definitions,creating a significant overlap between the criteria for substanceabuse and dependence. In 1987, DSM-III was revised (DSM-III-R) togive the behavioral aspects of substance use disorders equalweight to the physiological components. This shift away from the physiological to the behavioralelements of dependence was strongly influenced by the work ofresearchers Edwards and Gross, who had extensively studiedpersons with alcohol problems. These researchers conceptualizedalcohol dependence as a syndrome of graded severity that involvedan interconnected complex of behavioral, psychological, andphysiological elements associated with loss of control overalcohol consumption. Contributing to the emphasis on behavioral aspects ofdependence was work by Brady, Thompson, and others who had shownthat animals can be taught to self-administer substances ofabuse. Once taught, it was observed that most animals will expendtremendous amounts of energy to obtain additional doses and thatthis "drug-seeking behavior" is very difficult toextinguish. Efforts to repeat drug self- administration wereespecially prominent if the experimental drug was one with a highabuse liability such as morphine, methamphetamine, or(especially) cocaine and was difficult to extinguish. This body of work was among the first in a line ofinvestigation studying the behavioral aspects of drugs. Thisfield of research became known as "behavioralpharmacology" and was strengthened by additional studies byOlds and others. Thus, both the work of Edwards and Gross, that of behavioralpharmacologists, and of basic scientists pointed toward thepresence of a definable and independent syndrome that can resultafter an organism has learned to self-administer abusablesubstances. This syndrome was not dependent on the ability of thedrug to produce tolerance and withdrawal, but rather on itspositive reinforcing effects. These effects were evident byobserving the behavior of the organism, and could be measured byquantifying the work that the organism would produce to obtainthe substance. The development of the substance use disorders section forDSM-IV began in 1988 and involved the most extensive process yetundertaken for such a task. The major change in DSM-IV is in thedefinition of substance abuse. Unlike DSM-III and DSM-III-R, DSM-IV clearly separates the criteria for dependence from those ofabuse. Dependence in DSM-IV is a syndrome involving compulsiveuse, with or without tolerance and withdrawal; abuse isproblematic use without compulsive use, significant tolerance, orwithdrawal. Preliminary data from the DSM-IV field trialsindicate that this change will probably increase the number ofpersons diagnosed as having substance abuse, especially for thoseusing hallucinogens, inhalants, sedatives, and amphetamines. Substance Use and the Transition to Abuse/Harmful Use orDependence One problem in developing criteria for this second,nondependent category, whether called abuse or harmful use, isthat though dependence has been well-studied, the progressionfrom use to abuse has not been adequately researched (except inthe case of alcohol); and depending on the perspective, may notalways be linear. For example, using the DSM-IV classifications,it is possible that substances such as opiates may follow a paththat begins with use and progresses to dependence beforeabuse-related problems are identified. Within the field ofalcohol research, the consensus of studies is that consumingthree to four standard-sized drinks/day by males (equal to 40 ormore grams of alcohol at 12 grams/drink) is associated with anincreased probability for the development of problems. As femalestend to absorb alcohol more quickly, studies have shown thatproblems typically begin at about two to three drinks/day(1,2,5). Little work has been done on other substances. All persons whoend up with abuse, harmful use, or dependence begin with use. Useof a substance, whether licit or illicit, does not constitute asubstance use disorder even though it may be unwise and stronglydisapproved of by family, friends, employers, religious groups,or society at large. Use by itself is not considered a medicaldisorder. For a disorder to be present, use must become somethingelse such as: occur more frequently; occur at higher doses; orresult in a magnitude of problems. Though there have been someconceptual models developed for how one might approach a betterunderstanding of this transition, there are few data available toclearly point out where the border lies. DSM-IV AND ICD-10 DEFINITIONS DSM-IV Diagnostic Criteria: Abuse A. A maladaptive pattern of substance use leading toclinically significant impairment or distress, as manifested byone or more of the following occurring over the same 12- monthperiod: 1. Recurrent substance use resulting in a failure to fulfillmajor role obligations at work, school, or home (e.g., repeatedabsences or poor work performance related to substance use;substance-related absences, suspensions, or expulsions fromschool; neglect of children or household). 2. Recurrent substance use in situations in which it isphysically hazardous (e.g.,driving an automobile or operating amachine when impaired by substance use). 3. Recurrent substance-related legal problems (e.g.,arrestsfor substance-related disorderly conduct). 4. Continued substance use despite having persistent orrecurrent social or interpersonal problems caused or exacerbatedby the effects of the substance (e.g.,arguments with spouse aboutconsequences of intoxication, physical fights). B. Has never met the criteria for Substance Dependence forthis substance. Dependence: A maladaptive pattern of substance use, leading to clinicallysignificant impairment or distress, as manifested by three ormore of the following occurring in the same 12- month period: 1. Tolerance, as defined by either of the following: a. need for markedly increased amounts of the substance toachieve intoxication or desired effect b. markedly diminished effect with continued use of the sameamount of the substance 2. Withdrawal, as manifested by either of the following: a. the characteristic withdrawal syndrome for the substance b. the same (or closely related) substance is taken to relieveor avoid withdrawal symptoms 3. The substance is often taken in larger amounts or over alonger period than was intended 4. Any unsuccessful effort or a persistent desire to cut downor control substance use 5. A great deal of time is spent in activities necessary toobtain the substance (e.g., visiting multiple doctors or drivinglong distances), use of the substance (e.g., chain- smoking), orrecover from its effects 6. Important social, occupational, or recreational activitiesgiven up or reduced because of substance use 7. Continued substance use despite knowledge of having had apersistent or recurrent physical or psychological problem that islikely to be caused or exacerbated by the substance (e.g.,current cocaine use despite recognition of cocaine- induceddepression, or continued drinking despite recognition that anulcer was made worse by alcohol consumption) Specify if: o with physiological dependence: Evidence of tolerance orwithdrawal (i.e., either items (1) or (2) are present). o without physiological dependence: No evidence of toleranceor withdrawal i.e., neither items (1) nor (2) are present). ICD-10 Diagnostic Criteria for Clinical Use: Harmful Use: A pattern of psychoactive substance use that is causing damageto health. The damage may be physical (as in cases of hepatitisfrom the self-administration of injected drugs) or mental(e.g.,episodes of depressive disorder secondary to heavyconsumption of alcohol). The diagnosis requires that actual damage should have beencaused to the mental or physical health of the user. Harmfulpatterns of use are often criticized by others and frequentlyassociated with adverse social consequences of various kinds. Thefact that a pattern of use or particular substance is disapprovedof by another person or by the culture, or may have led tosocially negative consequences such as arrest or maritalarguments is not in itself evidence of harmful use. Acute intoxication or "hangover" is not in itselfsufficient evidence of the damage to health required for codingharmful use. Harmful use should not be diagnosed if dependencesyndrome, a psychotic disorder, or another specific form of drug-or alcohol-related disorder is present. Dependence Syndrome A definite diagnosis of dependence should usually be made onlyif three or more of the following have been experienced orexhibited at some time during the previous year: 1. A strong desire or sense of compulsion to take thesubstance. 2. Difficulties in controlling substance-taking behavior interms of its onset, termination, or levels of use 3. A physiological withdrawal state when substance use hasceased or been reduced, as evidenced by: the characteristicwithdrawal syndrome for the substance; or use of the same (orclosely related) substance with the intention of relieving oravoiding withdrawal symptoms. 4. Evidence of tolerance such that increased doses of thepsychoactive substance are required in order to achieve effectsoriginally produced by lower doses (clear examples of this arefound in alcohol- and opiate-dependent individuals who may takedaily doses sufficient to incapacitate or kill nontolerantusers). 5. Progressive neglect of alternative pleasures or interestsbecause of psychoactive substance use, increased amounts of timenecessary to obtain or take the substance or recover from itseffects. 6. Persisting with substance use despite clear evidence ofovertly harmful consequences, such as harm to the liver throughexcessive drinking, depressive mood states consequent to periodsof heavy substance use, or drug- related impairment of cognitivefunctioning; efforts should be made to determine that the userwas actually, or could be expected to be, aware of the nature andextent of harm. Narrowing of the personal repertoire of patterns ofpsychoactive substance use has also been described as acharacteristic feature (e.g., a tendency to drink alcoholicdrinksin the same way on weekdays and weekends, regardless of socialconstraints that determine appropriate drinking behavior). It is an essential characteristic of the dependence syndromethat either psychoactive substance taking or a desire to take aparticular substance should be present; the subjective awarenessof compulsion to use drugs is most commonly seen during attemptsto stop or control substance use. This diagnostic requirementwould exclude, for instance, surgical patients given opioid drugsfor the relief of pain, who may show signs of an opioidwithdrawal state when drugs are not given but who have no desireto continue taking drugs. The dependence syndrome may be present for a specificsubstance (e.g., tobacco or diazepam), for a class of substances(e.g., opioid drugs), or for a wider ranger of differentsubstances (as for those individuals who feel a sense ofcompulsion regularly to use whatever drugs are available and whoshow distress, agitation, and/or physical signs of a withdrawalstate upon abstinence). The diagnosis of the dependence syndrome may be furtherspecified by the following (the following roughly correspond tothe course modifiers and relapse section of DSM-IV): o Currently abstinent. o Currently abstinent, but in a protected environment (e.g.,in hospital, in a therapeutic community, in prison, etc.). o Currently on a clinically supervised maintenance orreplacement regime (controlled dependence, e.g., with methadone;nicotine gum or nicotine patch). o Currently abstinent, but receiving treatment with aversiveor blocking drugs (e.g., naltrexone or disulfiram). o Currently using the substance (active dependence). o Continuous use. Episodic use. _ Contents | Feedback | Search DRCNet Library | Schaffer Library | Major Studies Technologies for Understanding andPreventing Substance Abuse and AddictionWT02-B02-14IA086-000615-B001-41http://206.61.184.43:80/schaffer/Library/studies/ota/otatoc.htm 206.61.184.43 19970122023958 text/html 5309HTTP/1.0 200 OKDate: Wednesday, 22-Jan-97 02:39:32 GMTServer: WebSitePro/1.1f (S/N wpo-0deb)Allow-ranges: bytesContent-type: text/htmlLast-modified: Saturday, 28-Dec-96 06:51:33 GMTContent-length: 5092 Technologies for Understanding and Preventing SubstanceAbuse Contents | Feedback | Search DRCNet Library | Schaffer Library | Major Studies Technologies for Understanding andPreventing Substance Abuse and Addiction TECHNOLOGIES FOR UNDERSTANDING AND PREVENTING SUBSTANCEABUSE AND ADDICTION US Government Office of Technology Assessment October 18, 1994 Contents 1 Executive Summary Root Causes Necessary Preconditions Individual Factors Community Contexts Policy Options 2 Introduction Root Causes What Are Substance Abuse and Addiction Magnitude of the Problem Measuring Substance Use and Abuse Organization and Scope of the Report Part I: Necessary Preconditions 3 Biology and Pharmacology Drug Action Genetic Factors Role of Learning Summary 4 Availability Availability Are Drugs Readily Available Marketing Summary 5 Substance Use and Transitions to Abuse andAddiction Substance Use Stages in the Initiation of Use Stages in the Cycle of Use, Abuse, and Addiction Stages in Problem Behaviors Key Aspects of Use Summary Part II: Individual Factors 6 Individual Risk and Protective Factors Demographics Economics Psychosocial/Behavioral Summary Part III: Activity Settings 7 Ethnographic Drug Studies Ethnographic Studies of Alcohol and Other Drug Use Social Context of Drug Use Poverty, Racism, and Cycle of Abuse Future Research Summary 8 Community Activity Settings Homes and Families Schools and Peers Workplaces Recreational Settings Planning, Implementing, and Evaluating Community-wide Programs Summary 9 Policy Options Federal Focus and Prevention Program Structure Research Needs Community Activity Settings Availability APPENDICES A Drug Control Policy in the United States:Historical Perspectives B Federal Programs: Prevention andCausation C Perspectives on Defining Substance Abuse D List of Contracts E List of Workshops and Participants F Acknowledgments References Contents | Feedback | Search DRCNet Library | Schaffer Library | Major Studies Technologies for Understanding andPreventing Substance Abuse and AddictionWT02-B02-15IA086-000615-B001-333http://206.61.184.43:80/schaffer/Library/studies/ota/appa.htm 206.61.184.43 19970122024337 text/html 26050HTTP/1.0 200 OKDate: Wednesday, 22-Jan-97 02:43:28 GMTServer: WebSitePro/1.1f (S/N wpo-0deb)Allow-ranges: bytesContent-type: text/htmlLast-modified: Saturday, 28-Dec-96 06:51:29 GMTContent-length: 25832 APPENDIX A: DRUG CONTROL POLICY IN THE UNITED STATES:HISTORIC TECHNOLOGIES FOR UNDERSTANDING AND PREVENTING SUBSTANCEABUSE AND ADDICTION US Government Office of Technology Assessment APPENDIX A: DRUG CONTROL POLICY IN THE UNITED STATES:HISTORICAL PERSPECTIVES The United States has always been a drug-using country. Incolonial days, people drank more alcohol than they do today, withestimates ranging from three to as many as seven times morealcohol per year (13) While public drunkenness was a criminaloffense, it was generally considered a personal indiscretion.(1). The temperance movement began in earnest after theRevolution, when heavy drinking was revealed to be a problem, andreligious figures became committed to temperance. (1). Sincethen, the American experience with both licit and illicit drugscan be viewed as a series of reactions to the public's shiftingtolerance toward their use (9). THE EARLY 1900s: NARCOTICS AND COCAINE In the late 19th century it was possible to buy, in a storeor through mail order, many pseudomedical preparations,containing morphine, cocaine, and even heroin (9). The ubiquitoussoft drink Coca-Cola used to contain cocaine until 1903, when itwas replaced with caffeine (9). Pharmacies sold cocaine in pureform, as well as a number of opium-derived drugs, such asmorphine and heroin, the latter of which became well-known whenit was marketed by the Bayer Co. beginning in 1898 (10).Physician prescriptions of these drugs increased from 1 percentof all prescriptions in 1874 to between 20 to 25 percent in 1902;they were not only available but they were widely used, withoutmajor concerns about negative health consequences (14). Cocaine and narcotic preparations were taken off the marketfor various reasons. Increasing awareness of the hazards of druguse and adulterated food led to such regulations as the Pure Foodand Drug Act of 1906 that required that fraudulent claims beremoved from patent medicines, as well as disclosure ofhabit-forming substances. The passage of several antinarcotic andpharmaceutical labeling laws was spurred on by these healthconcerns, a growing temperance movement, the development of safepain relievers (such as aspirin), a broader range of medicaltreatments, and the growing immigrant population thought to beassociated with specific drug-using practices. However, theselaws did not make patent remedies, cocaine, and opium illegal.Some individual states imposed tighter restrictions on theiravailability, but there was no uniformity among state laws. Itwas United States involvement with international narcoticsconcern that led there (9,10,14). In 1909, the International Opium Commission called by theUnited States, met in Shanghai, to begin an internationaldiscussion concerning the problems of narcotics and the narcoticstrade. Twelve nations, in addition to the United States, werepresent to discuss problems relating to opium. At that time theperception in the United States was that Chinese immigrants wereto blame for the opium smoking problems. This angered theChinese, who had instituted strict campaigns against the sale anduse of opium within their own country. The Chinese were seekingU.S. assurances for help in ending Western opium trafficking intoChina. The State Department not only wanted to support China'sdrug control efforts, but thought that international drug controlmeasures would help stanch the flow of drugs into the UnitedStates, and thus the nonmedical consumption of these drugs. Itwould not be until two years later, in the Hague, that a treatywould be signed stating that all the signatories would enactdomestic legislation controlling narcotics trade, specificallylimiting the use of narcotics for medicinal purposes (9,10). Hamilton Wright, the State Department's opium commissioner,attempted to draft legislation but met opposition from theStates, the medical profession, pharmacists and pharmaceuticalcompanies. After nearly three years of debate, Congress passedthe Harrison Act in December 1914 (named for RepresentativeFrancis Burton Harrison, who introduced the initial form of thebill for the Administration). The bill provided for strictcontrol of opium and coca and their derivatives: both their entryinto the country and their dispersion to patients. Maintenance ofaddicts by physicians was allowed until 1919. Opposition to theHarrison Act came mainly from pharmaceutical companies andpharmacists, who objected to what they called the Act's confusingand complex record keeping requirements (9). Passage of the Harrison Act reflected, in part, growingpublic sentiment that opium and cocaine were medicines to betaken only in times of illness (and then only when prescribed bya physician) and that these substances could cause insanity andcrime, particularly in foreigners and minorities. Smoking opiumwas associated with Chinese immigrants; popular belief also heldthat cocaine would affect blacks more forcefully than whites andincite them to violence. Marijuana was believed to have beenbrought into the country and promoted by Mexican immigrants andthen picked up by black jazz musicians. These beliefs played apart in the 1937 Marijuana Tax Act, which attempted to controlthe drug's use (9). As early as 1910, many people argued againstany nonmedical use of narcotics. PROHIBITION AND BEYOND Focus on Alcohol Ratification in 1919 of the 18th amendment prohibited themanufacture, sale, transportation, importation, and exportationof alcohol and shifted the Nation's focus for more than a decadefrom the dangers of narcotics to the Nation's alcohol problems.Prohibition had its roots in the Temperance Movement, which beganshortly after the Revolution. In 1784, Benjamin Rush, a physicianand signer of the Declaration of Independence, published apamphlet entitled, "An Inquiry Into the Effects of ArdentSpirits on the Mind and Body," which was widely disseminatedamong Temperance leaders. In it he described a "diseasemodel" of excessive drinking, which characterizeddrunkenness and alcohol addiction as a "disease of thewill," in addition to causing many physical diseases. By themid-19th century, the American middle class had become more awareof the dangers of alcohol to the family, the nation, and thefactory (1). By the late 19th century and early 20th century, theTemperance Movement came to be associated almost exclusively withAmerican Protestantism as a political mechanism to control thegrowing numbers of non-Protestant immigrants. This political andsocial strength helped, in 1919, to ratify the 18th amendmentwhich forbade the sale of alcoholic beverages, and to implementit by means of the Volstead Act in 1920 (1). The shifting tolerance of Americans toward substance use isevidenced by the successes and failures of the Prohibition era.In 1919, many were optimistic that the prohibition of alcoholwould solve many of the country's social problems. If alcoholcontributed to the crime and unemployment associated with thecities, then removing it from the market might help solve thoseproblems. However, despite evidence that consumption declined(based on declining rates of death due to cirrhosis and ofalcoholic psychosis in State mental hospitals), there is alsoevidence that widespread dishonesty existed in the enforcement ofdry laws. Jobs to enforce Prohibition were doled out as politicalfavors, which may have contributed to graft, corruption, and thesurge in underworld crime (9,17). In addition to the perceivedrise in corruption, the passage of progressively stricter lawsregarding violations of the Volstead Act also contributed towaning public support of prohibition (17). The 1933 repeal ofProhibition signaled that public sentiment had once again becomefavorable toward alcohol, and alcohol and its related problemsreturned to private, rather than public, arenas. The scientific literature of the 1930s and early 1940sconcentrated mainly on captive alcoholic populations in jails,mental hospitals, and skid row, allowing many Americans todistance themselves from alcoholism (1). During this same period,Alcoholics Anonymous (AA) was founded, but lacked mainstreamrecognition until the 1950s and 1960s when the scientists lentsupport to the disease model of alcoholism, which has always beenthe central tenet of AA (1,11). Focus on Narcotics While alcohol experienced a transition period in respect topublic tolerance, negative attitudes toward narcotics and otherdrugs remained constant, or became even more severe. During the1920s, the Federal government expanded its antidrug effortsthrough new Treasury Department regulations (8). In 1930,President Hoover created the Federal Bureau of Narcotics andappointed Harry Anslinger as the Commissioner of Narcotics, aposition Anslinger held from 1930 to 1962, a precursor, perhaps,to the modern day drug czar. For more than three decades,Anslinger oversaw all aspects of drug control, from interdictionto domestic supply, to public relations. He effectively usedreligious and other antidrug groups to maintain a high antidrugsentiment in the country. He also controlled the flow of legaldrug supplies, by keeping watch over doctors who might prescribeunusually large amounts of narcotics. Anslinger was opposed tothe medical treatment of addiction, and addicts, like alcoholics,were seen as deviants (9,15). Prior to the mid-1960s, marijuana use in the United Stateswas mostly confined to various subgroups such as Mexicanlaborers, jazz musicians, and beatniks. Although portrayed as akiller weed and a menace by antimarijuana reformers, there islittle evidence that it was either at this time. In 1937, theMarihuana Tax Act (the Federal government then spelled marijuanawith an "h"), became law, making the use and sale ofmarijuana without a tax stamp Federal offenses. Some companieswere permitted to apply for a license to use cannabis products(e.g., for birdseed, paint and rope), and doctors could stillprescribe marijuana in limited circumstances. However, startingin 1937, recreational use was punished with greater severity(15). Some speculated that the passage of the Marihuana Tax Actresulted from strong anti-Mexican sentiment in the Southwest andthe political power of Anslinger (5). Intolerance toward drug use was very strong in the 1930s and40s. Federal laws concerning the sale and use of drugs gotprogressively stricter, culminating in the introduction of thedeath penalty for the sale of heroin to anyone under 18 years oldby anyone older than 18 (10). Illicit drug use during thesedecades was low in the mainstream population. Thismarginalization of narcotics (or at least, of the people who usedthem) may have played a part in the resurfacing of these drugsafter the 1930s. There was a concern during World War II thatAmerican soldiers in Asia would succumb to drug suppliesavailable in those countries and return home with drug habits.The Bureau of Narcotics received no budget increases, sinceCongress apparently believed it was well equipped to deal withthe current drug levels (9). In the 1950s, however, heroin was brought into the country inlarger quantities than at any time since it was outlawed. Dealerslearned that poor quality heroin could be sold at inflatedprices, and this higher cost pushed users into criminallifestyles heretofore not seen on such a wide scale (12). Anationwide scare that drug use would spread from the urban poor(mostly minorities) to the rest of the country erupted. The factthat young people appeared to be the biggest users of heroin wasparticularly alarming. This fear was reflected in the passage ofthe Narcotic Control Act of 1956, which increased penalties forthe sale and possession of marijuana and heroin (15). The reaction to this rise in drug use was not entirelyfearful, however. Scientific and technological advances offeredalternative answers to coping with the drug problem a switch fromthe past tactics of law enforcement. Even though thestereotypical heroin user was still a poor minority, new ideasfor treating and helping these people emerged as part ofincreasing acceptance of the medical model of addiction. In the1960s, methadone maintenance pilot programs were launched. Byusing the long-acting opioid methadone for treatment of addictionto the short- acting opiate heroin, these programs offer a wayfor heroin addicts to control their addiction (6). 1960s-PRESENT In the 1960s, white middle-class youths, who were morevisible than their minority counterparts, began experimentingwith drugs, including marijuana and heroin, causing wide publicconcern and demand for more treatment approaches and additionallaw enforcement (17). Some of this new interest in drug use maybe attributed to the intolerance toward it in the precedingdecades. Marijuana had never been widely used, and after the1930s its use was not a widespread concern. It was rediscoveredby young people in the 1960s, who had grown up with parents whoused alcohol. Some of the drug consumption may also be linked toan increase in consumption generally during the late 1960s andearly 1970s, the Vietnam War protest movement, and the rapidchanges in American society that occurred in those years(9,10,17). Despite the image of the sixties as a time of widespreadexperimentation, the increase of drug use activated many who hadbeen quiet on the issue. Marijuana, the drug of choice among manyyoung people, was seen by some researchers as the gateway to moredangerous drug use. Richard Nixon was elected President in 1968on a law and order platform, and it is said that no otherPresident has campaigned as hard against drug abuse (9). Asduring World War II, concern rose that soldiers serving inSoutheast Asia would develop drug habits while there. In thiscase, the fears were well- founded, as many servicemen did availthemselves of cheap supplies of heroin and marijuana. However,even among those who became addicted, many stopped their drug useupon returning to the United States. During the 1960s, the oldlinkages between corruption, Asians, and opium surfaced onceagain in public opinion, leading to more stringent measures tostop the flow of drugs into the United States from both Asia andLatin America (8). Public support of law enforcement against drugs was highduring the late 1960s and early 1970s, and President Nixon spokeof mounting "a frontal assault on our number one publicenemy [drugs]," but long mandatory minimum sentences forpossession of small amounts of marijuana disturbed manyAmericans, even those who did not approve of marijuana use. TheComprehensive Drug Abuse Prevention and Control Act of 1970lessened penalties for possession of marijuana. It alsoestablished a system for classifying drugs into five schedules,which is still used today. Drugs are placed in each schedulebased on their potential for abuse, their known harmfulness, andmedical value. Marijuana and heroin are listed in schedule1--drugs with high potential for addiction and no recognizedmedical value. There have been, however, limited experimentalprograms approved by the DEA and FDA for the use of marijuana intreatment of nausea due to chemotherapy and of ocular pressuredue to glaucoma. Cocaine is listed in schedule 2--drugs withpotential for addiction for acceptable for some medicalapplications. Subsequent to the establishment of this system,drug policies and laws for individual drugs have been based onthe drug's schedule (3,16). In 1972, the President's National Commission on Marijuana andDrug Abuse recommended that the laws against the use of marijuanabe relaxed, since the enforcement of these laws was becoming tooburdensome to police in some areas, and was considered intrusiveon individual privacy in others. The drug was increasinglythought to be innocuous in its effects, both by scientists andothers (4). Several States passed decriminalization laws, whichallowed possession or use of small amounts of marijuana andimposed fines instead of prison sentences for transgressions ofminor possession laws (10). The Commission remained strict oncocaine, which was also seeing a surge in use, but few expertsthought it was physically addictive or should be classified inthe same category as other narcotics. Despite President Nixon's emphasis on "law andorder" responses to drug use, his drug budget favoredprevention, education, and treatment. The National Institute onDrug Abuse (NIDA) was created as the lead agency for demandreduction, directing Federal prevention and treatment servicesand research. The Drug Enforcement Administration was created asthe lead agency for supply reduction, and single state agencieswere created to guide Federal funds into state and local antidrugprograms (3). From the mid-sixties to the late seventies, the compositionof drug users changed substantially. While drug use was stillassociated primarily with minorities and the lower classes, druguse by middle-class whites became a widespread and more acceptedphenomenon. As in the late nineteenth and early twentiethcenturies, when middle class whites haphazardly used narcoticpreparations, this new group of drug users down-played or ignoredthe dangerous effects of drugs, and extolled their virtues asagents of nonconformity and mind-expansion. Cocaine was anexpensive and high-status drug, used mainly for recreation byupper- and middle-class whites. From the drug experiences of this cohort, which were by nomeans entirely positive, the public of the late seventies wasbetter educated about the effects of drugs, and publicdisapproval of drug use began once again to increase. Drug use,however, particularly of cocaine and marijuana remained high. TheFord Administration (1974-1977) focused on the drugs it thoughtposed the greatest danger--heroin, amphetamines, andbarbiturates. Some even thought that drugs such as cocaine andmarijuana should be legalized, "so as to end the enormousgovernment expenditures of money and time on a problem that onlyseemed to bring profits to drug dealers and elicit contempt forthe law from an ever-growing body of drug users" (9). During the Carter Administration (1977- 1981), Peter Bourne,a special assistant for health issues, argued for Federaldecriminalization of possession of small amounts of marijuana,while focusing interdiction efforts on heroin. But Bourneresigned over a scandal involving criticisms over his prescribingpractices. His resignation forced President Carter to take aharder position on drugs, and Federal decriminalization neveroccurred. There were still States in which marijuana wasdecriminalized, but these decreased in numbers through 1990, whenthe last State--Alaska--to have decriminalization repealed thoselaws. The departure of Bourne coincided with the emergence ofseveral parents' groups concerned about drug use by their preteenchildren. One group in particular, in Atlanta, Georgia, becameenraged when they found that in addition to drug use at parties,their children were able to buy drug paraphernalia and prodrugliterature in local stores. The group formed the Parent ResourcesInstitute on Drug Education, National Families in Action, and theNational Federation of Parents. These groups were instrumental inprodding NIDA to publicize more widely the dangers of marijuanaand other drugs once thought of as harmless. The Administration of Ronald Reagan (1981-1989) favored astrict approach to drug use and increased law enforcement. FirstLady Nancy Reagan actively campaigned against drug use, urgingschool children to "Just Say No." At the same time,funding for research and treatment decreased, while theavailability of cocaine, heroin, and marijuana remained the same(9). The budget for antidrug related activities rose from $1.5billion in 1981 (split nearly equally between supply reduction(domestic law enforcement and international/border lawenforcement) and demand reduction (research, prevention andtreatment) to $4.2 billion by the end of President Reagan'ssecond term. Two-thirds of the funds were now allocated for lawenforcement activities, with the remaining third allocated fordemand reduction (2). In 1984, the Crime Control Act increaseddramatically Federal mandatory minimum sentencing provisions fordrug- related crime, including the manufacture, distribution, orpossession of controlled substances. It also expanded thecriminal and civil asset forfeiture laws to penalize drugtraffickers and increased Federal criminal penalties fordrug-related offenses (3). This trend continued through theremainder of the Reagan administration as well as that ofPresident Bush. The 1980s saw significant shifts in patterns of cocaine use.The negative effects of cocaine use, especially long-termuse, hadpreviously been masked, but middle-class users with drug-relatedproblems suddenly were more common. Concurrently, cocainesmuggling escalated, resulting in increased availability, lowerprices, and higher quality. Low-income, minority communitiesbegan experiencing major drug problems, first with powderedcocaine, then in the mid- eighties especially with the new formof cocaine--crack. Commonly called an epidemic, the spread ofthis smokable cocaine inspired both President Reagan and antidruggroups to heightened drug intervention efforts. Crack appeared tobe highly addictive, as well as affordable, and fear of itsconsequences forced many lawmakers into action. The Anti- DrugAbuse Act of 1986 authorized more funds than ever before for thewar on drugs, most of which was designated for internationalinterdiction activities (9), and the establishment of the Officeof Substance Abuse Prevention (OSAP). The AIDS epidemic has alsoaffected patterns of drug use, since some intravenous (IV) drugusers may have switched to smoking crack in order to avoidexposure to the AIDS virus. Other IV drug users, however, havecontinued to inject, and comprise a large percentage of theAIDS-infected population. While the main focus of drug control policy in the 1980s wasinterdiction of illicit drugs, significant policy initiativesconcerning alcohol were also implemented. For example, the goalof the national minimum drinking age of 21 was stated in 1984 andachieved by 1988. Warning labels were required on all retailcontainers of alcoholic beverages beginning in 1989 (7). When George Bush was elected President in 1988 the climatewithin the country was highly intolerant to the use of illicitdrugs. President Bush echoed President Nixon when he declaredthat the drug epidemic was "public enemy number one"(16). The Anti-Drug Abuse Act of 1988 mandated the creation ofthe Office of National Drug Control Policy (ONDCP), to be headedby a director, sometimes called the drug czar, who wouldcoordinate U.S. drug control and abuse policy, resources, andoperations (Public Law 100-690). The first director was WilliamBennett, former Secretary for Education under President Reagan.He was followed by Robert Martinez, former Governor of Florida.The director, in conjunction with the President and CabinetSecretaries, sets Administration policy on drug control. However,ONCDP lacks budgetary authority, and under President Bush thedirector of ONDCP was not a Cabinet position. During the BushAdministration, additional funds were authorized for the war ondrugs, including increased funds for treatment and prevention.However, most of the funds were designated for law enforcementactivities. Spending for antidrug-related activities rose fromthe high of $4.2 billion under President Reagan, to a proposed$12.7 billion in the last year of President Bush's term. Again,the monetary split was roughly two-thirds for law enforcement andinternational interdiction activities and one-third for demandreduction (2). While "The War on Drugs" has remained part of thepolitical lexicon, President Clinton, after taking office in1993, cut the Office of National Drug Control Policy from 146positions to 25. He elevated the director of ONDCP to cabinetstatus, and Lee P. Brown, former Police Commissioner of New YorkCity was appointed to this position. During his campaign for thepresidency, Clinton advocated drug treatment on demand, and theaddition of 100,000 new police officers to the streets. _ CliffSchaffer's Home Page WT02-B02-16IA086-000614-B044-213http://206.61.184.43:80/schaffer/Library/studies/cu/cumenu.htm 206.61.184.43 19970122021400 text/html 2596HTTP/1.0 200 OKDate: Wednesday, 22-Jan-97 02:13:51 GMTServer: WebSitePro/1.1f (S/N wpo-0deb)Allow-ranges: bytesContent-type: text/htmlLast-modified: Wednesday, 01-Jan-97 22:45:01 GMTContent-length: 2378 Consumers Union Report on Licit and Illicit Drugs - Tableof Contents Contents | Feedback | Search DRCNet Library | Schaffer Library | Major Studies The Consumers Union Report on Licit and Illicit Drugs by Edward M. Brecher and the Editors of ConsumerReports Magazine, 1972 Table of Contents Chapter 6 - Opium smoking is outlawed Chapter 7 - The Pure Food and Drugs Act of1906 Chapter 12 - The heroin"overdose" mystery and other occupational hazardsof heroin addiction Chapter 44 - How to Launch aNationwide Drug Menace Contents | Feedback | Search DRCNet Library | Schaffer Library | Major StudiesWT02-B02-17IA086-000614-B041-392http://206.61.184.43:80/schaffer/Library/studies/lag/conc1.htm 206.61.184.43 19970122020139 text/html 3760HTTP/1.0 200 OKDate: Wednesday, 22-Jan-97 02:01:28 GMTServer: WebSitePro/1.1f (S/N wpo-0deb)Allow-ranges: bytesContent-type: text/htmlLast-modified: Saturday, 28-Dec-96 07:02:35 GMTContent-length: 3543 LaGuardia Committee Report Sociological Study --Conclusions Contents | Feedback | Search DRCNet Library | Schaffer Library | Major Studies | LaGuardiaCommittee Report The LaGuardia Report - Sociological Study Conclusions From the foregoing study the following conclusions are drawn: Marihuana is used extensively in the Borough of Manhattan but the problem is not as acute as it is reported to be in other sections of the United States. The introduction of marihuana into this area is recent as compared to other localities. The cost of marihuana is low and therefore within the purchasing power of most persons. The distribution and use of marihuana is centered in Harlem. The majority of marihuana smokers are Negroes and Latin-Americans. The consensus among marihuana smokers is that the use of the drug creates a definite feeling of adequacy. The practice of smoking marihuana does not lead to addiction in the medical sense of the word. The sale and distribution of marihuana is not under the control of any single organized group. The use of marihuana does not lead to morphine or heroin or cocaine addiction and no effort is made to create a market for these narcotics by stimulating the practice of marihuana smoking. Marihuana is not the determining factor in the commission of major crimes. Marihuana smoking is not widespread among school children. Juvenile delinquency is not associated with the practice of smoking marihuana. The publicity concerning the catastrophic effects of marihuana smoking in New York City is unfounded. Contents | Feedback | Search DRCNet Library | Schaffer Library | Major Studies | LaGuardiaCommittee ReportWT02-B02-18IA086-000614-B042-25http://206.61.184.43:80/schaffer/Library/studies/lag/jackb.htm 206.61.184.43 19970122020220 text/html 14017HTTP/1.0 200 OKDate: Wednesday, 22-Jan-97 02:02:13 GMTServer: WebSitePro/1.1f (S/N wpo-0deb)Allow-ranges: bytesContent-type: text/htmlLast-modified: Saturday, 28-Dec-96 07:02:10 GMTContent-length: 13799 La Guardia Committee Report - The Marijuana Cigarette Contents | Feedback | Search DRCNet Library | Schaffer Library | Major Studies | LaGuardiaCommittee Report The LaGuardia Committee Report on Marihuana The Marihuana Cigarette (Look for the Jack Benny Jello Hour) The Cigarette Smoking. When marihuana is smoked, there is, as has beenstated, no such accuracy in dosage as is the case when it isingested. The marihuana user acquires a technique or art insmoking "reefers." This involves special preparation ofthe cigarette and regulation of the frequency and depth ofinhalations. In a group of smokers, a cigarette circulates fromone to another, each in turn taking one or more puffs. Theperformance is a slow and deliberate one and the cigarette, heldin a forked match stick, is smoked to its end. When the smoke comes in contact with the respiratory mucousmembrane, the absorption of the active principle is rapid and theeffects are recognized promptly by the subject. He soon learns todistinguish the amount of smoking which will give pleasanteffects from the amount which will give unpleasant ones and soregulates his dosages. Providing there are no disturbing factors,as is the case in gatherings of small friendly groups or partiesin "tea-pads," the regulated smoking produces aeuphoric state, which accounts for continued indulgence. (TABLE 4) The effect from smoking marihuana cigarettes was studied in 32subjects. Of these, 20 were classed as users, that is, prior totheir arrest they had had more or less extensive experience insmoking. In the study the smoking was repeated by each subjectseveral times, the number of cigarettes smoked within an hourranging from one to eight. In all of the user group the smoking produced a euphoric statewith its feeling of well- being, contentment, sociability, mentaland physical relaxation, which usually ended in a feeling ofdrowsiness. Talkativeness and laughing and the sensation offloating in the air were common occurrences. These effects wereof short duration, from one to three or four hours after thesmoking was concluded. In none of these subjects was there anexpression of antagonism or antisocial behavior. In the non-user group the effects were similar except that inone subject a state of mental confusion occurred and in anotherthe main effect was a feeling of dizziness, unsteadiness, andmuscular weakness. Finally one subject showed effects entirelydifferent from the others. He smoked one cigarette and becamerestless, agitated, dizzy, fearful of his surroundings, afraid ofdeath. He had three short attacks of unconsciousness. At oneperiod he had visions of angels, and for a few minutes a euphoricstate. The entire episode lasted a little over an hour, afterwhich he went to sleep. This subject had a similar psychoticepisode after taking 120 mg. of tetrahydrocannabinol. On sevenother occasions he had been given the marihuana concentrate ortetrahydrocannabinol with no unusual effects. Of the physical symptoms occurring with smoking, dryness ofthe mouth and throat, dizziness, and a sensation of hunger werethe most common. None of these or other symptoms seemed to lessenmaterially the pleasurable effects. The effect of smoking on the 7 females, 6 of whom were classedas users, corresponded to that on the male group. All showedeuphoric effects. One of the subjects was nauseated and anotherwas restless, irritable, and contrary. These effects wereobserved in both of the subjects when marihuana was taken bystomach. One of the users, euphoric after smoking 6 and 10cigarettes, had a psychotic episode after 8 cc. of marihuanaconcentrate. Tea-Pad Parties. (This section on "Tea-Pad Parties"was prepared by Mrs. Halpern.) In addition to the quantitativedata regularly obtained from the subject during the course of thetesting program, the examiner had opportunity to make diverseobservations of the subject's global reactions, which threwinteresting light on the general effect of the drug on theindividual personality. When the subject became "high," his inclination wasto laugh, talk, sing, listen to music, or sleep, but therequirement that he solve problems, answer questions, or rememberdrawings created an artificial situation, tending to bring him"down" and spoil his pleasure. In order, therefore,that the influence of the drug might be observed in less formalcircumstances and in a set-up more nearly like the customary"tea-pad," two groups of men were given"parties" on the last night of their hospital sojourn.The men were consulted beforehand, and the stage was setaccording to their desires. They requested that nothing be doneuntil it was really dark outside. They brought the radio into theroom where the smoking took place and turned it to soft dancemusic. Only one shaded light burned, leaving the greater part ofthe room shadowy. The suggestion was made that easy chairs orfloor cushions be procured but the party progressed withoutthese. The men were allowed as many cigarettes as they wanted. Whenthe "reefers" were passed out they crowded around withtheir hands outstretched like little children begging for candy.The number of cigarettes the men smoked varied, the range beingfrom two to twelve or thirteen. There were both users andnon-users in these two groups. The users of course were highlyelated at the prospect of getting much free "tea," andsome of the non-users also smoked with genuine enjoyment. In the beginning the men broke up into little groups of twosand threes to do their smoking, or in some instances went off bythemselves. Smoke soon filled the atmosphere and added to thegeneral shadowy effect. After the initial smoking there was somemoving about- some men laughed and joked, some becameargumentative, while some just stared out of the window. Thearguments never seemed to get anywhere, although they often dealtwith important problems, and the illogical reasoning used wasnever recognized or refuted by the person to whom it wasaddressed. Gradually, as though attracted by some force, allrestlessness and activity ceased, and the men sat in a circleabout the radio. Occasionally they whispered to one another, laughed a little,or swayed to the music, but in general they relaxed quietly intheir chairs. A feeling of contentment seemed to pervade, andwhen one man suddenly got a "laughing jag" they wereannoyed at the interruption. In general, they gave the impression of adolescent boys doingsomething which was forbidden and thereby adding spice to theindulgence. Many of the adolescent personality patterns as theyappear in group activities were clearly observable here. Therewas the eternal "wisecracker," the domineering"important" individual who tried to tell everyone whatto do, the silly, giggling adolescent and the shy, withdrawnintrovert. One forgot that these were actually adults with allthe usual adult responsibilities. One could not help drawing theconclusion that they too had forgotten this for the time being. Although urged to smoke more, no subject could be persuaded totake more than he knew or felt he could handle. After about anhour and half of smoking, the men were given coffee and bread andjam and the party broke up. They all went to bed and reported thenext day that they had slept very well. Another attempt at evaluating the effect of marihuana in lessformal situations was made in the following manner. The examiner,one of the police officers and the subjects listened to JackBenny on the Jello Program at 7 o'clock Sunday evening. Thepolice officer noted the number of times the audience laughed,and the length of time the laughter lasted. The examiner checkedthese items for the subjects. The first time this was donewithout marihuana; the following week the subjects were givenseveral "reefers" about fifteen minutes before theradio program started. The results were as follows: Without drug, the subjects laughed 42 times as against 72laughs in the radio audience. The total time for all laughs was63 seconds as compared with 139 seconds for the radio audience.With cigarettes the subjects laughed 43 times as compared with 47laughs in the audience, the total laugh time being 129 seconds ascompared with 173 seconds of laughter in the audience. Withoutdrug, the subjects laughed, roughly speaking, only half as oftenand as long as the audience- while under the drug they laughedalmost as often and the laugh time was about 75 per cent that ofthe audience. It is obvious that under marihuana the subject laughs morereadily and for longer time intervals. This is probably due bothto the fact that things seem funnier to him and because whenunder the influence of the drug he is less inhibited. Differences Between Concentrate and Cigarette When marihuana was ingested, it was in the form of theconcentrate, containing all the active principles which aresoluble in the medium used. The relative proportions of theprinciples present are unknown, and the effects can be assumed togive a composite picture of different actions, the dominating onebeing that of tetrahydrocannabinol. There is no informationavailable concerning the principles present in marihuana smoke,and it is possible that some of those found in the concentratehave been destroyed by the heat of combustion. The effects fromsmoking correspond to those induced by tetrahydrocannabinol takenby stomach, so it may be assumed that this principle is presentin the smoke. The rapidity with which effects occur after smokingdemonstrates the quick absorption of the cannabinol from therespiratory tract and the short duration of these effectsindicates its prompt excretion or detoxification. When theconcentrate is taken, the absorption from the intestinal tract isslower and more prolonged. For these reasons it is not possibleto make a precise comparison between the effects of the two formsof administration. In general the subject's consciousness of unpleasant symptomsis more marked when the concentrate is taken and this mayinterrupt or obscure the pleasant effects. The long duration ofaction and the inability of the subject to stop it serve toaccentuate the physical symptoms and to cause apprehensionconcerning what may happen. The result of all this readily accounts for the irritability,negativism and antagonism occurring. The lessening of inhibitionsis not peculiar to marihuana, for in a few subjects who weregiven alcohol in intoxicating doses the behavior corresponded tothat induced by marihuana. After smoking the main effect was of a euphoric type. Somedizziness and dryness of the mouth were generally present butwere not pronounced enough to distract from the pleasantsensations. The condition described as "high" came onpromptly and increased with the number of cigarettes smoked, butit was not alarming or definitely disagreeable, and did not giverise to antisocial behavior. On the contrary it prompted sociability. The marihuana wasunder the subject's control, and once the euphoric state waspresent, which might come from only one cigarette, he had noinclination to increase it by more smoking. When a considerablenumber of cigarettes were smoked, the effect was usually one ofdrowsiness and fatigue. The description of the "tea-pad parties" brings outclearly the convivial effect on the groups and the absence of anyrough or antagonistic behavior. Contents | Feedback | Search DRCNet Library | Schaffer Library | Major Studies | LaGuardiaCommittee ReportWT02-B02-19IA086-000614-B042-130http://206.61.184.43:80/schaffer/Library/studies/lag/sumdis.htm 206.61.184.43 19970122020409 text/html 20025HTTP/1.0 200 OKDate: Wednesday, 22-Jan-97 02:04:03 GMTServer: WebSitePro/1.1f (S/N wpo-0deb)Allow-ranges: bytesContent-type: text/htmlLast-modified: Saturday, 28-Dec-96 07:01:47 GMTContent-length: 19807 LaGuardia Committee Report on Marihuana -- Summary andDiscussion Contents | Feedback | Search DRCNet Library | Schaffer Library | Major Studies | LaGuardiaCommittee Report The LaGuardia Committee Report on Marihuana SUMMARY AND DISCUSSION Under the influence of marihuana changes in personality asshown by alterations in test performance are slight. They are notstatistically significant and indicate only tendencies or trends.Moreover, the drug effect is not always in proportion to theamount taken, nor are the changes consistently in one direction.In many instances the effect of small doses (2 cc.) or ofmarihuana cigarettes is the opposite of the effect of largerdoses (5 cc.) (2) (2) While sufficient experimentation has not been made tovalidate the finding, it should be noted that the personalitychanges produced by 2 cc. or marihuana cigarettes are almostalways in agreement in contrast to the changes resulting from theingestion of 5 cc. The 2 cc. Dosage apparently more nearlyapproximates the amount a person would take if left to his owndevices. The personality changes observed when the subject is under theinfluence of 2 cc. of marihuana or marihuana cigarettesdemonstrate that the subject experiences some reduction in drive,less objectivity in evaluating situations, less aggression, moreself-confidence and a generally more favorable attitude towardhimself. These reactions can be ascribed to two main causes,namely, an increased feeling of relaxation and disinhibition andincreased self-confidence. As the drug relaxes the subject, therestraints which he normally imposes on himself are loosened andhe talks more freely than he does in his undrugged state. Thingswhich under ordinary circumstances he would not speak about arenow given expression. Metaphysical problems which in theundrugged state he would be unwilling to discuss, sexual ideas hewould ordinarily hesitate to mention, jokes without point, areall part of the oral stream released by the marihuana. At the same time that he verbalizes more freely, there is areduction in the individual's critical faculty. This is probablydue both to the intellectual confusion produced by the drug andto the less exacting attitude his feeling of relaxation induces.He holds himself less rigidly to the standards of his undruggedphase and does not drive himself to achieve. He is satisfied withhimself and willing to accept himself as he is. Thisself-satisfaction undoubtedly helps produce the feeling ofself-confidence which allows the subject to come out more freelyin fields which he formerly avoided. This increased confidenceexpresses itself primarily through oral rather than physicalchannels. Physically the subject reports pleasant sensations of"drifting" and "floating" and he allowshimself to become enveloped in a pleasant lassitude. After the administration of larger doses of marihuana (5 cc.)the pleasurable sensations appear to be outweighed by concomitantfeelings of anxiety'and, in some cases, of physical distress,such as nausea. Under these circumstances, for many subjectsthere is little increase in confidence but rather heightenedinsecurity which precludes outgoing reactions and tends to evokegenerally negativistic attitudes to most stimuli. It is important to note that neither the ingestion ofmarihuana nor the smoking of marihuana cigarettes affects thebasic outlook of the individual except in a very few instancesand to a very slight degree. In general the subjects who arewithdrawn and introversive stay that way, those who are outgoingremain so, and so on. Where changes occur the shift is so slightas to be negligible. In other words reactions which are nativelyalien to the individual cannot be induced by the ingestion orsmoking of the drug. Although in most instances the effects of the drug are thesame for the user and the non-user, there are some differencesboth in kind and extent. Where the effects for the two groups arein the same direction they generally are more marked in the caseof the non-user. This is not unexpected in view of the non-user'slack of habituation to the drug action. For the nonuser hispresent experience is a strange, even hazardous one, and theuncertainty and anxiety attendant upon this impairs the sense ofwell-being which the drug produces in the user. Thus the non-userfrequently feels-less secure when he is "high" than hedoes normally and is less well adjusted than he is in ordinarycircumstances. When the productions of the undrugged marihuana user arestudied, certain personality traits which serve to differentiatehim from the non-user and from the "average" individualcan be discerned. As a group the marihuana users studied herewere either inhibited emotionally or turned in on themselves,making little response to stimuli in the world about them. Peoplewith this type of personality generally have difficulty adjustingto others and are not at ease in social situations. Thiswithdrawal from social contacts apparently finds littlecompensatory or sublimating activity elsewhere. These subjectsdid not have a desire or urge to occupy themselves creatively ina manner which might prove socially useful. They showed atendency to drift along in passive fashion and gave a goodportion of their attention to relatively unimportant matters.These men were poorly adjusted, lonely and insecure. As indicatedby their history they seldom achieved good heterosexualadjustment. CONCLUSIONS Under the influence of marihuana the basic personality structure of the individual does not change but some of the more superficial aspects of his behavior show alteration. With the use of marihuana the individual experiences increased feelings of relaxation, disinhibition and self-confidence. The new feeling of self-confidence induced by the drug expresses itself primarily through oral rather than through physical activity. There is some indication of a diminution in physical activity. The disinhibition which results from the use of marihuana releases what is latent in the individual's thoughts and emotions but does not evoke responses which would be totally alien to him in his undrugged state. Marihuana not only releases pleasant reactions but also feelings of anxiety. Individuals with a limited capacity for effective experience and who have difficulty in making social contacts are more likely to resort to marihuana than those more capable of outgoing responses. Family and Community Ideologies Adolph G. Woltrnann, MA At the outset of the study it seemed worth while to supplementthe quantitative data by some qualitative procedures of theprojective type which might throw light on the social reactionsof the individuals who were being studied. One of the methodsthat has shown its possibilities, particularly in its use withchildren, is the play technique in which the individual ispermitted to give free expression to some of his unconsciousmotivations in a way that is not immediately apparent to him. Thelimitation of this technique is the fact that it is highlyinterpretive, but it has the advantage of permitting observationsof the subject's personality reactions in problem situations. Such a study was accordingly carried out on 18 subjects in theearly part of the investigation. METHOD Two situations were studied: one, subsequently to be referredto as the family set-up, in which toys were used to build anapartment or home, and another, subsequently to be known as thecommunity set- up, in which a second variety of toys were used toconstruct a town setting. The Family Set-up The equipment used in this part of the study consisted of abox of household toys of the type available in the ten-centstore, including beds, dressers, chairs, tables, sinks, a stove,a bathtub, a wash basin, a piano, lamps, flower boxes, atelephone, doll sets of a man, woman, boy, girl, and maid, and,in addition, several small wooden slats which were intended to beused as room partitions. The box of toys and materials was presented to the subjectwith the following directions: "Here are a number of toyswhich can be placed in such a manner that a house can be builtfrom them. You are supposed to be this doll (man). Go ahead andbuild yourself a house or apartment. You may use as few or asmany toys as you wish. You may also make believe you are abachelor or a married man with or without a family." The Community Set-up In studying the community set-up the following items wereemployed: eighteen wooden houses, trees, cars, trucks, fireengines, an ambulance, a radio police car, a railroad train,airplanes, and numerous figures representing men, women, andchildren from different walks of life. All these toys were handedto the subject at the same time with the instruction to build atown or city. As in the family set-up, no further help orsuggestions were given. The actual method of handling these materials allows for twoapproaches. In the free method the subject is encouraged to playwith any toy and to create and act out any situation that thenature of the toy suggests to him. No help, clues, or hints aregiven. In the controlled methods either the subject is told tocreate a specific pattern or his responses and reactions to apredetermined particular situation are elicited. Both methodswere used in this study. After the subject had completed either his family or hiscommunity set-up and answered questions regarding certainsituations about which the examiner had questioned him thefollowing points were investigated: ( 1 ) subject's maritalstatus, both real and assumed; (2) type of home he built forhimself (number of rooms, type of furnishing); (3) subject'sassumed occupation; (4) monthly income and rent which he posited;(S) his reaction to attempted burglary; (6) his reaction to hiswife's and his own infidelity; and (7) the attitude he would taketoward civic problems if given a position of responsibility suchas mayor. In addition, the examiner appraised the subject'sneatness and orderliness in his home and community setup. Theexperiment was given first when the subject was undrugged andthen when he was under the influence of marihuana. FINDINGS Results were collated in terms of the type and frequency ofresponses to different situations both before and after takingmarihuana and in terms of number of items (toys) employed in theset- up, as, for example, in the case of the home situation, thenumber of rooms the subject thought necessary for his apartmentand the amount of rent he thought he ought to pay and itsrelation to the income he posited for himself; in the case of thecommunity set- up, the number of times the subject provided forambulances, firemen, and policemen; in the case of the subject'sreaction to burglary, whether he took a passive or a resistantattitude toward the burglary and whether he assumed the burglarhad absconded with most of the property and so on; in the case ofhis attitude toward his wife's adultery, whether he thought heought to divorce her or try for reconciliation; and, when thesubject was unfaithful, whether he thought his wife ought toforgive his delinquency. In most cases comparisons between responses or reactionsshowed little difference in attitude before and after theingestion of marihuana and therefore it would not be tooprofitable in this short summary of the work to present all thedata obtained. However, by way of illustrating the type ofmaterial procured, the following tables are given: (TABLE 20) (TABLE 21) The majority of the patients, though unmarried in real life,assumed families and responsibilities in the play situation, andin a free situation acted out family activities and ideologies.These figures reveal that, on the average, the subjects whenunder the influence of the drug tended to build apartments withsomewhat fewer rooms. The impression of the examiner was thatthis was due primarily to the subject's desire to get throughwith the task as quickly as possible in order to return to hisroom to rest and sleep. (TABLE 22) A "make-believe" sickness or accident necessitatingthe use of an ambulance was the most frequently observed playpattern. When the subjects were under the influence of the drugthe incidence of the ambulance and the police was considerablyless than it was when they were in the undrugged state. (TABLE 23) The most frequent form of passive reaction to his wife'sinfidelity was that the subject would pack up and leave home. Theaggressive reactions consisted of ordering the wife out of thehome in three instances, jailing the wife and lover in oneinstance, throwing the wife out in one instance, killing thelover but leaving the wife unmolested in one instance, andbeating up the lover and leaving the wife unharmed in oneinstance. The following are examples of subjects' responses to theadultery situation. When he was facing the pretended situationbefore taking marihuana, one subject immediately left his house,borrowed money from his employer, and traveled to the West Coast.After he arrived there he proceeded to drink and in due timebecame a derelict on the Barbary Coast. When asked about hischildren he said, "That's closed with the rest of thechapter. Let her ardent lover support the children. I take on anassumed name. Others might get a divorce and custody of thechildren but in my case my home life would be a closedchapter." After the administration of marihuana he stillshowed a passive attitude, but, having assumed the role of apsychologist, he felt obliged to act accordingly. At first heconsidered divorce action, but since that would deprive thechildren of a home, he finally forgave his wife. Then he stoppedin his contemplations, looked at the examiner and said, "Whydo I become altruistic? . . . That's beyond me . . . Maybe Ibecome a martyr . . . I commit an act of martyrdom." Anothersubject, when in the undrugged condition, ordered his wife out ofthe house and later divorced her. In the drugged state customaryprocedures were reversed. The subject went to his parents andremained passively at home while his mother unsuccessfully triedto bring about a reconciliation. The subject's attitude toward adultery did not change in thedrugged state. The data in Table 24 illustrate the fact thatingestion of marihuana generally does not alter the subject'sbasic attitude. (TABLE 24) Practically all the subjects approved of saloons. Gambling wasrejected because it deprives wives and children of money andleads to trouble. A heavy loser may try to recoup his lossesthrough holdups, and fights and homicide may develop fromquarrels. Prostitution was condoned by about 5O per cent of thesubjects both before and after the ingestion of the drug, but theuse of marihuana was frowned upon more often when the subject wasundrugged than when he was in the drugged state. (TABLE 25) SUMMARY AND CONCLUSIONS Eighteen subjects who participated in the marihuana study weresubjected to the play situation with the idea of seeing whetherthe pattern of play or the ideas investigated were materiallyaltered in consequence of the ingestion of the marihuana. Amongthe ideologies which were appraised were: (1) attitude towardfamily set-up; (2) attitude toward different occupations; (3)attitude toward income; (4) attitude toward situations ordinarilycalling for aggression, namely an attempted burglary of his homeand sexual infidelity on the part of his wife; (5) attitudetoward authority. In general the subject's attitude toward family and communityideologies as manifested in play did not change markedly as aresult of the ingestion of marihuana. The subjects (in play) werenot intolerant of infidelity or aggressive toward lawbreakerseither before or after the ingestion of marihuana. On the wholethe initial passive reactions already observed in other parts ofthe study were likewise observed in the play situationexperiment. The only very definite change as a result of theingestion of marihuana was in their attitude toward the drugitself. Without marihuana only 4 out of 14 subjects said theywould tolerate the sale of marihuana while after ingestion 8 ofthem were in favor of this. Another significant manifestation in the play situationpertains to the construction of the community set-up. In generalthe community was less orderly and well organized when thesubjects had had marihuana. It is probable that this poororganization may be ascribed to the generally indifferentattitude and lack of motor coordination already observed in themore controlled studies. On the whole, the experiment with play technique gave lessinformation as to the effect of marihuana on subjects than hadbeen hoped for. This may have been due to the incompleteness ofthe method employed or possibly to the fact that this techniqueis designed to give data about the basic personality of theindividual rather than such alterations in it as might be causedby pharmacological agents. Contents | Feedback | Search DRCNet Library | Schaffer Library | Major Studies | LaGuardiaCommittee Report WT02-B02-20IA086-000614-B048-244http://206.61.184.43:80/schaffer/Library/studies/fada/fada1.htm 206.61.184.43 19970122023308 text/html 127631HTTP/1.0 200 OKDate: Wednesday, 22-Jan-97 02:32:56 GMTServer: WebSitePro/1.1f (S/N wpo-0deb)Allow-ranges: bytesContent-type: text/htmlLast-modified: Saturday, 28-Dec-96 07:07:16 GMTContent-length: 127412 The Federal Government's Response to Illicit Drugs,1969-1978 The Facts About Drug Abuse The Drug Abuse Council, 1980 The Federal Government's Response to IllicitDrugs, 1969-1978 Peter Goldberg Note on Acronyms ACRONYMS ARE USED throughoutthis chapter for a number of federal agencies. Among those mostoften referred to are: ADAMHA Alcohol, Drug Abuse, and Mental HealthAdministration BNDD Bureau of Narcotics and Dangerous Drugs DEA Drug Enforcement Administration FBN Federal Bureau of Narcotics NIDA National Institute on Drug Abuse NIMH National Institute of Mental Health ODALE Office of Drug Abuse Law Enforcement ODAP Office of Drug Abuse Policy OMB Office of Management and Budget SAODAP Special Action Office for Drug AbusePrevention Introduction Throughout the twentieth century thegovernment of the United States has engaged, in one form oranother, in efforts to prevent its citizens from using certaindesignated psychoactive drugs. The use of nonapproved drugs hasbeen defined as illegal, and billions of taxpayer dollars havebeen spent and millions of man-hours devoted to curtailing theavailability of such drugs. Yet in spite of these efforts thereare now as many users and abusers of illicit drugs as everbefore. Similarly, the misuse of legally available drugs hasdramatically increased. Data on the use of illicit drugs do notconclusively demonstrate that the federal government's antidrugefforts have failed, but they do provide compelling reasons toundertake a thorough reappraisal of federal policies andprograms. Evaluations made by both federal government studygroups and private organizations' have resulted inchanges-particularly in preventive and treatment approaches-butfederal drug policies have remained fundamentally the same fordecades. This chapter will concentrate on the responseof the federal government to the issues of illicit drug use andmisuse from 1969 to the present. It was during this periodthat our country experienced an unprecedented growth in thegovernmental response to the use of illicit drugs. This periodalso roughly coincides with the years during which the Drug AbuseCouncil has been studying drug issues and policy. To understand the U.S. government's responseto illicit drugs in the 1970s it is necessary to know somethingof the history. Our nation's current drug policies and programsare the result of over seventy years of development. Detailedanalyses such as those provided by David Musto2and Rufus King3 offer insight into thisprocess. It is clear from these analyses that the government'sresponse to public fear of certain drugs and drug users hasprimarily consisted of law enforcement or quasi-enforcementstrategies intended to prohibit both new and continued use ofnonapproved substances. The belief that some drugs are soinnately harmful that the citizens of this country should andcould be prevented from using them has been the basic tenet ofAmerican drug policy for the past seven decades. Historical Review Several major pieces of drug legislation andpresidential initiatives have shaped public policy in the drugfield. The first pertinent legislation in this area passed byCongress was the District of Columbia Pharmacy Act in 1906.4 Although this act appliedonly to the District of Columbia, it set a precedent for Congressto deal with drug issues. This act permitted a physician toprescribe narcotics to addicts, but only when "necessary forthe cure" of addiction; the prescription of narcotic drugsto nonaddicted persons was limited to the treatment of injury ordisease. The intent of the act was to prevent the further -spreadof addictive drug use. It first raised the difficultphilosophical question of government regulation of physicianprescribing practices with respect to addictive drugs, an issuestill actively debated. The Harrison Narcotic Act,' passed in late1914, marked the official entry of the government into the areaof narcotics control. This act simplified record keeping on thedispensation of certain narcotic drugs, and required thatstandard forms be filed and maintained for two years on the salesof narcotic drugs. Revenue agents could inspect these records atwill. However, physicians were allowed to dispense drugs withoutkeeping records if in actual attendance on their patients.Numerous patent medicines containing small amounts of morphine,cocaine, opium, and heroin were still permitted to be sold bymail order or in general stores. Through regulations issued by the TreasuryDepartment pursuant to the Harrison Narcotic Act, the federalgovernment hampered the treatment of heroin and morphineaddiction to such a degree that by the early 1920s those clinicsin the country which regularly provided opiates to registeredaddicts (so-called "maintenance clinics") were closed,and few private physicians dared to provide these drugs toaddicts . 6 Thiseffectively ended the medical profession's active involvement inthe treatment of drug addiction until the 1960s. From the 1920son, the federal government was for all practical purposes incharge of attempts to control illicit drug use. Although therewere, at the time, serious questions raised about theconstitutionality of using federal police powers to restrict, andeventually prohibit, the use of certain drugs, the popular beliefwas that the use of these drugs must be eliminated even whenoccurring in the context of medical treatment for addiction. In 1929 Congress passed the Porter Act 7 ostensibly addressing thetreatment needs of convicted addicts. The Porter Act called forthe building of two narcotics "farms" in which thoseconvicted of the "crime" of drug addiction would behoused in order to receive compulsory treatment. The underlyingassumption of the act seemed to be that treatment-enforcedabstinence-required isolation and a controlled environment.Although the Porter Act became law in January 1929, the firstfarm did not open until 1935 in Lexington, Kentucky. A secondfarm opened in 1938 in Fort Worth, Texas. The treatment renderedat these farms was not successful, with most addicts returning toaddiction after discharge." In reality the farms were littlemore than specialized prisons. In fact, Musto reports that"not until the late 1960s were the bars removed from theLexington facility and the cells turned into rooms."9 In 1930 the first federal agency specificallydevoted to the control of illicit drugs, the Federal Bureau ofNarcotics (FBN), was established. Because the federal regulationof narcotic drugs was based on the taxing power of Congress, theFBN was made part of the Treasury Department and was concernedonly with enforcement issues. The FBN was responsible, at leastinitially, for enforcing the Harrison Narcotic Act andcontrolling only what were then thought of as the most dangerousdrugs-cocaine and the opiates. The FBN's policies were predicatedon the belief that "the most effective way of gaining publiccompliance with a law regulating a dangerous drug was a policy ofhigh fines and severe mandatory prison sentences for firstconvictions." 10 The FBN did not initially support a federalantimarijuana effort. However, newspaper accounts of seriouscrimes attributed to marijuana users and the drug's "Mexicanpurveyors" triggered a series of events that culminated inthe passage of the Marihuana Tax Act of 1937. 11 The FBN changedits policies after this act was passed, vigorously enforcing thefederal laws prohibiting marijuana. 12 Passage of the Marihuana Tax Act in effectimposed a total prohibition on marijuana use. Marijuana wasdescribed in congressional hearings as impairing the ability tothink rationally, dangerous to the mind and body, and leading toinsanity. It was further claimed that marijuana led to thecommission of violent crimes, spread drug use to school children,and resulted in impotence in the habitual user. It was not untilthe early 1970s that many of these views began to be modified. Tothis day, however, their effects on public attitudes and policieslinger. During the late 1940s and early 1950s therewere reports that rates of heroin addiction had risen,particularly in inner-city minority communities. This periodcoincided with the beginning of the so-called "McCarthyera," a time when public fear of nonconforming behavior washigh and tolerance of it low. Drugs were linked to communism. AsDavid Musto has written, "The Federal Bureau of Narcoticslinked Red China's attempts to get hard cash, as well as todestroy Western society, to the clandestine sale of large amountsof heroin to drug pushers in the United States."13 Inaddition, a theory that addicts began with marijuana use andmoved inexorably to the use of heroin (or morphine orcocaine)-the progression" or "stepping-stone"theory-was widely believed. In this atmosphere, the Boggs Act14 was passed in late 1951. The BoggsAct increased penalties for all drug law violators and for thefirst time made penalties for violation of the marijuana laws thesame as those for narcotic drugs. This act also introduced, atthe federal level, the concept of minimum mandatory jailsentences for drug law offenders. The Boggs Act-and later amendments whichfurther increased penalties 15 -reflected an undeviatingreliance on law enforcement activities and harsh penalties todeal with the perceived "drug menace." The BoggsAct-and the later Narcotic Control Act of 1956-passed after onlycursory hearings, which did not delve into either the causes orthe nature of the use of illicit drugs. The widespread fear ofcommunism and intolerance of nonconforming views and behavior atthe time made it politically feasible-even desirable-to advocatereliance on the criminal justice system to control and punishnarcotics users. The need for treatment was ignored. MostAmericans directly affected by these laws were politicallyimpotent, disliked, and distrusted because of prevailing racialand ethnic prejudices. The first notice of change in officialattitudes came in 1963 with President Kennedy's appointment of anAdvisory Commission on Narcotic and Drug Abuse (the PrettymanCommission) to review the nation's drug problems and thegovernment's response to them. The Prettyman Commission report 16 challenged many of theassumptions which had long dominated official thinking in thedrug area. It recommended a decreased use of minimum mandatorysentences, an increase in appropriations for research, and thetransfer of the FBN to the Department of Health, Education, andWelfare. It also recommended that the final judgment on thelegitimate medical use of narcotics be given back to the medicalprofession. The Prettyman Commission noted thefragmentation of federal activities in the drug field andrecommended that "the President appoint a Special Assistantfor Narcotic and Drug Abuse from the White House staff to providecontinuous advice and assistance in launching a coordinatedattack. " 17 Althoughthe commission made many recommendations, few were implemented atthat time. One recommendation of the commission which didreceive attention was that a civil commitment system beestablished "to provide an alternative method of handlingthe federally convicted offender who is a confirmed narcotic ormarijuana abuser." Such a system was instituted by theNarcotic Addict Rehabilitation Act of 1966 (NARA)."'Although NARA ostensibly considered drug addiction a"medical problem," addicts committed under NARAprograms were basically perceived as prisoners. By the mid-1960s, illicit drug use had becomea highly visible and emotional issue throughout the UnitedStates. It was widely believed that illicit drug use wasincreasing rapidly and for the first time reaching into thesuburbs and affecting white middle-class youth. News reportsoften tended toward sensationalism in presenting stories on LSDand hallucinogenic drug use on college campuses. Anti-Vietnam Warprotesters became identified with marijuana use. The use ofillicit drugs was, in general, identified as an antisocialgesture and was associated in the public's mind with mentalillness and rising rates of street crime. In February 1968 President Johnson established"a new and powerful Bureau of Narcotics and Dangerous Drugs(BNDD)" within the justice Department."' Johnson hadseen that the federal enforcement of narcotics laws wasfragmented. The Federal Bureau of Narcotics in the TreasuryDepartment had some responsibilities, while the Bureau of DrugAbuse Control (BDAC)-an agency created only three years earlierin 1965 in the Department of Health, Education, and Welfare-hadbeen assigned certain regulatory functions having to do withnonnarcotic drugs. In an attempt to unify the federal response,the FBN and BDAC were abolished and the new BNDD was given fullauthority to enforce all U.S. narcotics laws, from worldwideoperations to work with state and local law enforcementofficials. In addition, BNDD was directed to "conduct anextensive campaign of research and a nationwide public educationprogram on drug abuse and its tragic effects." In fact, inPresident Johnson's message to Congress proposing ReorganizationPlan No. 1, the only mention of any federal effort in research-treatment, or education was in the context of the justiceDepartment's BNDD. The emphasis was again on law enforcement andthe relationship between drugs and crime. Understanding the Growth of theGovernmental Response to Illicit Drugs During Richard Nixon's presidential terms, theissue of "drug abuse" was given a higher priority andgreater visibility than at any other time in our country'shistory. In January 1969 the annual federal. budget for drugtreatment, education, research, and law enforcement was $81.4million; five years later it was $760 million-nearly a tenfoldincrease. A series of major legislative, organizational, andprogrammatic changes accompanied these dramatic budget increases.The reasons for this enormous increase in the federal responsecan be traced to three unforeseen circumstances of need andopportunity. The Need to Reduce Rates of Urban StreetCrime. Rising street crime was a keyissue in the 1968 presidential campaign. The urban riots of themid-1960s and the rising crime-rate figures issued by the FBIprovided fuel for much of the campaign rhetoric about the growing"lawlessness" and "violence" of America."Law and order" emerged as the dominant domestic themeof the 1968 Republican presidential campaign .20 Campaign promises to "get tough"with urban street crime are historically easier to make than tofulfill. The jurisdiction and power of the federal government toprevent burglaries and armed robberies-among the most commontypes of urban street crime--are limited. Except in the Districtof Columbia, such violations are usually matters for state, notfederal, action. Even if Congress had extended the legalauthority of the federal law enforcement agencies, these agencies(FBI, IRS, BNDD) did not have the manpower to address urbanstreet crime effectively. In spite of the passage of "tough"legislation such as preventive detention, harsh prison sentences,and "no-knock" warrantless searches, crime ratescontinued to rise, as reported by the FBI, jeopardizing theadministration's promised law and order. Even in the District ofColumbia, where the federal government could exercise somecontrcl, the crime rate increased during the first year of theNixon presidency. Clearly, from a political perspective theNixon administration needed to show progress in some area ofcrime control before the 1972 election. This was one elementunderlying the growth since 1969 of the federal government'sefforts to control the use of illicit drugs. The Public's Increasing Concern AboutHeroin Addiction. The association ofillicit drug use with street crime and violence developed over along period of time. By the late 1960s, the relationship betweenheroin "addiction' and street crime was generally acceptedas fact, despite the absence of any careful research anddocumentation. 22 Heroin had become inextricably linked in thepublic's mind with the urban crisis; and as public anxiety aboutcrime grew, so too did the fear of heroin and heroin addicts. The public's fear of heroin was intensified byreports of increased use of narcotics among American soldiersstationed in Vietnam. The thought of "soldier-junkies,"trained in guerrilla warfare, returning to the streets of urbanAmerica heightened public concern and led to further demands forgovernment action. "Drug abuse" (particularly heroinaddiction) rapidly became a major public concern, as reflected inthe opinion polls of that time, adding another argument for anexpanded government effort. But neither the need for an effective crimereduction program nor the growing public concern about heroinexplain by themselves the increased federal response: a thirdelement was crucial. In all likelihood the government's effortsto prevent "drug abuse" would have expanded withoutthis third element, but it is doubtful that the expansion wouldhave been anywhere near the same magnitude. * In the late 1960s no distinction was madebetween heroin use and heroin addiction-all use of heroin wasbelieved addictive. More recent studies indicate that this is notnecessarily accurate.21 The Emergence of New Approaches to theProblem of Heroin Addiction. Three newavenues of response to the problems of heroin addiction andheroin-related crime emerged. Although distinct from one another,these three approaches in time became interrelated in subsequentgovernment programs. The opportunities they presented led-somesay misled-federal policyrnakers to believe that they couldrespond to the problems of heroin addiction more successfullythan previously. First, the legislative basis for federal druglaw enforcement efforts changed. Federal regulations and controlson drugs before 1970 were based primarily on the power to levytaxes and prohibit traffic in smuggled goods. Thus virtually allfederal drug law enforcement programs were administered by theTreasury Department-until the creation of the Bureau of Narcoticsand Dangerous Drugs in the justice Department by executive orderin 1968; simultaneously the Treasury Department's Federal Bureauof Narcotics was abolished. This transfer of jurisdiction wasgiven a statutory basis in 1970 with the passage of theComprehensive Drug Abuse Prevention and Control Act.2" This act addressed a broad range of drugprogram efforts, providing increased support for drug treatment,rehabilitation, and education as well as enforcement. Theenforcement provisions of this legislation (Title II of the act)were part of a larger attempt to reduce criminal activity throughimproved federal law enforcement. Congress and the Nixonadministration sought through this legislation to recodify theexisting drug laws into one comprehensive law. Most narcotics lawenforcement powers were given to the justice Department, thusallowing the Attorney General to exercise control over alldangerous drugs (e.g., amphetamines and barbiturates) andnarcotics. This was the first federal law making it illegal totraffic in or possess certain drugs which did not refer to thetaxing authority. Instead, the justification for federal-asopposed to state-enforcement was shifted to the power of Congressto regulate interstate commerce. The concept of the"interstate commerce" powers of Congress had greatlyexpanded in the decades prior to this new drug legislation.Supreme Court rulings on the "New Deal" legislation ofthe 1930s and 1940s and on the civil rights cases of the 1960shad clearly broadened the scope of activities that Congress couldregulate under its constitutional authority to regulate"interstate commerce." This shift in the constitutional basis of druglaw enforcement allowed the federal government to become moredirectly involved in suppressing one presumed major cause ofurban street crime about which there was great public fear. Itoffered some hope that expanded and intensified efforts to combattrafficking in illicit drugs could succeed where past efforts hadfailed. A second new avenue of response centeredaround bilateral agreements to reduce the international flow ofillicit drugs-particularly heroin-into the United States. Formore than sixty years, beginning with the Hague InternationalOpium Convention of 1912, the United States has negotiatedbilateral and multilateral international agreements to keepillicit opiates out of the country. Since opium, of which heroinis a derivative, is not grown anywhere in the United States, allthe heroin used by addicts in this country comes from foreignsources; hence the concept that if opium is not cultivatedelsewhere, heroin will not be available for use here. Since,however, it is virtually impossible to prevent the growth of theopium poppy everywhere, a second line of defense has been todisrupt international trafficking in opium, its chemicalconversion into heroin in foreign laboratories, and itssubsequent shipment into the United States. In January 1969, up to 80 percent of theheroin used in the United States was believed to be of Turkishorigin. The major processing country for converting Turkish opiuminto heroin for shipment to American East Coast port cities wasreputed to be France. The operations in these two countries werefrequently blamed for the rising rates of heroin addictionreported in the United States in the late 1960s. The Nixon administration sought greaterinternational cooperation to keep illicit drugs from entering theUnited States .14 Inearly 1971, just as public concern about heroin was reaching itspeak, separate agreements were reached with France and Turkeyenlisting their formal assistance in keeping heroin out of theUnited States. The French government agreed to take steps toclose down the clandestine laboratories operating principallyaround Marseilles and to prevent the traffic of opium into, andheroin out of, France. The agreement with Turkey-the culminationof five years of negotiations-amounted to a total. ban on -poppycultivation in Turkey in return for American financial aid forcrop substitution programs and income compensation for Turkishfarmers. It was anticipated that these two agreementswould significantly reduce the flow of heroin to the UnitedStates, and that the resulting shortage would reduce the levelsof heroin addiction and heroin-related crime. Thcy were touted asmajor victories on the international front of the new "waron drug abuse." The federal government sought to capitalizeon these agreements by negotiating agreements with otherpotential "source" and "processing"countries. The hoped-for success of these efforts to controlinternational supplies thus emerged as the second new avenue ofthe government's heroin control effort. The third new avenue of response was the useof methadone to treat heroin addiction. Methadone is a syntheticanalgesic developed by the Germans during World War 11 as asubstitute for morphine. After the war and throughout the 1950s,methadone was used in the United States as a detoxifying agentfor heroin addicts. In 1964 Drs. Vincent P. Dole and Marie E.Nyswander of the Rockefeller Institute in New York City foundthat they were able to maintain six heroin addicts on a stabledosage-level of methadone without their craving heroin. Dole andNyswander soon began an expanded program of methadone maintenanceto both demonstrate methadone's potential and evaluate theprogram's impact. In 1966 they reported the initial results oftheir work: Among the most widely publicized of their results wasthat criminal activity among the enrolled addicts had been"virtually eliminated. '125 Public and government interest in the concept ofmethadone maintenance grew, and by the late 1960s methadoneprograms were in operation in many urban centers, providingaddicts with an alternative to the more traditional forms oftreatment which emphasized abstinence, and which had not provedsuccessful for large numbers of addicts. While methadone maintenance programs aregenerally considered "treatment," particularly by theirstaffs and clients, the idea of using methadone treatment as partof the larger national effort to reduce urban street crime hadbegun to take hold by late 1969. The proposition put forth wasthat if an addict's dependence on heroin was broken (bysubstituting legally prescribed methadone), the crime rate wouldbe reduced, because-so the theory went-addicts committed a largeproportion of the street crime in order to feed their illicithabits. A 1970 Domestic Council Summary Option Paper on Drugsstated, "The Federal government has only one economical andeffective technique for reducing crime in the streets-methadonemaintenance. -26 Methadone thus offered an important new formof treatment to heroin addicts as well as a possibility ofreducing urban street crime. Which aspect was considered moreimportant is difficult to determine. In any event, the emergenceof methadone treatment was a crucial -part of the developing"solution" to the problems of heroin addiction andheroin-related crime. Thus in the late 1960s and early 1970s severalnew and potentially significant approaches developed. Manybelieved that if effectively applied in concert they couldsubstantially reduce the rate of heroin addiction and associatedproblems, particularly the crimes committed to raise money tosupport heroin addiction. These developments, coinciding as theydid with the political commitment to reduce urban street crimeand respond to the growing public concern about heroin addiction,had much to do with the enormous growth of the federal responseto illicit drugs which began in 1969. The Federal Response, 1969-1971 In January 1969 the federal government'sresponse to illicit drugs as measured in dollars spent was small;$86 million was spent in fiscal year 1969 (FY 69), and only amodest increase to $101.9 million was requested for FY 70 .27 The principal federal agencies involved in thedrug field during this period were the National Institute ofMental Health (NIMH) in the Department of Health, Education, andWelfare; the Bureau of Narcotics and Dangerous Drugs in thejustice Department; and the Customs Bureau of the TreasuryDepartment. These three agencies accounted for the bulk of thefederal drug effort in four operational areas: treatment andrehabilitation; education, prevention, and training; research;and law enforcement. NIMH was the major federal sponsor of allnon-law-enforcement programs, while BNDD and Customs each heldsome responsibility for the federal drug law enforcement effort.The emergence of BNDD created an intense bureaucratic rivalrywith Customs regarding jurisdictional responsibilities for druglaw enforcement programs. Although this dispute was supposed tohave been settled in 1969 when BNDD was authorized to conductoverseas operations and Customs was restricted to bordersearches, it has surfaced frequently in subsequent years; evennow the situation seems merely a temporary truce. (See StaffPaper 2, "Drug Law Enforcement Efforts," below.) The FY 71 budget was the first to becompletely developed by the Nixon administration, and in it thefederal drug budget more than doubled to a total of $212.5million. The major increases in the FY 71 budget were fortreatment and rehabilitation and education, prevention, andtraining. While the drug law enforcement budget rose by more than50 percent, it was for the first time surpassed in absolutenumbers by expenditures for treatment and rehabilitation, whichby this time were assuming added dimensions as part of the crimereduction effort (see Figure 1. 1). Since the use of illicit drugs was of growingpublic concern and government interest, federal budget makerswere clearly more receptive to agency budget requests for newdrug programs, and by FY 71 there were fifteen separate federalagencies involved in some kind of drug-related effort. For some,such as the Office of Education, the Veterans Administration, andthe Department of Transportation, FY 71 marked the first yearthey had undertaken specific drug activities. For others, such asthe Department of Housing and Urban Development and the Office ofEconomic Opportunity, drug-related expenditures, which until thenhad been minimal, rose dramatically. This expansion of thefederal drug budget was accompanied by greater problems ofinteragency coordination. Although federal response to the use ofillicit drugs was growing, it generally lacked cohesion andoverall purpose (other than a commitment to "solve the drugproblem"). This lack of coordination led Hutt and Wald tocomment in 1972, "Federal activities in the drug abuse fieldtend to be ad hoc reactions to current crises rather thanwell-considered, long-term programs.11211 The proposed FY 72 budget, announced inFebruary 1971, projected a drug budget of $265 million-anincrease of just over $50 million. This proposal envisionedfederal expenditures of $96 million for law enforcement, $101million for treatment and rehabilitation, $24 million forresearch, and $44 million for education, prevention, andtraining. By this time there were sixteen separate federalagencies involved in the drug effort, with little coordinationbetween them. The resulting bureaucratic nightmare wasgraphically depicted in a government report covering all federaldrug efforts except law enforcement (Figure 1.2). In early 1971, the National Commission onMarihuana and Drug Abuse began work on the first of twoconsecutive one-year studies it was to undertake. The appointmentof this federal study commission, the scope of its work, and theschedule for the completion of its two reports had beendelineated in the Comprehensive Drug Abuse Prevention and ControlAct of 1970. (The Senate and the House of Representatives eachappointed two members to the thirteen-member commission;President Nixon selected the remaining nine.) Congress hadstipulated that the commission first complete a comprehensivestudy of marijuana-related issues by March 1972 (discussed morefully in Staff Paper 5, "Marijuana and Cocaine,"below). in the commission's second year, Congress directed it tocomplete a more general examination and analysis of the nature,causes, and significance of the "drug abuse" problem inthe United States, and further directed it to presentrecommendations for legislative and administrativ6 actionsconsistent with the commission's findings and conclusions. However, on June 17, 1971, long before thescheduled completion of the commission's second report, PresidentNixon sent to Congress a special message on drug abuse in whichhe requested a supplemental budget of $155 million and areorganization of responsibilities regarding drug treatment,education, prevention, research, and, most notably, coordination.Citing the immediacy of the drug problem and the need for a moreeffective response, Nixon simultaneously issued an executiveorder establishing the position of Special Consultant to thePresident for Narcotics and Dangerous Drugs in order to"institute to the extent legally possible" thelegislation which he proposed to Congress. It was at this pointthat the fundamental restructuring of the federal government'sresponse to illicit drugs began. President Nixon's Message to Congress, June17, 1971.19 President Nixon's messageto Congress on June 17, 1971 raised the issue of illicit drug useto the highest level of government concern and responsibility.This statement was the culminating step in the declaration of astrong and irrevocable public commitment to reduce the crimeheroin addicts were thought to commit and bring the problems ofillicit drug use under control. "If we cannot destroy thedrug menace in America , Nixon informed Congress and the Americanpublic, "then it will surely in time destroy us. I am notprepared to accept this alternative." Although the Presidentspoke of the general problems of "drug abuse," there islittle doubt that the chief problems and concerns to which hereferred were those relating to heroin addiction. Clearly, public alarm about heroin-relatedcrime and addicted Vietnam veterans demanded a more effectivegovernmental response than previous ones. Equally clear was thefact that increased funding alone had not been successful.According to Nixon: "We must now candidly recognize that thedeliberate procedures embodied in present efforts to control drugabuse are not sufficient in themselves. The problem has assumedthe dimensions of a national emergency." Forceful measures were required, so thethinking went, if the twin problems of heroin addiction and urbancrime were to be curtailed. Speed was essential to the Nixonadministration because of the political aspects of illicit druguse. Predictably, the policies and programs it advocated wereconsistent with enforcement and quasi-enforcement approacheswhich had characterized past federal efforts. The government'sresponse to the use of illicit drugs in 1971 sprang from the sameassumptions about their innate harmfulness and arrived atfundamentally the same conclusions as had been espoused for morethan sixty years. The changes proposed were those of technique,size, and scope only. The president acknowledged the problems ofundirected growth in the government's response. We must recognize that piecemeal efforts, evenwhere individually successful, cannot have a major impact on thedrug abuse problem unless and until they are forged together intoa broader and more integrated program involving all levels ofgovernment and private effort. We need a coordinated effort if weare to move effectively against drug abuse. A two-sided approach was developed tocoordinate the federal drug effort. On the "supply"side were all federal drug law enforcement efforts to halt theillegal production, distribution, and use of prohibitedsubstances. On the "demand" side were all federallysponsored efforts at treatment and rehabilitation and education,prevention, training, and research. Each approach was envisionedas separate and independent of the other, although they sharedthe same goals of eliminating illicit drug use and drug-relatedcrime in America. To control "demand" the Nixonadministration proposed a dramatic reorganization which wouldtemporarily centralize responsibility for all federally sponsoredefforts in drug treatment, rehabilitation, education, prevention,training, and research in a new White House Agency, the SpecialAction Office for Drug Abuse Prevention (SAODAP). Thedirector of SAODAP was to be immediately accountable to thePresident. From an organizational standpoint it made sense tocoordinate the many federal agencies involved. To have ignoredthe management problems displayed in Figure 1.2 above would haveled to further chaos and undercut the potential of any federalresponse. However, this does not explain why such coordinativeresponsibilities were lodged in the White House underpresidential supervision. Other federal programs also involved anumber of federal agencies, yet coordination could usually beachieved through more regular bureaucratic measures such ascabinet- or sub-cabinet-level working agreements. What made thedrug issue different? One explanation lies in the deterioratingrelationship at that time between the White House staff andvarious federal agencies. Particularly with respect to thefunding of methadone maintenance programs, the White House feltthat there was considerable bureaucratic "foot-dragging. "30 Administration officialshad become persuaded of the benefits of methadone maintenance asa way to reduce "heroin and criminal recidivism," butthey had been unsuccessful in gaining the full support andcooperation of NIMH, the agency which normally would have fundedand overseen these programs. NIMH officials were cautious ofgovernment "sanctioning one addiction [to methadone] inorder to reduce the burden on society of heroin addiction,' andcontinued to resist White House pressures to fund a greaternumber of methadone programs .31 The administration contended that NIMH opposed theprograms because to endorse the concept of methadone maintenancewould have been tantamount to admitting the failure of thepsychiatric profession to successfully treat heroin addiction .32 While mention of methadone is made only oncein President Nixon's message to Congress, the proposed creationof SAODAP and the accompanying redelegation of authority wouldhelp circumvent NIMH and increase federal support for methadone.The administration sought thus to bypass-since it could notcajole-a reluctant bureaucracy. The president's designation ofDr. Jerome Jaffe-a prominent supporter of the use of methadone intreatment-as his Special Consultant for Narcotics and DangerousDrugs until SAODAP could be legally constituted by Congress leftno doubt as to the administration's intention. Indeed, when Dr.Jaffe assumed leadership responsibilities in mid-1971, there were135 federally funded drug treatment programs; eighteen monthslater, with a significantly increased drug treatment budget, thenumber had nearly tripled to 394 .33 Treatment for heroin addiction was emphasized in thisprogram expansion and the rate of growth of methadone treatmentprograms was accelerated. A second explanation for centralizingdrug-policy-making responsibilities in the White House is thatthe administration anticipated a successful campaign againstillicit drug use and drug-related crime and wanted to takepolitical credit for it. If the needs were great, so were theopportunities. The president's message to Congress exudedconfidence in spite of the crisis rhetoric in which it wascouched; the message sought to portray illicit drugs as thevillain in a domestic war which could only be won by forcefulpresidential leadership, as the following excerpt suggests. Narcotics addiction is a problem whichafflicts both the body and the soul of America. It is a problemwhich baffles many Americans. In our history we have faced greatdifficulties again and again, wars and depressions and divisionsamong our people have tested our will as a people-and we haveprevailed. The threat of narcotics among our people isone which properly frightens many Americans. It comes quietlyinto homes and destroys children, it moves into neighborhoods andbreaks the fiber of community which makesneighbors.... And we are not without the will to deal with thismatter. We have the moral resources to do the job. Now we needthe authority and the funds to match our moral resources. I amconfident that we will prevail in this struggle as we have inmany others. But time is critical. Every day we lose compoundsthe tragedy which drugs inflict on individual Americans. Thefinal issue is not whether we will conquer drug abuse, but howsoon. The message drew upon traditional perceptionsand fears of illicit drugs and illicit drug users in order torally public support for a renewed crusade against a social evil.The rhetoric was consistent with the tenor of the times. Leadinga war against illicit drugs was certain to enhance anypolitician's popularity. And, although the public pronouncementstended towards the dramatic, the reorganization and expansioncalled for, particularly regarding federal efforts in drugtreatment and prevention, were clearly warranted. The president's message leaves no doubt thatthe administration thought a war against illicit drugs could bewon. The president proposed only a three-to-five-year life forSAODAP because it was to be "an emergency response to anational problem which we intend to bring under control."This "war" was going to be swift, requiring immediateand decisive action and sufficient financing. SAODAF's role wasto give the White House direct involvement, visibility, andcredit. Development of the Expanded FederalResponse Having made a public commitment to respondforcefully to the problems of illicit drug use, theadministration commenced a period of whirlwind activity. Each ofthe three new avenues of response-methadone treatment,international negotiations, and domestic drug law enforcementprograms-were vigorously pursued in an attempt to launch acomprehensive attack on the perceived problems. Funding wasincreased commensurately. In his message to Congress thepresident had requested a supplemental budget of $155 million tobolster the new drug programs. When passed by Congress, thissupplemental appropriation raised the FY 72 drug budget to $418million-four times what it had been only two years earlier. Treatment. When he took office in 1971,President Nixon's new drug advisor, Dr. Jerome Jaffe, turnedfirst to the problems of the Vietnam soldier and veteran, amongwhom rates of addiction were reported to be extraordinarily high.The drug treatment programs of the Veterans Administration (VA)were expanded; many new centers opened, enabling the VA toattract more addicted veterans into treatment. And to stem thereported flow of drug-addicted soldiers returning to the UnitedStates, the Defense Department initiated amassive urinalysis detection program to screen all Vietnamservicemen for illicit drug use before they left Southeast Asia;any heroin- or opiate-using soldiers testing positive were to bedetained for treatment and rehabilitation. President Nixoninformed Congress, "We will be requesting legislation topermit the military services to retain for treatment anyindividual due for discharge who is a narcotic addict. All of ourservicemen must be accorded the right to rehabilitation. 1134 In all, nearly $50 million ofthe president's supplemental budget was applied to expanding thedrug treatment and rehabilitation capabilities of the DefenseDepartment and Veterans Administration. The SAODAP staff also immediately assumedresponsibility for directing the expansion of drug treatmentprograms throughout the United States. Although NIMH received anadditional $51 million for treatment and rehabilitation as aresult of the supplemental budget, raising its total treatmentand rehabilitation budget to $100 million, control of theexpenditure of these funds was largely shifted from NIMH toSAODAP and the White House staff. With respct to programexpansion, the emphasis was placed on heroin addiction treatmentand "there was a massive expansion of methadone maintenanceprograms throughout the country. "35 The first new goal of treatment was to enableany addict who wished it to obtain it without delay. This meanteliminating the waiting lists for entry at many programs, andexpanding treatment in communities where it was needed but notyet available. When Dr. Jaffe assumed responsibilities in June1971, federally funded treatment programs were located in 54cities; only eighteen months later the number of cities involvedhad quadrupled to 214 .36 The speed and size of this expansion was dramatic by anyaccount. The earliest available federal estimate places thenumber of clients in federally funded treatment programs at justovar twenty thousand in October 1971; by December 1972 the figurewas over sixty thousand .37 The only recognized approaches for heroinaddiction other than the expanding methadone treatment wereabstinence oriented and usually took place in a residentialcommunity setting. While popular and sonletimes effectivetreatment approaches for small numbers of addicts, theseabstinence programs had not and-according to federal policymakerscould not have a significant impact on urban crime.Methadone thus became a new hope, in spite of the objections ofthe Food and Drug Administration about insufficient research orthe opposition from minority communities about the underlyingphilosophy of using one addictive drug to treat another .311 In December 1972, the Foodand Drug Administration published new regulations which loosenedfederal controls over methadone, changing its status from that ofan investigational new drug to a new drug requiring ongoing,long-term study .39 ByOctober 1973, nearly eighty thousand persons were enrolled inmethadone maintenance programs .40 Some of these programs were federally funded; alloperated with federal government approval. From the government's perspective, methadonetreatment programs had certain advantages over therapeuticcommunity programs. Methadone allowed greater numbers of peopleto be treated in fewer programs, thus making rapid programexpansion easier. For a large number of heroin addicts unable tosuccessfully remain drug-free, the expansion of methadoneprograms offered an invaluable alternative to heroin addiction.Moreover, the cost per client of methadone maintenance wassubstantially less than the cost in a therapeutic community. Andalthough methadone treatment could not meet the public's demandfor drug abstinence, it could satisfy the even more populardemand for a reduction in heroin-related crime. Finally,methadone programs staffed with medical doctors and operated inmore traditional medical clinical style could be more easilyunderstood by the public. The encounter sessions and heavypsychological orientation of the therapeutic community were oftenmisunderstood, even though the drug-free orientation wascommended. Thus, the expansion of heroin treatmentprograms-particularly using methadone treatment-became SAODAP'sfirst objective. International Activities. In his June 1971 message to Congress, President Nixonhad proposed an all-out global war on international drugtrafficking. To dramatize his intentions, Nixon called togetherthe U.S ambassadors to Turkey, France, Mexico, Luxembourg,Thailand, the Republic of Vietnam, and the United Nations todiscuss ways to encourage greater cooperation from other nationsin the effort to control the illegal growing and trafficking ofopium worldwide. "I sought to make it . . . clear," hetold Congress of this meeting, "that I consider the heroinaddiction of American citizens an international problem of graveconcern to this Nation, and I instructed our Ambassadors to makethis clear to their liost governments. We want good relationswith othe@r countries, but we cannot buy good relations at theexpense of temporizing on this prob- lem . -41 Two weeks later President Nixon formallyannounced that the Government of Turkey had agreed to impose atotal ban on opium poppy cultivation following the 1972 harvest.In return the United States pledged $35.7 million in aid over afive-year period to compensate Turkey for the projected financialloss on legitimate sales of opium, and to help Turkish farmersdevelop substitute crops offering new sources of income. Theagreement was hailed as a "most significantbreakthrough" even though the ban was not to take effectuntil a year after its announcement .42 The Turkish agreement was intended to help launch aconcentrated American effort to halt all illicit opium productionthroughout the world. During the following twelve months,however, that effort far surpassed any tangible results. In September 1971 President Nixon establisheda new Cabinet Committee on International Narcotics Control, tooversee the further development of U.S. international drugcontrol efforts. The Cabinet Committee, chaired by the Secretaryof State, directed the U.S. embassies in fifty-nine countries toprepare Narcotics Control Action Plans to be used as a basis fornegotiating bilateral agreements with foreign countries infurtherance of U.S. international drug control programs.Apparently, however, it was decided that other countries were notto be offered the same type of broad-based economic assistancewhich had been extended to Turkey. Rather, the Narcotics ControlAction Plans were to be more limited in scope, essentiallyoffering law enforcement assistance to improve the"intelligence capability and law enforcement capacity of thehost . `43 Furthermore,whereas Turkey had been offered the "carrot," othernations were threatened with the "stick" of, amongother things, termination of economic and military assistance .44 This change in strategysuggests that the administration was aware, even before theTurkish ban took effect, of the severe limitations of thisapproach. There simply were too many countries where opium couldbe grown and converted to heroin for sale in the lucrative U.S.market .45 It wouldhave been difficult to negotiate similar agreements with allother potential "source" countries, and even ifdiplomatically possible the cost would have been prohibitive.Moreover, because of the remoteness of many areas from theirgovernments, not every country could successfully impose an opiumban even if it agreed to try. Gradually, therefore, internationalinterdiction efforts replaced prevention of opium cultivation asthe major objective of the U.S. international drug controleffort. Thus, despite active presidential involvement,no dramatic bilateral agreements other than that with Turkey andthe aforementioned one with France were produced to show successon the international front. In addition to bilateral efforts, efforts werealso made to strengthen the enforcement provisions of the 1961Single Convention on Narcotic Drugs, the governing internationalagreement on illicit drug control. In 1971 the United Statessubmitted proposed amendments to the Single Convention which werelargely directed toward improving controls on illicit opiumcultivation in source countries. These amendments were formallyagreed upon at a plenipotentiary conference in 1972 and submittedto the signatory countries for their ratification. The Nixonadministration apparently regarded the amendments as a bold newapproach in international narcotics control, despite theineffectiveness of the basic treaty .41, In return for strengthening the 1961 SingleConvention, the opium growing countries pressured the UnitedStates to support a second international agreement which wouldfor the first time place multinational controls on synthetic,"psychotropic" drugs such as hallucinogens,amphetamines, barbiturates, and tranquilizers. This treaty, alsodrafted in 1971, became known as the Psychotropic Convention.47The opium-producing countries viewed its ratification as ademonstration of the industrialized nations' seriousness aboutcontrolling the spread of nonnarcotic drug misuse. Americansupport of the Psychotropic Convention thus became a necessaryquid pro quo for support from the opium-producing nations onstrengthening the Single Convention. President Nixon sent the PsychotropicConvention to the Senate for approval on June 29, 1971. Theproposed treaty met strong opposition because it threatened tolimit domestic flexibility in regulating various psychoactivedrugs. It was argued that the treaty would further remove themedical and scientific professions from decision-makingresponsibilities in U.S. domestic drug policy. To date neitherthe Psychotropic Convention nor the changes in domestic law thatit would have required have been passed. Domestic Drug Law Enforcement. Until 1970 BNDD and its principal predecessor, theFederal Bureau of Narcotics, were often accused of concentratingtoo much law enforcement effort on users and street dealers inorder to inflate the number of arrests made. In 1970 BNDD claimedthis policy had been reversed, with efforts being redirected tothe higher levels of the illicit drug distribution structure.BNDD director John Ingersoll explained the anticipated result ofthis change to a House Appropriations subcommittee in March 1970. The shift in emphasis of federal narcotic anddangerous drug law enforcement from the addict, abuser, andsmall-time street peddler to the important illicittraffickers and illegal supply sources will undoubtedly result infewer total arrests. But those made should have a greater impacton the supply of narcotics and drugs available for distributionto the consumers in this country than a larger number of lesssignificant arrests. 48 However, in 1971 the administration sought toincrease the number of arrests by getting BNDD to move once againagainst street-level dealers.49 The administration apparentlybelieved that this would suggest a more active and successful"offensive" in its "war" on illicit drugs anddrug users. BNDD resisted the change, contending that suchefforts should be carried out by state and local agencies, and itcontinued to go after the higher levels of the drug distributionsystems. Like NIMH, BNDD was not immediately responsive to theadministration's wishes. And so once again the White Housecreated a new agency under direct White House control. In January1972 the Office of Drug Abuse Law Enforcement (ODALE) was createdby executive order within the justice Department.50 ODALE wasmade "responsible for the development and implementation ofa concentrated program throughout the federal government for theenforcement of federal laws relating to the prevention of drugabuse and for cooperation with state and local governments in theenforcement of their drug abuse laws ."51The director of ODALE was also made aspecial consultant to the president for drug-abuse lawenforcement, thus becoming the nation's chief drug lawenforcement spokesman. Within a month after its establishment, ODALEhad selected thirty three target cities and had deployed strikeforces consisting of federal investigators and agents, assistantU.S. attorneys, and state and local police officers. These strikeforces concentrated on the lower and middle levels of thedomestic heroin distribution systems, and, according to oneobserver, -were instructed -to "make arrests by any lawfulmeans possible, even if it meant bypassing the normal channels. `52 By combining the specializedenforcement authorities and powers of various federal agenciese.g., the Internal Revenue Service, Customs, BNDD, theImmigration and Naturalization Service, the Alcohol, Tobacco, andFirearms Agency, etc. -ODALE was in a unique position to"bypass normal channels." The strike forces weresufficiently funded to be able to make extensive use ofundercover agents and "buy money" to purchase drugs andpay infofmants; investigative grand juries were empaneled; andODALE was empowered to use court-authorized wiretaps and"no-knock" warrants in making arrests. As expected, thenumber of arrests rose quickly and the increased figures werepublicized. Rapidly and dramatically, ODALE became a prominent,highly visible part of the administration's "war ondrugs." The Congressional Response: Passage of the Drug AbuseOffice and Treatment Act of 1972 Congress responded to President Nixon'schallenge for quick and decisive action by passing the Drug AbuseOffice and Treatment Act of 1972 (P. L. 92-255), just nine monthsafter his June 1971 message and a year in advance of thescheduled completion of the second report of the NationalCommission on Marihuana and Drug Abuse .51 This new legislation reorganized a major part of thefederal drug effort, effected important changes in the roles ofstate and local government in the planning and funding of drugtreatment services, and expanded the overall size of the federaldrug effort by voting higher budget authorizations. Compared withmost major legislation, action on this bill was quick andthorough: Two Senate committees and one House committee heldhearings on the proposed legislation; after the Senate and Housepassed differing versions, a Conference Committee ironedout the differences, and then both bodies passed the compromiselegislation by unanimous votes. The final wording of the Drug Abuse Office andTreatment Act showed Congress and the president to be in generalagreement on the best organizational arrangements for effectivelycoordinating the federal drug effort. The basic"supply" and "demand" approach was adopted,and SAODAP was established to coordinate and oversee thedevelopment of federal drug-abuse prevention activities,* the"demand" side of the equation. Congress acceded to thepresident's request that SAODAP be made a part of the executiveoffice of the president. Since at this time the question of thelimits of executive authority was uppermost in the minds of manylegislators, this was generally interpreted as a strongaffirmation of congressional intent to deal decisively with thedrug issue. Congress agreed with the president that SAODAP needbe only a temporary agency, and established June 30, 1975 as thedate by which SAODAP -would be -replaced by a new NationalInstitute on Drug Abuse, operating within the traditionalchannels of the Department of Health, Education, and Welfare. SAODAP's primary responsibilities were toreorganize and direct the federal programs in drug treatment,rehabilitation, education, prevention, training, and research.Moreover, SAODAP would be responsible for coordinating these"demand" efforts with the federal drug law enforcementprograms, though the agency would have no authority over thelatter. SAODAP's position was a difficult one: Congress and thepresident expected it to coordinate, "from outside andabove," the activities of fourteen agencies that until thenhad existed in relative autonomy; to attain its goal in a shortperiod of time; and to coordinate these activities in a fieldwhere there was considerable disagreement as to the mosteffective means of dealing with the problems. *The legislation used the term "drugabuse prevention" to refer to all non-law-enforcement drugefforts including treatment and rehabilitation; education,prevention, and training; and research. To help the new agency accomplish theseformidable tasks, Congress included in the legislation severalprovisions designed to insure a coordinated federal drug effort. 54 First, it established SAODAP asa kind of mini-Office of Management and Budget, though limited tothe drug abuse prevention programs of the various federalagencies. -SAODAP was empowered to reprogram an agency'sdrug-abuse prevention funds if necessary to insure greaterconformity with the overall policies and priorities it would set.Second, Congress established a special fund of $40 million forSAODAP for each of three fiscal years "to provide additionalincentives to Federal departments and agencies to develop moreeffective drug abuse prevention functions and to give theDirector [of SAODAP] the flexibility to encourage, and respondquickly and efficiently to, the development of promising programsand approaches." Although Congress stipulated that at least90 percent of these funds had to be spent by federal agenciesother than SAODAP, they had to be spent according to SAODAPdirectives. Third, SAODAP received the power of "managementoversight review." This -power, although never actuallyexercised, gave it the authority to assume the drug-abuseprevention functions of an uncooperative federal agency for up tothirty days. The explicit legislative granting of such power isvery rare; the potential authority is usually enough to persuadeany recalcitrants of the advantages of cooperation. Although the purpose of this reorganizationwas to streamline, coordinate, and make more efficient thefederal response, it also effectively muted opposition. In fact,when he signed the legislation enacting SAODAP, President Nixonwarned that "heads will roll" if the agency directorsdid not cooperate with the new office.51 The president named Dr.Jaffe -to direct SAODAP and expand the work he had already begununder executive order. When SAODAP formally began in March 1972,policy and programmatic decisions had essentially been made; itwas simply a matter of carrying them out. What reservations therewere within and without government were largely ignored oroverridden. Recommendations such as those put forth by theNational Commission on Marihuana and Drug Abuse in 1972 and 1973were quickly rejected because they were inconsistent with thepolicies and programs the administration had already chosen topursue. In sum, up to and through the 1972presidential elections the Nixon administration sought to be (1)responsive to the public concern about heroin addiction andheroin-related crime, (2) effective, in contrast to thelack of success which had characterized past drug efforts, and(3) quick, so that "progress" could be claimedat the earliest possible moment. Most of the bureaucraticrestraints which might have impeded the Nixon administration's"war on drugs" had been overcome, so its potential to"solve the drug problem" could be tested. Deemphasis of the Drug Issue and Emergenceof the National Institute on Drug Abuse (NI15A) Eighteen months after the enactment of theDrug Abuse Office and Treatment Act, and only ten months afterhis reelection, President Nixon signaled a change in direction byannouncing in September 1973, "We have turned the corner ondrug addiction in the United States."511 Although caveatsfollowed this declaration, the announcement was an importantmilestone in the history of the government's response to illicitdrugs. In addition to being a statement of "victory,"the president's message also implied disengagement from the war. In the days and weeks following thisannouncement, administration officials offered evidence insupport of the President's statement .57 This "evidence" included claims of an apparentshortage of heroin on the East Coast, an increase in the streetprice of the drug, an increase in the number of drug seizures andarrests, the expansion of drug treatment availability andutilization, a reported decline in the incidence of new heroinuse, and heroin-related crime being down. Not everyone agreed:Some challenged the accuracy of the statistics, others challengedtheir interpretation. Still others accepted the evidence, butcautioned that the downward trend might only be temporary. In retrospect, it is clear that the "turnthe corner" speech was based on more than statistics. Otherfactors were also at work, and a brief review of certain eventswhich occurred between June 1971 and September 1973 will help toexplain the turnabout. First, the 1972 presidential election hadpassed. Though it is difficult to assess what part this may haveplayed in the administration's response to the drug issue, thereis little doubt that it had some importance. Illicit drugs were amajor political issue, and anyone running for national electiveoffice was expected to address it. Second, the armies of addicted Vietnamsoldiers never materialized. The severity of the problem had beenoverestimated; among those soldiers who did use opium or heroinin Vietnam, subsequent research showed that relatively few wereeither dysfunctional or addicted users after their return to theUnited States .58 Third, public interest in the drug issuedwaned. There were a host of possible explanations for this: Theproblems had been overdrarnatized and public fears exaggerated,the rate of urban crime had leveled off, other domestic issueshad taken precedence, the media had run out of things to say, orit was simply part of the natural ebb and flow of publicinterest. Whatever the reasons, there is little question that thepublic's attention had become diverted elsewhere. Fourth, the new avenues of response to the useof illicit drugs, which had been pursued with varying degrees ofsuccess, had in their combined effect failed to measure up tooriginal expectations, and it seemed unlikely that any furtherimprovement would result from a widened or intensified effort inthese areas. For example, federal law enforcement effortsagainst street-level drug activities had backfired. ODALE was notalways well received by local law enforcement agencies, and itsability to have a significant impact on street-level drugactivities was seriously questioned.59 In April 1973, ODALEagents were involved in two criticized "no-knock"entries into homes in Collinsville, Illinois. The events inCollinsville precipitated a thorough review of the agency and areevaluation of the need for unique enforcement authoritiesagainst drug dealers and users. In effect, ODALE had gone too farin "bypassing the normal channels." Instead of becominga positive symbol of how to win a war on drugs, ODALE became thefocal point of criticisms about the excesses of that war. On June30, 1973, ODALE was abolished in yet another drug-law-enforcementagency reorganizations The position of special consultant to thepresident for drug-abuse law enforcement matters was alsoabolished, and Congress subsequently repealed the no-knock andpreventive detention sections of the federal statutes. Federallaw enforcement strategy reverted to a concentration on the upperlevels of drug distribution systems. The Turkish opium ban did contribute to ashortage of heroin in 1973, principally in the eastern UnitedStates. But because the government had been unable to negotiateany other significant bilateral agreements, it became clear thatthe Turkish ban would have only a temporary effect. The periodimmediately after the Turkish ban took effect was the high pointin terms of any practical significance which it could have had.The demand for heroin and the consequent profits to be realizedwere bound to generate new supplies and supply routes-it was onlya matter of time. Bilateral agreements thus failed to provide anylasting "solution." Drug treatment programs, methadone programs inparticular, had been expanded to a point where everyonevoluntarily seeking treatment could get it. Overall, the qualityof the treatment offered in methadone as well as drug-freeprograms improved. Program personnel gained experience and withit increasing expertise. Increased funding assured greaterprogram stability. However, treatment supply exceeded treatmentdemand; in this crucial respect the administration's goal hadbeen reached: Unless more people were to enter treatment, themaximum short-term impact of this approach had also probably beenreached. The administration, through SAODAP, had alsoachieved a more coordinated federal effort on the"demand" side. Much overlapping, duplication, andinefficiency had been eliminated. Within the framework of itspolicies and programs, the federal response was functioning muchmore smoothly. And the budget was sufficient; the total FY 74drug budget was $760 million. Lack of funds no longer limited thepotential of the federal drug response; at the same time therewas no indication that increasing the budget further wouldmeasurably improve the situation. There seemed little need to any longermaintain a strong White House identification with the drug issue.Within the framework of the policies and programs theadministration had chosen to pursue the situation was probably asgood as it would get in the foreseeable future. Politically, thismay have suggested to the federal government that the issue couldbe returned to a more "normal" status within thebureaucracy and be dealt with like most other urban and socialproblems. Whether or not the president's assessment ofthe situation in his "turn the corner" speech wascorrect, it triggered a turn in government activity in the drugfield. The more extraordinary measures of the previous yearscould no longer be justified, On the contrary, it becamenecessary for government budget- and policymakers to make majorchanges in the federal drug effort in order to prove that avictory had been won. Even before the president's pronouncement,drug law enforcement programs had been moved away from activeWhite House involvement to a newly formed Drug EnforcementAdministration within the Department of justice. Federal effortsagainst street-level drug dealers and users were quietlyabandoned. International efforts to curtail illicit drugcultivation and trafficking continued, but were less publicized.SAODAP remained in existence until June 30, 1975, but it lost itsinfluence after the "turn the corner" speech. The trendin budget requests was also reversed: The overall treatment andrehabilitation budget for FY 75 (proposed in January 1974) was$33 million less than in the previous fiscal year, marking thefirst drug budget cutback in the Nixon administrationsFurthermore, the administration sought increasingly to shift drugprogramming responsibilities to the states, under the aegis ofits "new federalism" policies. The combined effect of these actions wassignificantly to reduce the visibility and controversy of thefederal drug effort. This was beneficial in the sense that thedrug issue was temporarily freed from the political rhetoric thathad bound it. But the loss of momentum was unfortunate to theextent that the government's opportunity to shape a morecomprehensive approach to drug problems in America was notdecisively acted upon. One of the most important and lastingbyproducts of this chain of events was the creation of a newagency, the National Institute on Drug Abuse (NIDA) within HEW.This was created by a departmental reorganization announced bythe Secretary of Health, Education, and Welfare on September 23,1973. The announcement occurred more than a year in advance ofthe congressional requirement in the Drug Abuse Office andTreatment Act of 1972 for the creation of such an agency no laterthan December 30, 1974 .113 Organizationally, NIDA was made a fourth-levelagency in HEW. As Figure 1.3 illustrates, the director of NIDA isone of three agency directors reporting to the administrator ofthe Alcohol, Drug Abuse, and Mental. Health Administration(ADAMHA). The administrator of ADAMHA is, in turn, one of sixPublic Health Service officials reporting to the assistantsecretary for health, who in turn is one of many assistantsecretaries reporting to the secretary of HEW. Despite this organizational arrangement, NIDAwas charged with providing "leadership, policies and goalsfor the Federal effort in the prevention, control and treatmentof narcotic addiction and drug abuse, and the rehabilitation ofaffected individuals." Clearly, NIDA was intended to succeedSAODAP as the lead agency on the "demand" side of thefederal drug effort. But NIDA was not and could not be a substitutefor SAODAP. SAODAP was designed to be a policy and coordinatingoffice, with minimal direct program responsibilities. NIDA wasgiven the bulk of drug treatment program responsibilities butvery limited coordinating powers. Much of SAODAP's authority wascontained in P. L. 92-255, and most of those powers were nottransferable to NIDA without congressional approval. Even if thepowers were to be transferred, the decisions and directions takenby NIDA, buried as it was within HEW, would obviously haveattracted less attention and carried less weight than when thevery same actions were announced by a White House office. Although the earlier-than-anticipatedemergence of NIDA and diminution of SAODAP made many of thoseinvolved with drug treatment and prevention anxious about thefuture, some found solace in the fact that the drug treatment andprevention effort had been removed from the immediate control ofNIMH. Under the HEW reorganization NIDA was established asseparate and equal to NIMH. Similarly, responsibility in thealcoholism field had been removed from NIMH and given to anothernew separate and equal agency, the National Institute on AlcoholAbuse and Alcoholism. The effect of removing NIMH control fromthese fields was to allow each to more fully develop its ownapproaches. Inasmuch as drug problems in many respects lieoutside traditional mental health concerns, the creation of NIDAindependent of NIMH was applauded by many people in the drugtreatment and prevention fields. The Arguments for and against the Continuation of SAODAP Even though NIDA was in full operation bymid-1974, SAODAP continued to function until its expiration dateof June 30, 1975, though with greatly reduced staff levels anddiminished bureaucratic status. It was maintained to exercisethose coordinating functions which could not legally betransferred to NIDA. Moreover, it provided the drug treatment andprevention fields with a symbolic organizational parity with druglaw enforcement concerns, a role which NIDA could not fulfill. By early 1975, questions were being raisedabout the implications of SAODAP's impending demise. The futuredirection and scope of the federal drug effort seemed uncertain.Gerald Ford had succeeded Richard Nixon as president, and Ford'sviews and commitment regarding the drug field were largelyunknown. In March 1975, Senator William Hathaway,chairman of the Senate Subcommittee on Alcoholism and Narcotics,introduced legislation amending the Drug Abuse Office andTreatment Act of 1972. The proposed legislation called for amodified version of SAODAP, to be called the Office of Drug AbusePrevention Policy (ODAPP), which would continue certainpolicymaking and coordinating functions of the predecessoragency. The expiration of SAODAP along with other provisions ofP. L. 92255-including funding authorizations for future federaltreatment, prevention, and research efforts-gave Congress itsfirst opportunity to review both the 1972 legislation and thestatus of the federal response.114 This congressional review prompted PresidentFord to direct the Domestic Council to undertake its ownassessment in order to define more clearly the administration'sdrug policies and prepare the administration's response to anycongressional action .6' These congressional and executive office assessmentsreconsidered the tone and approach of the government's responseto illicit drug use in a distinctively less politicized way thanhad marked the crisis atmosphere during the Nixon administration. Both Congress and the administration sought toback away from the warlike rhetoric of the Nixon administration.The emphasis on "victories" and "solutions"was replaced by more cautious statements about "goals"and "objectives." Congress amended its Declaration ofNational Policy by adopting more temperate wording. The DomesticCouncil Report to the president was even more straightforwardwith respect to its assessment of goals: We should stop raising unrealisticexpectations of total elimination of drug abuse from our society.At the same time, we should in no way signal tacit acceptance ofdrug abuse or a lessened commitment to continue aggressiveefforts aimed at eliminating it entirely. The sobering fact isthat some members of any society will seek escape from thestresses of life through drug use.Prevention, education, treatment, and rehabilitation will curtailtheir number, but will not eliminate drug use entirely. As longas there is demand, criminal drug traffickers will make somesupply available, provided that the potential profits outweighthe risks of detection and punishment. Vigorous supply reductionefforts will reduce, but not eliminate, supply. And reduction inthe supply of one drug may only cause abuse prone individuals toturn to another substance. All of this indicates that, regrettably, wewill probably always have a drug problem of some proportion.Therefore we must be prepared to continue our efforts and ourcommitment indefinitely, in order to contain the problem at aminimal level, and in order to minimize the adverse social costsof drug abuse."" This acknowledgment of the persistence of drugproblems and the impossibility of achieving a quick victory hadno direct effect on the operational aspects of the various drugprogramming efforts; it only sought to adjust public expectationsof them. Congress and the Ford administration relievedsome of the anxieties felt in the drug treatment field after the"turn the corner" speech by halting the one-year budgetcutback which had been initiated with that speech. Althoughquestions were raised about the adequacy of the administration'sbudget proposal, many agencies and individuals were pleased-simply by this temporizing action. More serious difficulties between Congress andthe president arose over whether some modified version of SAODAPshould be continued. Many in Congress argued for such an agency;President Ford and his administration were opposed to it. Theproponents of a successor agency to SAODAP contended that WhiteHouse coordination of the drug effort was still necessary .7 Theyheld that without some successor to SAODAP the earlierorganizational Difficulties could easily reappear, maintainingthat the logic which dictated congressional approval of SAODAP in1972 extended to the proposed Office of Drug Abuse PreventionPolicy in 1975. Congressional proponents further argued thatNIDA, as a fourth-level HEW agency, would never be able toexercise any real control over the "demand" side of thefederal drug effort. They pointed cut that 51 percent of allfederal expenditures for drug prevention programs were made byagencies other than NIDA, and thus concluded that "for NIDAto coordinate and lead the Federal drug abuse prevention effort,both from a structural and from a fiscal perspective, would bedifficult at best and, more likely, actuallyimpossible.""" President Ford and the Domestic Council TaskForce agreed on the need for continued coordination, but theydiffered with the proponents of ODAPP on the way to achieve it.Rather than have a special White House agency just to coordinatethe "demand" side of the federal drug effort, PresidentFord opted for "strong Cabinet management" of theprogram. In April 1976 he created the Cabinet Committeefor Drug Abuse Prevention (CCDAP), chaired by the Secretary ofHEW, which included the Secretaries of Defense and Labor and theadministrator of the Veterans Administration. CCDAF was givenresponsibility for the oversight and coordination of all federalactivities involving drug prevention, treatment, andrehabilitation, integrating the efforts of all the cabinetdepartments and agencies involved. Moreover, CCDAP was expectedto "give HEW, ADAMHA, and NIDA the organizational strengthand authority to provide the interdepartmental and interagencycoordination needed to maintain the progress which has been madein drug abuse treatment and prevention. " ODAPP's sponsors sought to extend itsprojected responsibilities of review, -formulation, andcoordination of drug policies and priorities to all drug policiesand programs, including drug law enforcement programs andinternational negotiations. This was to be the major differencebetween ODAPP and SAODAP, whose authority had been confined todrug treatment, rehabilitation, education, prevention, andresearch. This proposed extension of authority for ODAPP gainedsupport for several reasons: First, it sought to reconceptualizethe federal drug effort by bridging the gap between theenforcement and treatment approaches. ODAPP was envisioned as theforum in government by which the long-standing philosophicalconflicts between the medical and law enforcement communitiescould be faced and, ideally, reconciled.70 At the very least,ODAPP was being designed to insure a more comprehensive review ofthe drug programs and policies of the various federal agencies. Second, this extension of ODAPP's authoritywas proposed at a time when the balance between drug lawenforcement and drug treatment and prevention programs was onceagain shifting in favor of law enforcement.71 The drug lawenforcement budget was rising while drug treatment and preventionfunds remained level; and, bureaucratically, DEA was a higherlevel agency within the justice Department than was NIDA in HEW.ODAPP was supported partly in the hope that it could keep abalance between these two principal agencies and their respectiveapproaches to the drug problem. Third, support for ODAPP stemmed from thecongressional desire to have one single administration officialwith overall responsibility for national drug policy who would beaccountable to Congress. At the time Congress was consideringODAPP, officials of the Office of Management and Budget (OMB)were refusing to testify before Congress on drug policy issues,and the directors of the various drug agencies (NIDA and DEA inparticular) spoke only for their own programs and policies. Theunresolved areas, as well as the overall concerns, of nationalpolicy could easily be unintentionally overlooked in thissituation. ODAPP was designed to rectify this.72 President Ford and the Domestic Council TaskForce also recognized the need to coordinate treatment andenforcement approaches. In its report the Domestic Councilstated, "Strong coordinative mechanisms are necessary toensure that the efforts of these [Federal] departments andagencies are integrated into an effective overall program, andthat the approach adopted in each is consistent with thePresident's priorities."" However, the administrationmaintained that such coordination could be attained without aWhite House agency. Instead, it chose to formalize the divisionof the drug functions developed during the Nixon administration.Thus the government's response split the effort into threeseparate areas, each with a "lead agency . '174 The Drug EnforcementAdministration was designated as the "lead agency" fordrug law enforcement, the State Department for internationalactivities, and NIDA for prevention and treatment. To strengtheninteragency coordination within each functional area, PresidentFord convened three separate cabinet committees, each withoversight and coordination responsibilities within one area. Going a step further in acknowledging someneed for "program oversight and limited interagencycoordination at the Executive Office level "75President Ford and the Domestic Councilaccordingly made several more recommendations.76 Foremost amongthem was the recommendation that the Strategy Council on DrugAbuse* be revitalized to provide overall policy guidance, andthat a small staff at OMB be maintained to assist the StrategyCouncil and executive office in formulating drug policy. However,these recommendations fell considerably short of a White HouseOffice for drug abuse. *The Strategy Council, mandated in 1972 byP.L. 92-255, consists of government officials and privatecitizens appointed by the president. The argument that Congress needed one personor office to be accountable to it for total federal drug policywas rejected by the administration. "The best places to getsuch information and to seek accountability for progress,"said President Ford, "are the departments and agencies whichhave direct responsibility and program authority."77 In point of fact, the arguments raised bothfor and against ODAPP were illusory. There were other ways tosatisfy the needs cited by the proponents of ODAPP, and thecreation of ODAPP would not have guaranteed the advantagesenvisioned anyway. For example, the Ford administration couldhave coordinated its response to the drug problems of Americawithout an ODAPP, just as it could have allowed the partitionsbetween the medical and legal approaches to continue despiteODAPP's presence. The ODAPP concept was strongly supportedby the majority of individuals, associations, and privateorganizations working in the drug treatment, rehabilitation,education, prevention, and research fields. All had feltseriously threatened by the funding cutbacks of the Nixonadministration's last budget, and the elimination of SAODAP hadadded to the uncertainty about future federal commitment.Accordingly, these associations and organizations, many of whichhad developed during the years of budget expansion, vigorouslylobbied Congress to support the small White House agency fordrugs as a sign of their support for the drug field.Congressional spokesmen took note of the symbolic importance ofODAPP, explaining that "there is a clear danger thatelimination of that office [SAODAP or ODAPP] would have enormoussymbolic significance to this field. There is no way in whichthis move [the elimination of SAODAP], coupled with recentproposals to cut funds, can appear to be anything but a drasticretrenchment in Federal priorities ."711 The Ford administration's opposition to ODAPPwas also symbolic, but not in relation to the drug field.President Ford had committed himself to a reduction of executiveoffice power and a restoration of the powers of the variouscabinet departments and federal agencies. He wished to reversethe concentration of power in the White House which hadcharacterized the Nixon administrations trend to which SAODAP wasboth a symbolic and a real contributor. To the Fordadministration, the negative symbolism of a new White House drugoffice-even a small one-overrode any positive symbolism it mighthave conveyed to the drug field. In March 1976, eight months after SAODAP hadexpired, Congress passed legislation creating in the White Housethe Office of Drug Abuse Policy (ODAP, a slight shortening of theoriginally proposed name) .71, Compared to SAODAP, ODAP was organizationally small andits legislatively granted powers limited, but its coordinatingresponsibilities extended to law enforcement and internationalnegotiations, thus giving it broader scope than its predecessor. President Ford signed the legislation creatingODAP only because sections of the same bill contained thenecessary funding authorizations to continue federal efforts indrug treatment and prevention. The president remained steadfastlyopposed to ODAP in principle, and in signing the legislation hesaid: I have voiced strong opposition to thereestablishment of a special office for drug abuse in the WhiteHouse. I believe that such an office would be duplicative andunnecessary and that it would detract from strong Cabinetmanagement of the Federal drug abuse program. Therefore, while Iam signing this bill because of the need for Federal funds fordrug abuse prevention and treatment, I do not intend to seekappropriations for the new Office of Drug Abuse Policy created bythe bill. 110 This impasse continued throughout Ford'spresidency; ODAP had been legally constituted but remained a"paper" agency with neither staff nor funds. Instead,President Ford continued his plan for supervision of governmentresponse to illicit drug use through three cabinet committees,one each for law enforcement, international narcotics control,and treatment and prevention. Government Response under Presidents Fordand Carter Drug problems and issues faded from thelimelight during the Ford administration, a change generallyviewed as salutary when compared to the tumultuous yearspreceding it. Funding levels in all areas remained reasonablystable, as did program operations. Although whatever gains hadresulted from the Turkish opium ban were reversed by the newavailability of Mexican heroin, no new "wars" wereproclaimed. Utilization of existing treatment capacity didincrease throughout the country and funding was increased totreat several thousand more people. The Drug EnforcementAdministration continued to confiscate large amounts of illicitdrugs, but the overall impact on illicit trafficking wasmarginal. Guided by the Domestic Council's "WhitePaper on Drug Abuse," the Ford administration accepted theverdict that the "drug problem" could not beeliminated. Instead of trying to rally public support to end"drug abuse," the administration started seeking todevelop greater public tolerance of this ineradicable phenomenon. Although the style was different and the goalsless ambitious, the Ford administration's response to illicitdrugs was largely predicated on the same assumptions about theinnate harmfulness of illicit drugs that have guided thegovernment's response to drugs throughout the twentieth century.The administration's response continued to rest upon lawenforcement or quasi-enforcement strategies fundamentallyintended to prohibit new or continued use of nonapprovedpsychoactive substances. Though these assumptions were notchallenged, the limits of any attempt to "solve" theproblems of illicit drug use were at last openly acknowl-edged-asignificant change from previous administrations. In his one major public statement on the useof illicit drugs, President Ford devoted less than threeparagraphs to treatment and prevention issues. The remainder ofhis six-page message to Congress" addressed the drug-crimenexus, law enforcement efforts, proposals for mandatory minimumsentences for traffickers and bail denial, the activities ofCustoms, use of the Internal Revenue Service to go aftertraffickers, international control and cooperation, and the like.Support for programs in treatment and prevention was derived, aswith enforcement, from the longstanding fears and assumptionsabout illicit drugs, their users, and their effects on society. When Jimmy Carter became president someobservers of the drug field expected swift and significant policyand programmatic changes to result, in part because of Carter'sclose association with Dr. Peter Bourne, a highly regarded drugprogram expert. In March 1977, under some pressure from Congress,President Carter activated ODAP, naming Dr. Bourne as itsdirector. It was believed that ODAP might devise a more unifiedand coordinated government response to illicit drugs, melding thegoals and concerns of the treatment, prevention, and enforcementcommunities. No sooner had ODAP been activated, however,than President Carter announced his intention of abolishing theoffice. This announcement was made as part of the ReorganizationPlan No. 1 of 1977, in which President Carter sought tostreamline and reduce the White House staff. As a result, ODAPexpired in April 1978, after completing a series of drug policystudies spanning the treatment, prevention, and enforcementfields. 82 ODAP'slegal functions were transferred to the president. Dr. Bourneremained as special assistant to the president in part to"advise the President on drug policy and assist in thecoordination of interagency efforts," until his resignationin July 1978. Several ODAP staff members were transferred to theDomestic Policy Staff, where they continue to provide someoverall review of drug policy issues. The results of thisreorganization resemble the plan of strong cabinet managementwith "some" executive coordination advocated by theFord administration. Shortly after announcing his reorganizationplan, President Carter presented Congress with his first majormessage on drug issues.113 His primary concern was thefragmentation and lack of coordination among drug programs andagencies. (This organizational problem has persisted in spite ofall the attention it has received.) President Carter stressed thecontinuing need for international cooperation, and directed theindividual agencies involved to give the drug issues a highpriority. Like Presidents Nixon and Ford before him, Carterstressed international law enforcement efforts to eradicate theillicit cultivation of drugs and interrupt internationaltrafficking networks. And like his predecessors, he urgedCongress to ratify the Psychotropic Convention. With respect to law enforcement, PresidentCarter announced support for programs which would promise"swift and severe punishment" to traffickers in drugs.These programs include the investigation of links betweenorganized crime and drug trafficking, revocation of passports andfreezing assets of known major traffickers, support oflegislation raising the dollar value of property seized from andforfeited by a drug violator through administrative action, studyof possible denial of bail or any release prior to trial forcertain major drug-traffic offenders, and the possible emendationof the Tax Reform Act to allow for easier investigation of majortraffickers (if this would not infringe on the privacy ofcitizens). For the most part, these proposals are conceptuallyindistinguishable from those made by Presidents Nixon and Ford;all sought to enact measures that would deter major drugtraffickers in the hope of reducing the availability of illicitdrugs at the street level. As for drug treatment, President Carter calledupon NIDA to include more programs for abusers of barbiturates,amphetamines, and combinations of drugs (including alcohol). Hesupported expansion of rehabilitation and job-training programsfor former heroin addicts. President Carter also expressed theneed for better coordination of federally sponsored researchefforts on a variety of drugs, including opiates, alcohol, andtobacco. He expressed the hope that this would save money and"lead to greater scientific understanding of addictionproblems." In recent years the barbiturates have beenrecognized as a major drug problem (this problem has resulted inpart from their widespread licit medical use). The specialattention that President Carter directed to be given to these andother sedative-hypnotic drugs will cover the whole gamut offederal drug response: Prescribing practices of physicians willbe reviewed, more intensive efforts will be made to prosecutephysicians who deliberately overprescribe, DEA will investigatestreet marketing activities and audit companies lawfullymanufacturing the drugs, and HEW will study the question whetherbarbiturates should remain on the market. In focusing suchspecific attention on barbiturate abuse, President Carter took asignificant step toward extending the federal government'sresponse to drugs beyond a traditional concern with such illicitdrugs as heroin, cocaine, and marijuana. And in what amounted to his most significantpolicy break with Presidents Nixon and Ford, Carter endorsed thedecriminalization of possession of small amounts of marijuana forpersonal use, noting that "penalties against possession of adrug should not be more damaging to an individual than the use ofthe drug itself." Nevertheless, the overall thrust of PresidentCarter's first major statement on drug issues does not suggestany fundamental changes in the specifics of government response.The tone does suggest a less emotional approach than that of theearly 1970s; the inclusion of licit drugs which can bedangerously misused suggests a broader understanding of theconcept of "drug abuse"; and the adoption of amarijuana decriminalization position suggests that fundamentalchanges in government response could occur after current policiesand programs are clearly, repeatedly shown not to work. But in abroader context President Carter's drug statement furtherreflects the tortuously slow process by which public opinion andpublic policy change. Some Concluding Thoughts The overriding observation which emerges froma review of the federal government's history of response toillicit drugs is that its drug policy changes slowly if at all.Federal drug programs have changed considerably in thepast decade, but policy remains essentially unchanged. Faithremains strong in the power of criminal sanctions to deterillicit drug use and the effectiveness of law enforcement effortsto eliminate that use which does occur. Two deeply rooted premises have guided federalresponse: One is that there are certain drugs which people shouldbe prohibited from using under any circumstances. The secondis that the government can then prevent their use. The firstpremise is philosophical in nature, the second pragmatic. The philosophical question of thejustification of prohibition can always be argued at greatlength; there is no single "answer" as such. Withrespect to the pragmatic issue, the belief that government canprevent illicit drug use, there is more concrete evidence toanalyze. The experience of the 1970s clearly shows that even withan extensive, generally efficient, and popularly supportedfederal effort, it is impossible to prohibit the presence ofnonapproved drugs in American society. It is difficult toconceive how that effort might have been expanded or intensifiedto be more successful while still respecting the traditionalvalues of a free society. Federal policymakers are by now generallycognizant of the limits of current federal drug policy. Why thendo they continue to pursue the same fundamental policies? Becausethe public demands it; to relax the prohibitionary goal istantamount to being "soft on drugs" (a most pejorativeterm that has been used in ugly ways to cast aspersions on thosewho question the wisdom of prohibition). In a democratic society,policymakers cannot stray too far from what the public wants orthey will simply be replaced. Federal drug policy will not changesubstantially until there is public support to do so. But federal drug officials have not conveyedto the public an understanding of the limits to their potentialaccomplishments; it is far easier politically to highlightoccasionally successful programs and to emphasize long-rangegoals or aspirations. Policyrnakers also seem reluctant to engagethe public in a discussion of the philosophy of drug prohibition.One reason for this difficulty is that for many years the federalgovernment fueled the popular demand for drug prohibition. Yetthose who are familiar with drug policy recognize now that thedesignation of certain drugs as illicit and as targets forprohibition has roots in racism, hysteria, and sensationalism. Itis also now apparent, based on current knowledge about drugs andtheir effects, that prohibition has been based on muchmisinformation and misunderstanding. In the context of these general observations,the following concluding thoughts are offered: 1. The most important contribution whichfederal drug agencies can now make to future drug policy is toprovide the American public with opportunities to carefully andsensibly reexamine the wisdom of drug prohibition. Even thoughthey are now more than five years old, the two reports of theNational Commission on Marihuana and Drug Abuse would still makean excellent starting point for this reappraisal process. 2. Until the drug issue becomes lessvulnerable to sensationalism, there is no way to guarantee thatexcesses in the federal drug effort, such as those of the early1970s, can be prevented. Federal drug policies and programs oughtto be the product of careful, thoughtful consideration.Impulsive, hastily conceived programs such as ODALE can do greatdamage to our society. 3. The federal drug effort needs greatercoordination; the treatment, enforcement, and internationalcomponents cannot be left to go -their own -ways. Coordinationwithout "teeth" has beer, more superficial. thansubstantive. 4. From a policy, bureaucratic, and budgetaryperspective, criminal justice and drug law enforcement agencieshave been too dominant in our national response to the abuse ofpsychoactive drugs. This dominance has not served society well;rather than bringing out the best in us, it has led us to relytoo heavily on our meaner, more punitive instincts. APPENDIX A: A Budget Perspective Overview of Fiscal Years 1970-1978. It isimpossible to account exactly for all funds expended on thefederal government's response to illicit drugs. The figurespresented in this report are, however, sufficiently accurate tobe used for an overall fiscal analysis and review of significanttrends and priorities. Table 1. 1 presents the federal drugbudget by function for fiscal years 1970-1978. From July 1969 through September 1978, thefederal government spent approximately $5.7 billion on itsdrug-related efforts. Of this total, $2.4 billion was spent ontreatment and rehabilitation, $2.3 billion on law enforcement,and the remainder ($.95 billion) was spent on education,prevention, and training ($.4 billion), research ($.4 billion),and planning ($.15 billion). The effect which the "war on drugabuse" had on the budget is clearly demonstrable beginningwith FY 72 (which began July 1, 1971, two weeks after PresidentNixon's special message to Congress). (See Figure 1.4.) The mostrapid expansion of the federal drug budget occurred during FY 72and FY 73. After FY 74 and Nixon's "turn the corner"speech, the rate of budget expansion slowed considerably. (Infact, if adjusted for inflation, the buying power of the federaldrug effort was lower in FY 78 than it had been since FY 72.)Still, although the annual rate of growth of the federal drugbudget slowed, the absolute size at which its annual totalmore-or-less leveled off was much higher than ever before. Theaverage annual federal drug expenditure for the years 1974-78 wasover $800 million; for 1973-78-a six-and-one-quarter-yearperiod-it totaled $5 billion. Perhaps the most useful index of federalpriorities in the drug area is a comparison of the treatment andrehabilitation budget with the law enforcement budget. Figure 1.4displays the rapid growth of the treatment and rehabilitation budget between FY 71 and FY 73; however, since FY 73 it hasalternately declined and increased, ending up at nearly the samelevel as in FY 73 ($366 million in FY 78 compared to $350 millionin FY 73). The drug law enforcement budget, on the other hand,has risen steadily, doubling in size from $200 to $400 million inthe same time period. If we look at these items in a slightlydifferent way-as a percentage of the total federal drugexpenditure for each year-we find a rapid expansion of thetreatment and rehabilitation strategy between FY 71 and FY 73 anddetectable slippage since FY 73 (Figure 1.5). In contrast, thepercentage of the total drug effort allocated to law enforcementrose from a low of 29 percent in FY 73 to 45 percent, its highestlevel, in FY 78. This apparent reversal in strategy in theperiod FY 71-73-with treatment more heavily funded thanenforcement-is explainable insofar as one accepts the thesis thatdrug treatment programs-in particular, methadone treatmentprograms-derived at least part of their government support fromconcern more with reducing criminal recidivism that with reducingheroin recidivism. If so, then recent government response toillicit drug use has remained rather consistently dominated by anenforcement approach, as indeed it has since the early 1900s.Moreover, insofar as drug treatment has been funded because ofits crime reduction potential, it may have been in partill-defined as "treatment" in a traditional healthcontext. The pursuit of this avenue of response-crime reductionthrough treatment-may offer a reasonable explanation for thebrief reversal during FY 71-73 in the traditional balance betweentreatment and enforcement approaches. If so, this adds greatercredence to the contention that the underlying assumptions andstrategies of the government's response to illicit drugs haschanged very little in the 1970s. The FY 79 BudgetRequest. President Carter released his proposed FY 79 budgeton January 20, 1978. Inasmuch as this budget request is the firstone fully prepared by the Carter administration it is logical toturn to it for any signs of impending changes in the governmentresponse to drugs. The currently available budget documentssuggest that it will remain essentially unchanged. However, acomplete analysis is precluded because neither OMB'nor ODAP hascompiled drug-related expenditures on an agency-by-agency basisas they previously did every year since 1971. Without thatcompilation it is not possible to add in agency expenditures forthird-party reimbursement, nor is it possible to estimateaccurately either the non-line-item expenditures of federalagencies or how block grants will be used. Thus at this time it is not possible toinclude the FY 79 figures in our tables and figures. This absenceof an overall analysis of the drug budget by either OMB or ODAPcould allow a return to a situation where agency drug budgetsdictate overall federal drug policy rather than the other wayaround. In the absence of an overall analysis of thefederal drug budget, the budget proposals for NIDA and DEA-thetwo principal federal drug agencies-may serve as a usefulsurrogate. NIDA's budget will increase to $275.2 million in FY79, a $13.1 million increase over FY 78. The greater part of thisincrease-$11.8 million-is earmarked for research, in response tothe preliminary recommendations of the president's Commission onMental Health. NIDA will continue to support a treatment capacityof 102,000, with a maximum local matching rate of 40 percent; thetreatment budget will remain at $161 million. The Drug Enforcement Administration willreceive a modest budgetary increase if President Carter's requestis approved; the DEA budget for FY 79 will be $193 million,compared to $188.5 million in FY 78. Funding for directenforcement activities will increase by $4.2 million to a totalof $137.2 million, while DEA's research and development programwill be cut by more than half to $2.3 million. Overall, the FY 79 federal drug budgetproposal seems to maintain the status quo. The total expenditurewill increase a little, as it has in each of the past severalyears; the relationship between treatment and enforcementapproaches will remain essentially unchanged. APPENDIX B: A Comment On The Role of State and LocalGovernments* The material for this appendix is largelydrawn from a paper by Peter Goldberg, "The Role of the Cityin Responding to the Problems of Drug Abuse," in RehabilitationAspects of Drug Dependence, ed. Arnold Schecter (Cleveland:CRC Press, 1977). In addition to the federal government, stateand local governments have been active in the drug field.However, the activities and directions of state and localgovernments vary from jurisdiction to jurisdiction, thus makingit impossible to generalize about these efforts as if they wereuniform. In recent years, organizations such as the NationalAssociation of State Drug Abuse Program Coordinators, theNational League of Cities, and U.S. Conference of Mayors haveattempted to catalog expenditures at the state and local leveland offer some general analysis of policy decisions and programdirections. The Drug Abuse Council cannot add substantively tothat information. One important issue, however, deservescomment, that of the intergovernmental system for planning andprogramming established by the Drug Abuse Office and TreatmentAct of 1972 (P. L. 92-255). The system, perhaps inadvertently,has resulted in a nearly total absence of any sustained,systematic large-city government participation in the state orfederal policy making and program planning processes. It is aninexplicable situation, since the nation's most severe drugproblems are concentrated in its large central cities. The conditions of heroin addiction and crimewhich initially prompted an expanded federal response to illicitdrug use in the early 1970s were concentrated in the largercities of this country. In fact, the increased federal responsewas required partly because the scope and extent of the problemsassociated with addictive drug use had far transcended theability of city governments to respond effectively. Also, stategovernments-whose legislatures were frequently dominated by ruraland suburban interests-were often reluctant to become extensivelyinvolved in what they felt was essentially a central-cityproblem. Before the passage of the Drug Abuse Office andTreatment Act of 1972, only New York, California, and Illinoishad undertaken major efforts in drug treatment and prevention. Nevertheless, when the federal governmentbegan its large-scale expansion of the drug effort, the stateslobbied for and succeeded in obtaining the major role in thateffort. The role of local government was ignored; largecities-where the social costs of illicit drug use are the mostsevere-were left out of the formal policyrnaking and fundingprocess. This imbalance between city and state responsibilitiescan be traced to the congressional authorization of annualformula (block) grants to states, detailed in Section 409 of theDrug Abuse Office and Treatment Act. In return for the blockgrants, Congress required each state to establish a drug abusecoordinating agency and annually prepare a drug abuse plan tomeet treatment and prevention needs. Thus Congress, in effect,required even nonurban states such as North Dakota, Vermont, andMontana-states having comparatively small drug problems-to plan adrug abuse response effort, while cities such as Newark, Detroit,New Orleans, Boston, and Los Angeles were ignored in thelegislation. The resulting problems were first of allpolitical. Large-city concerns and needs tend to beunderrepresented at the state level of government, where ruraland suburban interests are disproportionately powerful. Moreover,blacks and other minority populations have added yet anotherpolitical concern, most clearly articulated in a resolutionpassed by the National Black Caucus of Local Elected Officials inJune 1974. Whereas, unfortunately, the problems of drugabuse have disproportionately affected large numbers of Black andSpanish-speaking Americans, these minority populations tend to bemost underrepresented at the state level where drug abusepolicies are being increasingly formulated, thus creating a largediscrepancy between those most afflicted by the problems andthose establishing the policies and procedures to solve theproblems. In addition to these political concerns, thedrug problems themselves in rural and suburban areas are oftenquite different from those in the central city. While heroin maybe the major drug of abuse (alcohol excepted) in the largecities, other parts of a state are usually concerned with otherdrugs. And while treatment may be the most pressing need indealing with heroin addiction in the central city, the emphasisdesired or demanded by the rest of the state may be for educationand prevention programs. Although the larger cities may wantincreased funding for methadone programs, other areas of thestate where heroin is not a problem may be unsympathetic to thisuse of one addictive drug to treat another. In the finalanalysis, different units of government are bound to havedifferent needs, priorities, and philosophies, all justified fromtheir own perspectives. The imbalance between state and large-citydeterminations of problems and priorities has become furtheraggravated as the principal federal drug treatment and preventionagency, NIDA, has sought to become more reliant on state plans indetermining federal funding decisions. In fact, NIDA has recentlyannounced its intention to fund virtually all of its treatmentand prevention efforts through statewide services contracts withstate governments by 1979. It is argued that this will beadministratively efficient; but this increasing substitution ofstate decision making for federal does not augur well for thelarge cities, where drug and drug-related problems are mostsevere. In some instances a strong state role hasworked well; this is most often true in states where there are nolarge urban centers. But in many other instances, potentiallyserious problems between state and large-city governments haveimpeded the effective flow of funds and delivery of services.City organizations such as the National League of Cities and theU.S. Conference of Mayors have repeatedly expressed theirdissatisfaction with the lack of state responsiveness to largecity needs in the drug area. Representatives of a number oflarge-city governments have also voiced strong and specificcomplaints about this. There is clearly a need to make someadjustments in the state planning process so that plans moreadequately and appropriately allow for large-city needs andparticipation. Such adjustments can be made without dismantlingthe state planning system. NIDA and the cities need to communicate moredirectly on drug issues and learn more from one another. To anunfortunate extent federal drug policies are formulated withoutdiscussion or collaboration with local elected officials fromareas where drug and drug-related problems are particularlysevere. This situation must be remedied if our drug policies andprograms are to work more efficiently. NIDA needs to developmechanisms by which it can more aggressively and systematicallyseek large-city government input in its deliberations, and,conversely, cities need to develop a better understanding of whyNIDA does what it does. The concept of an Office of UrbanServices within the NIDA bureaucracy to facilitate these crucialinteractions would seem to have merit. Finally, NIDA should seriously considerinitiating a program to fund city coordinating agencies withresponsibility for developing city-wide drug abuse plans in anumber of cities with the highest concentrations of drug-relatedproblems. These plans should provide for interaction with thestate government. Cleveland needs such an agency and plan farmore than does the state of Idaho, Atlanta more than Vermont. A federal system that funds only state drugabuse plans and agencies is either focusing solely onadministrative ease or operating in ignorance of the actualproblems. Plans should not proliferate uncontrollably across thecountry, but if the federal government is to require planning itshould at least make certain that there will be directparticipation from those areas most afflicted and concerned. Anadditional benefit of funding city agencies would be that itwould give local elected officials a dependable and developedlocal source of advice and assistance on drug issues andproblems. CliffSchaffer's Home Page WT02-B02-21IA086-000614-B042-89http://206.61.184.43:80/schaffer/Library/studies/lag/intell.htm 206.61.184.43 19970122020301 text/html 44975HTTP/1.0 200 OKDate: Wednesday, 22-Jan-97 02:02:52 GMTServer: WebSitePro/1.1f (S/N wpo-0deb)Allow-ranges: bytesContent-type: text/htmlLast-modified: Saturday, 28-Dec-96 07:02:21 GMTContent-length: 44757 LaGuardia Committee Report on Marihuana -- Intellectualfunction Contents | Feedback | Search DRCNet Library | Schaffer Library | Major Studies | LaGuardiaCommittee Report LaGuardia Committee Report on Marihuana INTELLECTUAL FUNCTIONING Florence Halpern, MA In this phase of the study investigation was directedprimarily toward establishing the effect of marihuana on thesubject's intellectual functioning. An attempt was made todetermine what changes in mental ability occur under differentamounts of the drug, what direction these changes take, when theyare first measurable, and how long they persist. TESTS Bellevue Adult Intelligence Test This test was used tomeasure the general mental level of all the subjects. It waschosen in preference to other available scales because it is theonly individual test of intelligence which has been standardizedon an adult population, takes into account both verbal andperformance abilities, and compares the individual with standardsestablished for his particular age group. It consists of tentests, five verbal and five performance. The verbal tests coverthe fields of general information and general comprehension, drawon the individual's capacity for abstract reasoning and test hisarithmetical ability and his rote memory. The performance testsalso evaluate the subject's comprehension of social situations,but here the results are independent of language. There are alsotests of the individual's ability to carry out a routine task, toorganize parts into a meaningful whole, to distinguish betweenessential and unessential details, and to analyze and synthesize.Army Alpha (Bregman Revision, Forms A, B. 5, 7 and BellevueRevision) This is a group test first used in the United StatesArmy in 1917 and 1918 when it was given to more than a millionrecruits. It consists of eight tests: test 1, a direction testwhich was not used in this study since the item does not appearon all forms; test 2, a test of arithmetical reasoning; test 3, atest of common sense in which the subject indicates which heconsiders the best of three possible responses to a givenquestion; test 4, a.modified vocabulary test; tests. in which thesubject must mentally reorganize disarranged sentences and thenindicate whether the resultant statement is true or false; test6, a test of numerical relations in which the subject must supplythe last two numbers in a numerical series on the basis of therelationship between the first six numbers; test 7, a test ofanalogies in which the subject determines the relationshipbetween two given words and then underlines one of four wordswhich is related to a third word in the same way; and test 8,which on Forms A and B and on the Bellevue Revision is a test ofgeneral information in which the subject is given a choice offive answers to a question. On Forms 5 and 7, this test is a testof directions. Because this test has five alternate forms which are roughlyof equivalent difficulty it could be repeated many times within ashort time interval. It was therefore used to establish a curveshowing at what time following ingestion the marihuana has aneffect on general intelligence and on individual higher mentalprocesses. Pyle's Digit Symbol Test In this test each number from1 through 9 is associated with a specific symbol, as, forexample, number 1 is associated with a square and number 2 withan asterisk. The numbers and their associated symbols appear atthe top of the sheet of paper. Below the sample are rows ofsymbols, five symbols to a row, followed by five blank squares.The subject is expected to fill in each square with the numberassociated with the respective symbol. With practice theassociation bond between the number and the symbol becomesstronger and the subject depends less and less on the model atthe top of the sheet. He is therefore able to work faster and hislearning rate is reflected in the increased number of squaresfilled. Cancellation Test The subject is required to cross out aspecific geometric form wherever it appears on a sheet which iscovered with rows of geometric figures. This measures theindividual's capacity for carrying out a routine task. Form Board Test The measurement of the ability to manipulateconcrete material in contrast to the verbal or abstract abilitydetermined by the Army Alpha test required the introduction ofcertain form board tests. These were the Seguin Form Board, theTwo Figure Board, the Casuist Board, - the Five Figure Board,Healy A, Triangle Test, Diagonal Test, all administered andscored according to the Pintner-Patterson Performance Series. TheSeguin Form Board has ten blocks of various goemetric forms, tobe put in their appropriate places as rapidly as possible. Threetrials are given. The Two Figure Board has nine pieces which,when placed correctly, form a large cross and a large square.Time and the number of moves are recorded. The Casuist Board hastwelve pieces which, when correctly placed, form three circlesand an oval. Time and errors are recorded. The Five Figure Boardhas five geometrical figures which are formed by the correctplacement of two or three pieces for each figure. Time and errorsare recorded. Healy A has five small rectangular pieces which,when placed correctly, form a large rectangle. Time and thenumber of moves are recorded. The Triangle Test consists of fourtriangular pieces which are fitted together in a board. Time anderrors are recorded. The Diagonal Test has five pieces of variousshapes which must be fitted together in a rectangular frame. Timeand moves are recorded. Kohs Block Design Test This is aperformance test which is less a test of manual dexterity andmore dependent on abstract intelligence than are the form boardtests. It correlates more highly with intelligence than do mostperformance items and yet it is entirely independent of language.Therefore, the individual who cannot express himself well or whosuffers from a language handicap is not penalized as he is onverbal scales. The test consists of sixteen cubes each with ared, a white, a blue, a yellow, a red-and- white, and ablue-and-yellow side. A colored design which can be reproducedwith the cubes is placed before the subject and he is expected tomake it. Results are rated numerically, depending upon the timeconsumed in execution. In this experiment two sets of designs ofequivalent difficulty were required- Designs IV, VI, and XIV wereselected for one series and V, VII, and XII for the other. Memory Tests Although memory in itself cannot be considered ameasure of intelligence, it is essential to any intelligentfunctioning and must therefore be included in any estimate ofintelligence. Three aspects of memory, namely rote memory, theability tof recall presented objects, and visual memory weretested. The rote memory test requires the repetition of digits inforward and reverse order as given on the Bellevue IntelligenceTest. Object memory was tested by exposing ten small objects forthree seconds and recording the number of articles the subjectwas able to recall. Visual memory or the ability to reproducedesigns after a ten-second exposure was estimated by using thedesigns and scoring technique from the Army Performance Test.PROCEDURE The Bellevue Adult Intelligence Test Each subject wasgiven the Bellevue Adult Intelligence test within two or threedays after his admission to the hospital and before any marihuanahad been administered. The Army Alpha, Pyle's Digit Symbol, and Cancellation TestsThese tests were given as group tests to a total of 20 subjects.The Army Alpha and Pyle's Digit Symbol tests were given everyhalf-hour, beginning a half-hour after drug ingestion. The ArmyAlpha was continued for seven hours and Digit Symbol for fivehours. The Cancellation test was given every hour for six hours,beginning one hour after drug administration. Eleven users and 9non-users took the Army Alpha and the Digit Symbol tests, while 9users and 11 non-users took the Cancellation test. Tests 2through 8 of the Army Alpha require twenty and a half minutes foractual performance while such preparations as the distribution ofpapers and the reading of directions consume almost ten minutesmore, so that had the entire Alpha been given at each half-hourlysession, the subjects would have gone from test to test with nointermittent rest period. For this reason the tests were dividedand the following schedule arranged: (table a) Each subject took three test series, one without the drug, onewith 2 cc. and one with 3, 4, 5, or 6 cc., depending on individual tolerance. A test series consisted of fourteen half-hoursessions for the Alpha, ten half- hour sessions for the DigitSymbol and seven hourly sessions for the Cancellation tests.Because of the time factor, a series required two days for itscompletion. The halves of a series were given on successive days,and the different series a week apart. Thus for example, asubject might take his first test series with 2 cc. on Monday andTuesday of one week; the following Monday and Tuesday the serieswould be repeated with the subject in a different drug state (nodrug or S cc.); and a final series would be given the third weekwith the subject in still another drug condition. An effort was made to obviate practice effect by giving thefirst test series to one third of the subjects without drug, toone third with 2 cc., and to one third with 3, 4, or 5 cc.However because of the necessity of increasing dosage graduallythis ideal presentation was not actually obtained. The followinggives the amount of drug administered to users and non-users ateach test series. (table b) Since the various forms of the Army Alpha are notabsolutely equivalent in difficulty, their order of presentationfor any one group had to be identical in each of the three drugstates. However, for each of the three groups tested the order ofpresentation was different so that all the difficult forms didnot come at the same interval, as is shown on the following page.Kohs Block Design, Form Board, and Memory Tests Administration ofthese tests differed markedly from those discussed above in thatno attempt was made to give them at regular successive timeintervals. Rather, they formed part of a battery of individualtests given to various subjects under specific drug conditions.For example, 5 cc. of marihuana would be ordered for a patientfor 8:00 A.M., and testing began as soon thereafter as thepatient appeared "high," the state of"highness" being judged by the subject's own statement,his pulse rate, the condition of his pupils and otherphysiological signs. (table c) Kohs Block Design was given to each subject twice,once without the drug and once with 5 cc. The test was taken by atotal of 21 subjects, 10 users and 11 non-users. Five users toolsthe test first without the drug, S had their first trial with 5cc. Of the non-user group 8 had their first trial withoutmarihuana, 3 with 4 cc. The average time at which the test wasgiven to the user group was three and a half hours after drugadministration, with range from two to five and a half hours. Forthe nonuser group, the average time of administration of the testwas also three and a half hours after the drug was given, rangetwo and a half to five and a half hours. The two series of designs (one series being Designs IV, VI andXIV, the other V, VII and XII) were presented in such manner thathalf of the subjects were tested on one series and half on theother series while they were under the influence of marihuana.Thus any difference in degree of difficulty between the two setsof designs was canceled out. The weighted scores given on theArthur Point scale were used in evaluating the results. Form Board Tests were divided into three batteries, eachbattery consisting of the Seguin Form Board, one of the threelarger boards (Two Figure, Five Figure, or Casuist) and one ofthe three smaller boards. Various combinations of boards wereused under various drug conditions in order to make the resultsas comparable as possible. The following indicates the number oftimes the various boards were used with different dosages ofmarihuana. From the results it appears that Gwyn Triangle was used toooften with 5 cc. and Healy A was not used often enough. (table d) Aside from the Triangle and the Healy A, the distribution ofboards in different drug stages was such as to obviate anydifferences in degree of difficulty. Nineteen subjects, 10 usersand 9 non- users, took this test. The results were scored fortime and errors according to the Pintner-Patterson Performanceseries. Memory tests. The first digit span test was always givenbefore marihuana had been administered, since the Bellewe Scalewas given each patient during the first two or three days of thestudy. The trials under 2 cc. and 5 cc. were alternated. In all,28 subjects, 17 users and 11 non-users, took this test before andafter the ingestion of marihuana. The final score equaled thenumber of digits recalled. To test Object Memory, ten small articles such as a key, aring, a pill box, and a crayon were placed on a flat, neutralsurface and exposed for three seconds. An attempt was made tovary some of the articles at each presentation so that six orseven were the same and three or four were different. Twenty-sixsubjects, 11 users and 15 non-users, took this test. They were sodivided that 10 of them took the test the first time withoutdrug, 10 with 2 cc., and 6 with 5 cc. To test Visual Memory, Army designs were given each subjectthree times, once prior to the administration of marihuana, onceunder 2 cc., and once under 5 cc. The test was riven to a totalof 28 subiects. 16 users and 12 non-users. Because there is noalternative form for this test, results were definitelyinfluenced by practice. Here, therefore, more than with any other test, it becameimportant to arrange the order of administration. The followingindicates the dosage of marihuana at the first test. (table e) It is obvious that the initial examination was given slightlymore often when the subjects were not under the influence of thedrug. Improvement derived from practice is therefore more of afactor in the tests which were performed under marihuana. FINDINGS Bellevue Adult Intelligence Test General Intelligence. Theresults of the Bellevue Adult Intelligence Test which wasadministered to 60 subjects, 40 users and 20 non-users, are shownin Table 5. As has been pointed out elsewhere, these findingsindicate that both the user and the non-user groups may beclassified as of average intelligence. (Table 5) Mental Deterioration. Studies of mental deterioration due totoxic, organic or psychotic factors, as given in the literature,reveal that in such cases the subtest scores on the BellevueAdult Intelligence Test show marked irregularity, depending uponthe functions involved in the deteriorative process. As a group,the marihuana users tested show very even functioning, and whatlittle irregularity occurred can be explained on the basis oflanguage and racial factors.(4) From this we may conclude thatthe marihuana users had suffered no mental deterioration as aresult of their use of the drug. The age factor does not affectthe result since the groups were well equated in this respect. Army Alpha Test Total Mental Functioning. The total scoresobtained from this test at the successive testing periods areshown in Table 6. Those recorded before the administration of thedrug give a picture like that seen in any learning curve, thatis, there is a gradual increment in test scores at each testinginterval, interspersed with plateau periods. Thus, without drug the test score for the second testinginterval showed a 2 per cent gain over the initial score, thescore for the third testing interval showed a 4 per cent gainover the initial score, and so on up to the last testing periodwhen there was a 13 per cent gain over the initial test score. Between two and a half and three hours after ingestion of 2cc. of the drug there appeared to be a possible very slightfalling off in mental ability. Otherwise the results paralleledthe findings obtained in the undrugged condition except thattoward the end of the day the increments were larger than thosewhich occurred when the subjects were undrugged. This may be dueto complications in the experimental procedure or may be anindication of accelerated mental functioning resulting from drugingestion. This point is discussed more fully when the effect ondifferent mental functions is considered. Deleterious effects were apparent an hour after the ingestionof 5 cc. of marihuana. There was a 3 per cent drop from theinitial score at this one-hour period and this first attainmentis not surpassed until four and a half hours after drugingestion. From the four-and-a- half- hour period on to the endof the testing there were gradual increments in score. Different Mental Functions. A very elaborate study was made ofthe scores made on the subtest (Table 7). Some irregularitiesoccurred even in the undrugged state, and these may be attributedprimarily to chance factors, as, for example, the difference indifficulty of the various test forms. On the whole, the findingswere in line with those which one would expect in any situationwhere constant repetition increases efficiency. The effects of 2 cc. of marihuana on the different mentalfunctions were variable. Tests involving number concepts gaveclear-cut, consistent findings and revealed that impairmentoccurred an hour after the drug was taken and continued for fromtwo and a half to three hours after ingestion. Results of othertests showed that there was little if any loss in ability, andsome of them, especially those done toward the end of the day,showed gains which exceeded the ones made in the undrugged state.It is not possible on the basis of the present data to ascertainwhether these large increments indicate that small amounts of thedrug serve as stimulants in situations dependent primarily uponverbal facility or whether they are due to certain complicationsin the test technique. The former theory coincides with theincreased verbosity noted on other tests as well as with theclinical impression, but the latter also cannot be overlooked. Further investigation of this point is definitely indicated. The effect of the 5 cc. dosage on each function was in linewith that reported for total scores, that is, there was a fallingoff in efficiency one hour after the drug was taken and thisimpairment continued for anywhere from three and a half to sixand a half hours after ingestion. Here too the scores on testsinvolving number concepts were most severely affected, recoveryfor them taking place from six to six and a half hours after drugadministration. Degree and Duration of Drug Effect. In general it may bestated that marihuana has a deleterious effect on mentalfunctioning, the extent, time of onset, and duration of theimpairment being related to the amount of drug taken. The adverse effect of the 2 cc. dosage on global intelligencewas slight (about 3 per cent to 4 per cent impairment inefficiency) and of sort duration, occurring at about two and ahalf hours after ingestion and lasting little longer than ahalf-hour or an hour. Certain mental functions, especially thosedealing with number concepts, appear to have been affected muchearlier than others, the effect on the number test scores beingmeasurable as early as one hour after ingestion and continuinguntil two and a half hours after ingestion. For other functions,in particular those involving verbal facility, the results werevariable, in some instances showing no adverse effect and even aslight acceleration. The effect of 5 cc. of marihuana on global intellectualfunctioning was apparent within an hour from the time the drugwas taken and was operative until four and a half hours afteringestion. All mental functions showed this early impairment butfor some of them recovery from the adverse effect was earlierthan for others. Those most severely impaired from point of viewof duration were the ones dealing with number concepts. (Table 6) The testing program was continued for only seven hours afterthe drug was taken and, therefore, any estimate of the effect ofmarihuana after this time is purely a subjective one. However,both the subject and the examiner felt that the drug produced a"hang- over" which in most cases continued into thefollowing day. The subject complained of being headachy, sleepy,and unable to work at his usual level, and the examiner alsonoted that the subject did not work as well or as quickly whencalled upon to do something on a day following marihuanaingestion. The impairment reported here is not entirely representative ofthe maximum impairment which occurs under the influence ofmarihuana. Two opposing variables account for the resultsobtained in the drugged condition. One variable is practiceeffect which tends to increase test scores with each succeedingtrial. The other variable, the drug, tends to lower test scores.In the earlier sessions there was evidence that the marihuana,especially when given in large doses, is the more potent force,as seen by the continuing downward trend of the curve during thefirst few hours. In these earlier phases, in spite of repetition,results were lower with each succeeding trial, or if there was noactual loss, the increments made were never comparable to thosemade in the undrugged state. Three or four hours after drugadministration there was a general trend toward rising scores.Some of this gain must be attributed to increased practice effectwhich was counteracting, in part at least, the deleterious effectof the marihuana. For this reason it is not certain that the drugwas less effective at later points in the curve than it was atthe moment of seemingly greatest impairment. This seemsparticularly plausible because, beginning with the third hour,the subject was no longer working on new tasks but was actuallyrepeating identical tasks that he performed earlier in the day.Thus, at the third hour the test form used was the same as theone given at the initial session; at the end of thethree-and-a-half-hour period the form was the same as theone-hour examination, and so on. What is shown in the curves isthe effect of marihuana on intellectual tasks with which thesubject has become very familiar. For practical purposes the testsituation has the advantage of being comparable with daily livingsince the tasks performed in daily routine are usually relativelyfamiliar ones. (Table 7) Speed Versus Power. Intellectual impairment under theinfluence of marihuana resulted from a loss in both speed andefficiency. There was a slowing up in output indicated by thedifference in the number of items done before and after theadministration of the drug. On the whole the number of test itemsattempted tended to increase at each succeeding examinationperiod even when the subject was under the influence ofmarihuana, but the percentage of increase in the drugged statepractically never equaled that attained for the correspondingtime interval when the subject had not ingested the drug. Thefindings for the number of items done in the drugged andundrugged condition follow very closely the findings in respectto the number of items correctly done. From this it may beconcluded that under the influence of marihuana an individualfunctions less rapidly and also less efficiently than when he hashad no drug. Careful analysis of what causes the loss in efficiency revealsthat certain factors not necessarily related to mental abilityper se were accountable for the reduced scores in the druggedstate. For example, under the influence of the drug the subjectfelt dizzy, had blurred vision, or exhibited other handicappingphysiological disturbances. These impeded his efficiency inputting his answer on the correct line, or marking a cross in theright box. Men were observed running their fingers across thepage in an effort to keep their place. On the other hand, much ofthe intellectual loss can be ascribed to an impairment in thethinking processes, and there seemed to be a general confusion ofideas and inability to maintain a fixed goal. Some subjectsreported that the reason they accomplished so little was that, bythe time they had finished reading a question, they no longerremembered what their purpose in reading it had been.Occasionally perseveration of a form of response specific to onetest was found in a subsequent test. For example, some forms ofthe Same-Opposite test require the subject to mark the answer Sor O. In a later test requiring a plus or minus responseoccasional irrelevant S's or O's appeared. Comparison of the Effect of Marihuana on User and Non-User. When the group is divided into marihuana users and nonuserscertain interesting and suggestive differences are revealed(Table 8). Although the general findings for total intelligence scoresfor the two groups follow similar curves, the deleterious effectswere not as great on the user as on the non-user. Thus under 2cc. of marihuana the user showed no real intellectual impairmentexcept for a very short interval beginning about two and a halfhours after ingestion and lasting for an hour or an hour and ahalf. In contrast to this he made gains both at the beginning ofthe testing and toward the end of the day which exceeded thosemade in the undrugged state. The non-user who had ingested 2 cc.of marihuana showed a definite drop in score beginning about twoand a half hours after ingestion, and for a period from one and ahalf to two and a half hours after this time he did not makeincrements comparable to those which he made in the undruggedstate. Following this, during the last two hours of testing he,like the user, obtained scores which showed an acceleration notparalleled in the undrugged state. (Table 8) Under 5 cc. of marihuana both the user and the non-user showeda 3 per cent loss in efficiency within an hour of the time thatthe drug was taken. Although recovery was slow for both groups,the user was less severely affected, as is indicated by the factthat at the next testing interval his score was only 1 per centbelow his initial score as compared with a 7 per cent loss on thepart of the non-user. The disparity in the degree of impairmentfor the two groups continued for several hours. The more markeddrug effect in the case of the non-user was further evidenced bythe fact that the user showed recovery four or four and a halfhours after ingestion (as measured by the time when his scoresapproach those made when in the undrugged state) while thenon-user, even at the end of seven hours of testing, did notapproximate his undrugged performances. No simple explanation of this difference is available. Themost probable reason seems to be that previous use of the drug insome way serves to ameliorate that anxiety and inevitabledisorganization which the use of any drug may have on anindividual who has never taken it before. Another explanation maylie in possible physiological adaptation to the drug which,though not identical with tolerance in the ordinarypharmacological sense, seems to act in the same direction. Variability. The results reported here are all in terms ofaverages. A study of individual scores indicates that there was markedvariability in the effect of the drug on different subjects. Inone case the drug action came early and soon disappeared. Anothersubject experienced no reaction until after he had eaten hislunch, at which time a very definite effect was apparent. A thirdsubject showed impairment late in the day when the drug effect onalmost all the other subjects had worn off. There were some hardysouls who did not appear to be affected by even large quantitiesof marihuana, while a few (mainly non-users) became so ill thatthey could not continue with the examinations. Pyle's Digit Symbol Test Comparison of the results obtained onthis test when the subject was in the undrugged condition andwhen he had had 2 cc. of marihuana reveals that small amounts ofthe drug did not interfere with his ability to carry out theappointed task (Table 9). In fact, as was noted above for certainother tests, the improvement in score at the end of two and ahalf or three hours was greater after the ingestion of 2 cc. ofmarihuana than it was when no drug had been administered, and atthe end of the five-hour testing period there was a 32 per centincrease in score as against a 22 per cent increase in theundrugged condition. Under the influence of 5 cc. of marihuana, however, there wasa decrease in ability occuring within an hour after the time thedrug was administered. Although the scores show no actual loss ascompared with the initial score, the increments did not equalthose made in the undrugged condition until from four to four anda half hours after ingestion. It may therefore be concluded that certain types of learningability are not affected by small amounts (2 cc.) of marihuana,but are impaired when larger amounts (5 cc.) are ingested. (Table 9) (Table 10) Cancelling a Geometric Form The results of this test are shownin Table 10. With 2 cc. of marihuana, there was a slight falling off in thesubject's efficiency occurring about three hours after drugingestion. At that time he was 3 per cent less efficient than he had beenan hour previous. With S cc. of marihuana there was a slowing upin the subject's ability to carry out the appointed task, whichwas apparent two hours after drug ingestion (and possiblyearlier). At that time there was only a 4 per cent increment overhis initial score as compared with a 10 per cent increment in theundrugged state and a 12 per cent increment when the 2 cc. dosagehad been administered. He improved only slightly at the three- and four-hour testinginterval, and only at the five-hour interval did he show anappreciable improvement. Apparently, the carrying out of a simple routine task isadversely affected to a slight degree and for a short period oftime as the result of the ingestion of 2 cc. of marihuana whilethe ingestion of S cc. of the drug produces adverse effects whichare more severe and more lasting. Performance Tests Seguin Form Board. For adults of averageintelligence this test is primarily one involving speed ofreaction time. The average time taken by the subjects when theywere not under the influence of marihuana was 12.8 seconds. Thiswas increased to 14.0 and 14.1 seconds under doses of 2 cc. and 5cc. respectively. Thus, ingestion of marihuana in 2 cc. and 5 cc.doses caused a 9 per cent delay in performance time. Form Boards. The time scores for this test remainedpractically the same whether no drug, 2 cc. or 5 cc. of marihuanahad been administered, the average scores in terms of mental agebeing respectively 11.7, 11.7 and 11.9 years. The error scoresalso showed little change as a result of drug ingestion, theaverages in terms of mental age being 9.7 years (no marihuana),9.9 years (2 cc.) and 10.2 years (5 cc.), and what changeoccurred was in a positive direction, that is, there was a veryslight improvement in the subject's performance when he was underthe influence of marihuana. Kohs Block Design. This test correlates more highly withabstract intelligence than do any of the other performance tests.Here the drug had a definitely deleterious effect when it wasadministered in large amounts. The average score was 17.6 whenthe subjects were not under the influence of marihuana and 14.8after they had ingested the drug; that is, under S cc. ofmarihuana there was a 16 per cent loss in score as compared withundrugged results. In general it appears that those functions most closely associated with higher intellectual processes are more impaired bythe drug than are the simpler functions. Memory Tests Rote Memory. As measured by the ability to repeatdigits forward there were no changes in rote memory as a resultof drug ingestion, the average scores under no drug, 2 cc. ofmarihuana, and 5 cc. of marihuana being in each case 7.1. Digits Reversed. Although the giving of digits in reverseorder is always grouped with memory testss this task actuallyrequires something over and above mere recall. It demands amental control not necessary in tests dependent purely upon rotememory. Although simple rote memory, as measured by the abilityto repeat digits forward, was not affected by the ingestion ofmarihuana, the repetition of digits reversed was affectedadversely. In the undrugged state the average for the group was5.4, with 2 cc. the average was 5.0, and with S cc. it was 4.8.The impairment was comparatively small but it seems to have beenrelated to the amount of drug taken. Object Memory. The average scores under no drug, 2 cc. ofmarihuana, and 5 cc. of marihuana were respectively 6.2, 5.6, and5.9- that is, there was a loss of about 9 per cent in thesubject's ability to recall objects which had been exposed to hisvision for three seconds when he took the test under theinfluence of 2 cc. of marihuana, while after the ingestion of 5cc. the impairment was less, being only about 5 per cent. Thisseemingly contradictory result is probably due to the fact thatby the time the subjects took the test under the influence of 5cc. most of them had already had it two times previously. Theloss in terms of absolute number of remembered articles wasslight. Visual Memory. In this test as in the case of digits reversedsomething over and above simple memory function is involved. Acapacity for analysis and synthesis which correlates well withintelligence is required for the successful execution of thistask, and it is this function which is adversely affected by theingestion of marihuana. The average scores were 10.3 (no drug),9.7 (2 cc.) and 7.8 (5 cc.); that is, after the ingestion of 2cc. of marihuana there was a 6 per cent drop in score, whileunder 5 cc. there was a 24 per cent drop. In general one may conclude that simple memory functions arenot affected by the administration of marihuana while the morecomplex memory functions are affected adversely, the extent ofthe impairment being related to the amount of drug taken. Throughout the examination of subjects on individual tests,the same difference was observed in intensity of the effect uponuser and non-user as was noted in group tests. Experiments with Marihuana cigarettes In addition to the testsmade to determine the effect of the ingestion of marihuana onvarious intellectual functions, several experiments were triedwith marihuana cigarettes. The tests used in this part of thestudy were the Bellevue Adult Intelligence Test; the Woody McCallMixed Fundamentals Test, Form I, which consists of thirty-fiveexamples requiring addition, subtraction, multiplication ordivision; a cancellation test in which the subject is required tocross out a specific number (in this instance the number 8)wherever it appears on a sheet covered with rows of numbers; theKohs Block Design Test; and the test for rote, object, and visualmemory. The subjects took the test series and individual tests twice,once without the drug and once after having smoked marihuanacigarettes. They were not given a specific number of cigarettesbut were told to smoke until they felt "high." Thenumber of cigarettes smoked to produce this effect ranged fromtwo to seven. The Mixed Fundamentals and cancellation tests were given asgroup tests and were repeated at half-hour intervals for two anda half hours. In the series given when the subjects were"high," the first test was taken as soon as thecigarettes had been smoked. Time limit on each test was one and ahalf minutes. The Bellevue Adult, Kohs, and memory tests were given asindividual tests and were administered only twice, once beforethe subject had smoked marihuana cigarettes and once after he hadbecome "high" from smoking them. If during the courseof the examination he wanted another cigarette or the examinerhad reason to suspect that he was no longer under the influenceof the drug, more cigarettes were smoked. The number ofcigarettes used during a three-hour testing period ranged fromsix to twelve. In the cancellation, Kohs, and memory tests the subjects wereso divided that half took the tests for the first time beforethey had smoked and half after they had smoked. In the WoodyMcCall Mixed Fundamentals Test more non-users had their firsttests before they had smoked. The Bellevue Adult IntelligenceTest was always given first without the drug during the two orthree days immediately following the subject's admission. Fourweeks later the test was repeated on 10 subjects while they wereunder the influence of marihuana cigarettes. Bellevue Adult Intelligence Test Ten subjects, 5 users and 5non-users, repeated this test under the influence of marihuana.The results are shown in Table 11. (TABLE 11) Since the test taken when the subject was "high" wasalways his second experience with it, some allowance must be madefor practice effect. Without drug the average I.Q. of thesesubjects was 101.6, while after they had smoked cigarettes it was104.4. This increase of only 2.8 points is smaller than one wouldprobably get with repetition occurring after such a short timeinterval. It may be concluded, therefore, that smoking marihuanacigarettes has some negative effect on intellectual functioning,in that the subject benefits less from previous experiences thanhe would if he had not smoked. Woody McCall Mixed Fundamentals Test, Form 1 This test was givento 24 subjects, 10 users and 14 non-users. >From the results which are shown in Table 12 it may beconcluded that when the subject was "high" aftersmoking marihuana cigarettes there was a slowing up in hisability to do simple arithmetic calculations. This lag occurredwithin the first half-hour after smoking and continued for atleast an hour. The deleterious effect was not such as to cause anactual loss in ability but the increments resulting from repeatedpractice were never as great in the drugged as in the undruggedstate. Thus, the initial increment was 10 per cent in the testgiven before smoking and only 4 per cent in the one administeredafter the subject had become "high." The finalincrement at the end of two and a half hours was 20 per centwithout drug, 13 per cent with drug. This test measures the subject's ability to use acquiredknowledge. Under the influence of marihuana cigarettes the capacity forusing such an acquired skill is not lost but is slowed down. Theadverse effect of smoking marihuana in cigarette form occursalmost immediately in contrast to the delayed action of thepills. (TABLE 12) Cancelling 8's Sixteen subjects, 8 users and 8 non-users, tookthis test, the results of which are shown in Table 13. As aresult of smoking marihuana cigarettes the subject worked alittle slower in his execution of a routine task than he did whenhe had not smoked. The increment over the initial score in thetest score made a half-hour after he became "high" wasonly 7 per cent as against an increment of 9 per cent when thecigarettes had not been smoked. His performance was slowed up forone hour after smoking and possibly longer. (TABLE 13) Kohs Block Design Test This test, which measures performanceability, was given to a total of 9 subjects, 6 users and 3non-users. The average score without the drug was 18.5, and aftercigarettes had been smoked 14.7. This difference in score of 3.8points indicates a loss in efficiency of 21 per cent. Memory Tests Rote Memory. Thirteen users and 9 non-users tookthis test. Neither in repeating digits forward nor in giving them inreverse did the subjects show any disadvantageous effects fromthe use of marihuana cigarettes, the average scores before andafter smoking being 6.9 and 7.1 respectively for the digitsforward test and 5.2 and 5.1 for the digits reversed test. Theonly explanation for this deviation from the results obtainedwhen marihuana was taken in pill form is the inability to controlthe dosage when marihuana is given in cigarette form. Object Memory. Thirteen subjects took this test. Object memorywas not impaired by the smoking of marihuana, the average scoresbeing 6.8 before the cigarettes were smoked and 7.1 when thesubjects were "high." Visual Memory. There was an .8point loss (from 10-5 to 9.7) in the average score of the 20subjects, 11 users and 9 non-users, who took this test. Thisrepresents an impairment of about 8 per cent. Effect of Marihuana Cigarettes on Users and Non-Users Thedifference in intensity of effect of marihuana cigarettes on theuser and on the non- user was not the same as the difference inthe effect of the marihuana concentrate on these two groups. Theuser was usually more affected by smoking marihuana than was thenon- user, probably because the nonuser did not smoke as much oras intensely as the user and was not as much under the influenceof the drug. Contents | Feedback | Search DRCNet Library | Schaffer Library | Major Studies | LaGuardiaCommittee Report WT02-B02-22IA086-000614-B048-275http://206.61.184.43:80/schaffer/Library/studies/fada/fada2.htm 206.61.184.43 19970122023324 text/html 95235HTTP/1.0 200 OKDate: Wednesday, 22-Jan-97 02:33:14 GMTServer: WebSitePro/1.1f (S/N wpo-0deb)Allow-ranges: bytesContent-type: text/htmlLast-modified: Saturday, 28-Dec-96 07:06:50 GMTContent-length: 95017 Drug-Law Enforcement Efforts The Facts About Drug Abuse The Drug Abuse Council, 1980 Drug-Law Enforcement Efforts John R. Pekkanen When the city of San Francisco passed an ordinance n 1875banning the smoking o opium in opium dens." it marked thefirst time a law prohibiting the use of narcotics was enacted inthis country. Since then cities, states and the federalgovernment have enacted a great number of drug laws. Some havebeen stringent, others more lenient. Some were passed duringpolitically volatile periods when "get tough"approaches were thought to be the answer; others were passedduring calmer times when more moderate approaches were sought. To understand why we embarked on a course of prohibition forparticular drugs is a difficult and elusive undertaking, tooaffected by deeply rooted attitudes and prejudices to allow forcompletely dispassionate inquiry. Drug laws from their inceptionwere a special breed. In effect, the passage of these prohibitorylaws created crimes by definition; drug activities derived theircriminal label more from prevailing attitudes and prejudices thanfrom actual threats to persons or property. These were laws bywhich people could and did express social disapproval, and werenot in the tradition of laws enacted to protect us from those whosteal, murder, or commit fraud. They were the means by whichright and wrong were distinguished according to popular butarbitrary national values and mores. In many instances, a proposed drug law would begin as anattempt to control the use of a certain substance, such as opium,cocaine, or marijuana. The rhetoric surrounding the proposedantidrug law would usually call for the preservation ofpredominant social and moral values, and it would be offered as ameans of restoring those "lost" values. Frequently sucha law would be directed at an outcast or minority segment ofsociety identified with the use of the drug. I Supporters of thelaw would offer it as a solution to a wide range of social,moral, racial, political, and economic problems-from unemploymentand crime in the streets to preserving the white race. Early in the consideration of the Harrison Narcotic Act (thefirst major federal antinarcotics act2), there was somediscussion about the hazards of legislating morality, but thesecautions were soon put aside. In essence, the Harrison NarcoticAct was a tax law enacted to achieve a moral end, similar in thatregard to the Volstead Act prohibiting alcohol. Since then, druglaws and the enforcement policies which flow from them have neverbeen seriously challenged. In his study of alcohol prohibition, Symbolic Crusade: StatusPolitics and the American Temperance Movement,3 Joseph Gusfieldexamines the components of criminal law and separates them into"instrumental" and "symbolic" aspects.Applied to antidrug laws, the "instrumental" aspect iswhat the law states as its intention-i.e., the prevention of theuse and availability of certain drugs. The "symbolic"aspect may have an importance as great as or greater than that ofthe instrumental*: In the case of antidrug laws, part of thesymbolic function has been to define users of particular drugs asabnormal and to designate their behavior as criminal. When thislabelling process was attempted with alcohol prohibition as well, it failed because the number of alcohol users in the countrywas so large and diverse that no one group could be singled outand designated as "abnormal" exclusively because ofdrinking alcohol. *These two functions of the law were best exemplified by thereport of the National Commission on Marihuana and Drug Abuse,which called for the retention of laws against simple marijuanapossession but not enforcement of those laws. The law by itselfwould discourage use, it was argued, and not enforcing it wouldavoid stigmatizing those who did use the drug. However, the use of certain drugs, such as opium, heroin,and-until the 1970s-marijuana was most often primarily confinedto subgroups and minorities, whose separation and isolation weremore easily accomplished. This fact partly explains why onlycongressional approval was needed to ban narcotics and marijuana,while alcohol prohibition required a constitutional amendment,and why when antidrug laws have appeared to be unsuccessful theirtotal repeal has never been seriously considered, although repealwas possible with alcohol prohibition. In the material that follows, the law enforcement approach tothe control of certain drugs will be discussed from fiveperspectives: the development of the laws themselves; how theagencies charged with enforcing drug control laws have gone abouttheir task; the relationship between drug use and crime; a casestudy of the impact of the nation's "toughest" drugcontrol law, the New York State Drug Law Amendments of 1973; andthe impact of drug law enforcement on illicit drug-usingbehavior. Drug Control Laws and Policies Efforts to control certain drugs have come in cycles,focusing on specific drugs during specific periods. 4 Generally,the demand for tough drug control has been most vociferous duringperiods of economic or political turmoil in the United States.The antiopium crusade began during the depression of the 1870s;the anticocaine crusade came during a period of racial turmoil inthe South . 5 Federal sanctions against selected drugs toughenedconsiderably between 1915 and 1920, during the first "RedScare"; the prohibition of alcohol was of course alsoeffected during this period. Later, during the depression of the1930s, the entry of many Mexicans and Mexican-Americans into thelabor market in the Southwest appears to have been a major causeof the antimarijuana crusade and attendant laws. The creation ofthe Federal Bureau of Narcotics (FBN) in 1930 established thepreeminence of law enforcement in the drug field, a fact whichhas not changed over the years. The FBN's initial major drugtargets were heroin and marijuana; this policy lasted for morethan thirty five years." In the 1940s drug control activities remained relativelystable. There were no new demands for harsh laws or policies.States adopted legislation comparable to the Harrison Act, themajor federal drug law, and this tightened the nation's drugprohibition policy, There were also outbreaks of concern over themisuse of legitimately produced drugs-amphetamines andbarbiturates were the most widely abused-but these drugs escapedthe full force of the antidrug effort. By 1950, however, theatmosphere had changed, and many voices demanded new, tougherantidrug laws.7 Between 1947 and 1950, an apparent increase in illicit druguse was reported among blacks and Puerto Ricans in many northerncities. This caused alarm, creating support for passage of a new,more stringent drug law in 1951. Commonly called the Boggs Actafter its sponsor, the late Representative Hale Boggs, it enactedthe harshest penalties for drug law violations to date . 8Historian David Musto notes in The American Disease, "HaleBoggs's bill, which contained mandatory sentences, was passed in1951 at the beginning of the McCarthy era and fears of Sovietaggression, the 'betrayal' of China to the Communists, andsuspicion of domestic groups and persons who seemed to threatenoverthrow of the government."" In 1956 an even moresevere federal narcotics bill was enacted which empowered a juryto impose the death penalty on anyone over the age of eighteenselling heroin to anyone Under the age of eighteen. 10 Severalstates also enacted extremely harsh laws during this period,imposing heavy penalties for both sellers and users. This "tough" approach was eventually moderated: themid-1960s marked the beginning of a more comprehensive approachto drug law enforcement. New criminal laws regulated"dangerous drugs"-i.e., legally produced hallucinogens,stimulants, and depressants. These laws were more moderate intone and substance, and marked a belated attempt at more uniformpolicy at the federal level for the control of legitimate andillegitimately produced drugs. The previous concern had beenexclusively with a very few illicit drugs like heroin, cocaine,and marijuana. The present era in drug law enforcement, an outgrowth of the1960s, was inaugurated during the Nixon administration whichorganized an intensified, coordinated federal antidrug program.This was the heralded "war on drug abuse."" TheComprehensive Drug Abuse Prevention and Control Act of 1970replaced the former crazy-quilt of criminal drug law statuteswhich had been gradually patched together since the beginning ofthe century. 12 Through the Controlled Substances Act portion ofthe legislation, psychoactive drugs were placed into fiveschedules according to their presumed potential hazards. Thefederal drug bureaucracy, which had gradually grown since the1920s, was restructured and further expanded. As important as these steps were in modernizing the Americanapproach to drug control and in moderating the Draconian criminalpenalties of the 1950s, the new era did not break significantlywith the past in any fundamental way. The law enforcementapproach to drug use remained fixed and, except for a relativelybrief period, continued to receive the bulk of federal dollarsexpended in the drug field. Popular notions about drugs were notsignificantly altered, nor were traditional responses seriouslyquestioned. The beliefs in the almost mystical power of illicitdrugs over people may have become more sophisticated, but theydid not change radically. Users of opiate drugs, instead of beingviewed merely as criminals, were now charitably viewed as"sick" criminals. But they were still viewed ascriminals, and still are. Perhaps one of the most important ideas to remain unchangedwas the belief in a direct link between illicit drugs and crime.This presumed link, which had been the basis for the harsh druglaws of the past, remained a permanent fixture. The nature ofthis assumed relationship-as is discussed in later sections ofthis chapter-has undergone some changes, but the basic belief ina causal link has not. Whatever the causes and motives behind the nation's druglaws, the inescapable conclusion from the more than one hundredyears of experience since the first prohibitory law was enactedis that they have not stopped or even diminished the use ofillicit drugs. For example, in 1924 the U.S. Public HealthService estimated the opiate addict population at two hundredfifteen thousands ; although imprecise, this figure is consideredto be the most reliable of that period. In 1976 the NationalInstitute on Drug Abuse (NIDA) estimated the heroin addictpopulation at five hundred thousand; other recent studiesindicate that the figure for all types of heroin users may be twoto four million. 14 Allowing for population increases, there aremore heroin users today than there were a half century ago. Thesame appears to hold true for users of other illicit drugs. Because of such findings, our drug laws and policies are moreopenly questioned today than at any point in the past. On onehand there are those who argue that government has no right atall to intervene in the private lives of individuals. This viewholds that drug use is essentially a private act, and thattherefore government ought not intervene unless drug-taking leadsto socially disruptive or criminal behavior. A more pragmaticaspect of this position is the feeling that laws and policies cando little to diminish the supply of illicit substances because ofthe enormous profitability involved and the consequentdevelopment of highly organized "black market"distribution networks. It is argued that the government'sresources could be better used in attempting to change theconditions that contribute to illicit drug use-i.e., poverty,unemployment, and other social problems-than to continueself-defeating efforts to eliminate the supply and use ofparticular drugs. On the other hand, there are those who feel the government'santidrug effort is doing about as well as can be expected incutting back the supply of illicit drugs, short of abridgingeveryone's civil liberties. They argue that if law enforcementprograms did not attempt to diminish supply and frighten someindividuals from using drugs, our drug problems might be fargreater than they are. Then there are those who argue we are notdoing nearly enough, that more severe and repressive approachesand policies are needed if we are to combat and eradicate the"enemy, drug abuse." In its extreme form, this latterview holds that no price is too great to pay in order to achievethis end. However, much of the debate over drug control laws has failedto focus sufficiently on the difficulties involved in enforcingthem. Passing a drug law is only one part of a control effort;enforcing it is quite another. It is important to understand thateven when operating at maximum effectiveness, there are seriouslimits to what law enforcement agencies can achieve. One of the primary problems that American drug lawenforcement must face is that the drug laws and drug policieshave been consistently oversold by public officials. Burglarylaws are not expected to eliminate burglary, and penalties forarmed robbery are not expected to eliminate that crime; yet druglaws are expected to eliminate illicit drug sale and use- astandard has been set for drug laws that was never set for otherlaws. More has frequently been promised than could possibly bedelivered. Consequently, as long as illicit drug use haspersisted, the policies against it have been regarded by some asabject failures. What is needed in any discussion of drug controlpolicies is a realistic notion of what they can and cannotachieve, and what their costs and benefits are. Only when weunderstand this will the long cycle of overreaction to the use ofparticular drugs subside. Law Enforcement Activities Basically, there are two strategies by which law enforcementseeks to discourage illicit drug use: The first seeks to disruptand discourage use by enforcing domestic laws against drug useand internal trafficking; the second seeks to prevent supplies ofillicit drugs from entering the country, either by preventingtheir cultivation abroad or by intercepting shipments to theUnited States. The latter strategy is largely the work of federalagents, although state and local agencies may occasionallyparticipate. The efforts to control illicit drug use within theUnited States are conducted by federal, state, and local agents.Occasionally these different levels of government join forces andwork together; all too frequently, however, they actindependently, jealously guarding their "turf" (i.e.,their resources and sources of information) from one another. At the federal level the Drug Enforcement Administration(DEA), at present the chief drug enforcement agency, has overfour thousand employees, of whom over two thousand are agents. 15(While this number may sound impressively large, it merelyapproximates the size of the New York City Transit AuthorityPolice, a force that patrols the subways and buses in that city).Several other federal agencies play various roles in theenforcement of federal drug laws: Among these are the CustomsService, which attempts to screen incoming persons and freightfor illicit drugs; the Internal Revenue Service, which pursuestax law violations of illicit drug traffickers; the LawEnforcement Assistance Administration, which provides researchand funding support for state and local drug enforcement; and theU.S. Coast Guard, which patrols coastlines and harbor areas forillicit drug trafficking. At the state and local level there is a substantially largernumber of personnel actively engaged in drug enforcement-thepolice; but an exact count is not available, since regular-patrolmen generally enforce drug laws along with their otherduties. Special narcotics units have been established invirtually every major-city police department as well as in manystate police departments; most major cities also give some druglaw enforcement training to their uniformed patrolmen. The strategies for controlling both drug use and suppliesincorporate a number of variables. The analyses that followattempt to summarize each strategy and identify some of theircosts and benefits. Controlling Drug Use. Drug enforcement is unlike most othertypes of police enforcement activities where generally a crime iscommitted and reported and the police investigate, gatheringevidence and making their case. The victim is central to thisprocess; he or she initiates the police investigation; it isoften the testimony of the victim during the trial that convictsthe offender. In drug cases, police usually do not have victims on whom torely. Not only are there no complainants, but everyone involvedconspires to conceal the crime from the police. As a result mostillicit drug offenses go entirely undetected; the percentage ofviolations which result in arrest are extremely low.17 Of those drug violations which do result in arrest, more than75 percent are "spontaneous" arrests involving no priorpolice investigation. 18 These drug arrests are often incidentalto an another investigation. For example, if the driver of anautomobile is stopped for a traffic violation and the arrestingofficer sees marijuana or suspects its presence and findsevidence of a drug law offense, a drug arrest may follow. Sucharrests are not due to any overall drug enforcement strategy, butare rather the result of normal, day-to-day police enforcementactivities. This helps explain why the overwhelming number ofdrug arrests are for simple possession, with a majority of theseinvolving marijuana. Arrests for simple illicit drug possession have little if anyimpact on the overall availability of illicit drugs because theylargely fail to affect drug distribution. The major distributorsof illicit drugs conduct their drug transactions in secret, and,as in other activities involving drugs, there are nocomplainants. Major drug dealers have developed verysophisticated methods of concealment, including drop systems andother subterfuges. Even well-known dealers are usually able toavoid creating probable cause for arrest. Because of this secrecyand the absence of complainants, the fundamental problem policeface in making arrests for drug trafficking is proving thatsomething illegal took place. While this can be difficult enoughin cases of simple possession, it is extremely difficult withdrug trafficking, particularly in developing the so-called"high-level" cases. While many who use illicit drugsparticipate to some degree in drug distribution (whether forprofit or not), those who import and deal in large quantities ofparticular illicit drugs are not easy to identify, apprehend, orsuccessfully prosecute. Undercover Investigations. Narcotics officers at the federal,state, and local levels often work undercover, and may becomeparticipants in aspects of the offense in order to gathersufficient evidence to prove a crime has been committed. Thiswork is hazardous, time-consuming, and, as one former DeputyAttorney General told Congress, "a dirty, miserablebusiness.""' The most serious practical shortcoming ofundercover operations is that, despite the publicity suchoperations receive when successful, they result in the arrest ofonly a miniscule proportion of those engaged in major drugtrafficking. Moreover, each undercover operation is sotime-consuming, and the number of policemen with the temperamentand skill for this work so limited, that the percentage of majorarrests would not increase substantially even if every undercoveroperation were successful. These problems of investigation are as true at federal as atstate and local levels. In fact, one of the persistent criticismsof the federal drug enforcement effort is that the overwhelmingmajority of arrests are of relatively low-level dealers. A 1975analysis by the Government Accounting Office of 1974 DrugEnforcement Administration (DEA) arrests revealed that only 604(3.6 percent) of the total 16,796 arrests were Class I violators,and of these only 63 were convicted. 20 (Class I violators aremajor international drug traffickers, drug laboratory operators,or wholesalers.)" In addition, GAO found only 5 percent ofthe arrests to be Class 11 violators, a lesser but stillsignificant category of offenders. However, followingcongressional hearings and considerable public criticism, DEAappears to have made a major effort to pursue more Class I and Hoffenders even at the expense of overall arrest figures. DEAstatistics for 1976 show only 6,143 total drug arrests, but ofthese 15 percent were for Class I and 1 1. 9 percent for Class 11offenses. Still, nearly three-quarters of the arrests were ClassIII and IV arrests, a statistic that indicates that major drugtrafficking arrests continue to be elusive in spite of increasedefforts . 22 An important consequence of undercover operations is thatwith arrest and trial of the suspect the undercover officer'scover is "blown" and his usefulness in that line ofwork in that region is usually ended. This is a serious problem,because good undercover officers are few and far between.Undercover operations also pose a number of legal problems; forexample, defense attorneys often argue, sometimes successfully,that the undercover officer is guilty of "entrapment"by having enticed the defendant into committing the crime inquestion. Another hazard here is the potential for police corruption.The possibility of corruption through payoffs is always present,because the sums of money involved in illicit drug traffic areenormous-generally estimated to involve several billions ofdollars nationally per year-and because the salaries of policemenare generally rather low. Additionally, substantial amounts of"buy" money are provided by law enforcement agenciesfor this work; in fiscal year 1976, for example, the DEA budgetcalled for $9 million for "buy" money to be used inprocuring information and allowing agents to "buy into"drug transactions in the gathering of evidence .23 All major-cityand state narcotics enforcement agencies have substantial amountsof this "buy" money. With these great sums of money thepossibilities for corruption can be great. Temptation can beabetted by the fact that the undercover agent is operating in alawless environment where one's normal sense of right and wrongcan become distorted. In New York City the corruption ofnarcotics investigators reached serious proportions .24 After theKnapp Commission revelations, the New York City Police Departmentinstituted a procedure whereby any undercover officer on theStreet Crime Unit is required to obtain specific approval by asuperior officer to make a drug arrest, and, furthermore, thatarrest must be witnessed by the superior officer. This rathercumbersome policy is still in effect today. Not all forms of corruption involve money, however. Asmentioned above, there can also be a corruption of attitudecaused by a police officer's constant exposure to the mores ofthe underworld. In Buy and Bust Mark Moore writes, "They[undercover agents] will know more about the violation and theviolators they attack than police usually do, and will sometimeshave personal interests at stake in the arrests. This invitesthem to exercise their authority in accordance with theirintimate knowledge rather than what the law requires. 1125 Forexample, in some cases undercover police might protect certaindealers who have acted as informants and select others forarrest. Such choices are made not on the basis of law but uponpast collaboration or even friendship. Close relationships bredby undercover ' work can influence a police officer to change hisviews on the law, what it means, and his requirements to upholdit. 211 Intelligence Gathering. Many critics have argued that if drugenforcement agencies were to gather and organize intelligence ina more systematic way, more could be done to successfullyinvestigate major drug traffickers. Such intelligence presumablywould give more detailed information about the methods drugtraffickers employ and accordingly provide a better overallpicture of trafficking operations. However, the assumption thatbetter intelligence would lead to more successful enforcementhere is open to question. Nevertheless, this debate doeshighlight another basic problem: That drug enforcement agentstraditionally have been hostile toward intelligence functionsperformed by special units within their own agencies. As Moorenotes, "No investigator would be happy to admit [to anintelligence analyst] that he had not mined the files of hisorganization for every nugget of relevant information. 1117 Oneresult is that different agents with different items ofinformation, which if systematically collected and analyzed mightprovide greater information about drug transactions and networks,often do not share it. Thus the efforts of intelligence unitswithin the DEA and other drug enforcement agencies are oftenthwarted. I Lack of Coordination. Although many state and local policeagencies rely on federal help to train and establish theirnarcotics units, there is a notable absence of uniformity andcoordination between the various levels of law enforcementagencies. As a police chief in one large American city hasremarked, It's always been a problem over the years to sort out theroles of federal, state and local agencies. My obligations to thecitizens of my city are not the same as the Bureau of Narcoticsand Dangerous Drugs [now the DEA], for example. They take asystems approach, then make a management by objectives analysis,they can target people and work on them. In the metropolitanpolice departments, such as this one, we're at the low rung ofthe law enforcement ladder, and we can't do that. We have to beresponsive to the citizen who calls in with just a meager amountof information but expects and is entitled to action on it. 28 Overlapping jurisdictions, as well as the different emphasesgiven to different drugs and to various aspects of enforcementmodels, have created conflict. As a result, some local policebelieve federal drug enforcement should confine itself tointerstate and international trafficking and should not involveitself in "local" investigations. While the basic assumption has been that local police willenforce laws against small-time street dealers and users, statepolice will enforce laws against the larger dealers, and thefederal government will concentrate on the major traffickers andwholesalers, this has not always been the case. The federalgovernment investigates cases throughout the country, sometimesinforming state or local police agencies and sometimes not doingso; its cases do not necessarily involve truly major interstateor international violations. Because of these overlaps, the threelevels of drug enforcement remain to this day uncoordinated,competitive, and at times conflicting. This continuing lack ofcoordination, coupled with the other pitfalls of domestic drugenforcement, have at times led to an acute sense of frustrationon the part of police, policymakers, and the public. As aconsequence, excessive measures periodically find support. Onerecent, well-known example of this process of frustration andoverreaction involved the now defunct Office of Drug Abuse LawEnforcement. ODALE: A Case History. The Office of Drug Abuse LawEnforcement (ODALE) was established in early 1972 by executiveorder of President Nixon and charged with the mission of wagingan even tougher "war" on illicit drug users and dealersthan had been attempted in the past.211 The brief history of thisshort-lived agency illustrates the excesses to which a "waron drugs" philosophy can lead. It also highlights thedifficult position of drug law enforcement in attempting toenforce the law justly without overstepping constitutionalsafeguards. ODALE was criticized from its inception for being an"election-year stunt" while being simultaneously laudedas a bold attempt to fight drug traffickers. ODALE was ostensiblycontrolled by the justice Department but actually operated bydirection of the White House. Its initial creation was somethingof a curiosity in that the federal government already had twocompeting agencies, the Bureau of Narcotics and Dangerous Drugs(BNDD) and the Customs Bureau, in the forefront of its drugcontrol effort. ODALE's potential for engendering yet morebureaucratic rivalry was soon realized; within the space of a fewmonths, the agency had eclipsed the other traditional federaldrug enforcement efforts in influence. 30 ODALE was staffed by employees from a number of federalagencies, including BNDD, Customs, the Internal Revenue Service(IRS), and the Bureau of Alcohol, Tobacco, and Firearms. Theagents from these departments were deployed into "strikeforces" which were authorized to use "no-knock"search warrants, court-authorized wiretaps, and other searchprivileges when "incidental to arrest." Furthermore,ODALE could forward the names of suspected drug traffickers to aspecial committee in IRS which could then initiate special auditsor investigations of them.31 ODALE received most of its funds from the Law EnforcementAssistance Administration (LEAA), which is empowered by Congressto fund state and local law enforcement units. While it was notwithin the authority of LEAA to directly fund ODALE, a federalagency, this barrier was skirted by having LEAA make grants tolocal police departments participating in drug raids with ODALEagents. This funding process also allowed ODALE to circumventbudget appropriation proceedings in Congress. These steps, whileapparently within the letter of the law, were not in its spirit,but they went largely unchallenged in the name of fighting"drug abuse. "32 One of ODALE's first acts was to establish the "heroinhotline," a toll-free number which people could call if theyknew or suspected someone of dealing in illicit drugs. Althoughthe "hotline" received abundant publicity itsaccomplishments in aiding drug enforcement were minimal at most.Only a few months after it was installed, "hotline"callers were told by a recording to call another number; the"hotline" was out of business .33 The excesses this new agency fostered came vividly to lighton the night of April 23, 1973 in Collinsville, Illinois, whenODALE agents broke into the house of Mr. and Mrs. Herbert J.Giglotto, asleep at the time, routed them out of bed, roughedthem up, and accused them of drug dealing. But the ODALE agentshad made a mistake and come to the wrong house. They made asecond mistaken raid in another home that very night. Theseevents led to the suspension of the involved agents. Eventuallythey were brought to trial on criminal charges, but wereacquitted.34 The adverse publicity generated by the Collinsville raidscrippled ODALE's effectiveness and power. But the creation ofthat agency and the extraordinary powers given to it demonstratehow the impulse to combat the use of particular drugs and theuncritical attitude accompanying that impulse can lead to anoverzealous approach which can seriously erode constitutionalsafeguards. The excesses of ODALE were almost predictable, as inpast instances when the climate for stamping out illicit drug usewas equally extreme. A number of questions surround ODALE even after itsbureaucratic demise. Was it created solely to combat illicit druguse? Why was such a unique agency with unique powers believed tobe needed? The answers to these questions are not and may neverbe clear, because of different interpretations of what ODALE wasor attempted to be. What does seem to be clear, however, is thatODALE represented one more attempt to allay public fears bystriking hard at illicit drug use with tough enforcement. What isalso clear is that in spite of the hoopla surrounding itsinception, ODALE's arrest statistics reveal that virtually everyindividual arrested by the agency was a minor, street-leveldealer of little or no consequence. 35 Controlling Drug Supplies. In addition to efforts to controlthe numbers of users and distributors of illicit drugs throughthe criminal justice process, the federal government also hassought to reduce the quantity of illicit drugs available for use.There are two ways American law enforcement agencies have soughtto control the supply of illicit drugs: intercepting them as theycome into the country, and destroying them at their source inother countries. Interdiction. Many of the illicit drugs used in this countryare produced in foreign nations. One exception is marijuana,which is grown both within and without the United States,although the bulk of it is produced in foreign countries; otherexceptions are synthetic psychoactive drugs produced inlaboratories (rather than refined from a harvested plant)-e.g.,amphetamines, barbiturates, and some hallucinogens. Cocaine andheroin, officially considered to be the major illicit drugs ofabuse in the United States, originate in other countries. Anobvious --some might say simplistic-drug control strategy is totry to prevent these illicit substances from reaching thiscountry. Upon closer examination, this strategy proves to be anawesome task. Anyone who has ever passed through American Customs at theCanadian or Mexican borders or our sea- or airports realizes thatthere is rarely any thorough inspection. The vast numbers whodaily cross into and out of American jurisdiction make thoroughinspection of every traveler a practical impossibility. Inaddition, American borders have traditionally been open;constitutional safeguards define the manner and circumstances ofsearches. Successful seizures of illicit drugs therefore dependmore on intelligence information than on the luck of randomsearches. This intelligence information is usually supplied byAmerican drug agents in foreign countries, who attempt toidentify drug traffickers to later be either arrested at theborder or kept under surveillance and arrested within the UnitedStates. * However, even with good intelligence information, preventingillicit drugs from entering this country is a difficult, indeednearly impossible task .311 When the estimated amount of illicitdrugs consumed in this nation is compared with amount seized atour borders or other ports of entry, it is clear that only a verysmall percentage of the drugs being smuggled into the country areconfiscated. It is estimated, for example, that from twelve to twentythousand pounds of high-purity heroin are smuggled into thiscountry each year"; but in fiscal year 1974 only 115 poundsof high-purity heroin was seized at all U.S. borders and ports.This means that, combining this with the amount of heroin seizedinternally by the authorities in domestic operations, only 670pounds of heroin were confiscated that year .38 By fiscal year1976, after intensive effort, domestic seizures had increased toa total of 1,124 pounds of heroin, still far short of the totalincoming amount. The publicity accorded these seizures, however,often has conveyed the impression that law enforcement agenciesare making major inroads against illicit drug smuggling. To alarge extent this publicity has been generated by the agencyinvolved in the seizure, for both political and bureaucraticreasons. Perhaps the most widely used technique for embellishing theimportance of a seizure of illicit drugs is to state the"street value" of the seized drug.311 A seizure offifteen pounds of heroin, therefore, might not be merely afifteen-pound seizure, but a seizure of "thirty milliondollars' worth of drugs." The "street value"figure is elastic and sometimes exaggerated; it often reflectsthe most optimistic price a dealer might possibly ask for hisdrugs. This is analogous to estimating the value of rustledcattle by the price they would bring as steaks at the bestrestaurants. What is omitted in these claims of the "streetvalue" of drugs seized is the fact that between $5 and $11billion worth of illicit drugs is sold in this country each year.40 Thus, $30 million or even $300 million, while significant, isstill but a tiny fraction of the total, and has little if anyimpact on the total amount of illicit sales. However, whenseizures drop, enforcement agencies frequently also use thedecline to indicate the success of their efforts. *Additionally, international interdiction also has includedinvestigations by U.S. agents abroad in cooperation with foreigngovernments, and the arrests of drug traffickers in certaincountries. However, U.S. agents are now prohibited by law fromparticipating in the arrest of individuals in foreign countries. By this self-serving logic, the drug law enforcement agenciesnearly always can appear to be successful. Although drug seizure data have often been misused bycompeting drug agencies to enhance their public images, seizurescan have a disruptive effect and present an economic risk to drugtraffickers. In addition, limited amounts of these drugs are ofcourse kept out of the illicit market. Historically, border interdiction has been a major source ofrivalry among the federal agencies charged with controllingillicit drugs-specifically, between the Customs Bureau and thejustice Department's drug agencies, from the Federal Bureau ofNarcotics to the Bureau of Narcotics and Dangerous Drugs to thepresent Drug Enforcement Administration." Governmentreorganizations, as well as a number of other attempts toreconcile these disputes-such as specifying which internationalareas each agency should be responsible for-have not completelysucceeded in quieting this rivalry, although DEA's incorporationof some of the drug enforcement duties of Customs has certainlyallayed it. These jurisdictional disputes have appeared at many criticalpoints in the federal drug enforcement effort. For example, whendrug agents in a foreign country obtain information regarding asignificant drug-smuggling attempt, this information wouldideally be relayed to the U.S., in order to effect an arrest onU.S. territory; here, however, the federal drug law enforcementprocess often broke down. In some cases Customs would insist thatthe drugs be intercepted at the border, to make certain they didnot enter the country, while FBN, BNDD, or DEA would insist thatthe smuggler be allowed through the border, whence he might leadto "higher ups" in the smuggling operation. In point offact, however, many times the true reason for these differenceswas the desire of each agency to make the drug seizure and arrestitself. The competing agencies eventually began circumventing oneanother, refusing to reveal what they were doing or whom theywere investigating. Sometimes one agency would deliberatelyinterrupt the investigation of another with a premature arrest.In one celebrated instance, two agencies, unknown to one another,were involved in the same investigation; in a showdown shootingerupted, with agents from two federal agencies of the UnitedStates government mistakenly shooting at each other." Howoften disruptions of this kind occurred is difficult to estimate,but it is clear that the rivalry was a serious impediment toeffective federal drug control and an embarrassment to thegovernment generally. Another problem with border interdiction is simply that ourborders with both Mexico and Canada are so easily accessible;trying to make them less accessible in order to seize more drugswould not only erode freedom of entrance and egress, but probablywould not work anyway. As noted, the major border drug seizuresgenerally result from intelligence information supplied to borderagents. Few illicit drugs are uncovered in random searches, asOperation Intercept-an attempt to cut off drug supplies at theMexican border-amply demonstrated in September 1969. That effortaffords another illustration of the ineffectiveness of extrememeasures taken in the name of fighting illicit drugs. Operation Intercept: A Case History. The Mexican border hastraditionally been a major trafficking point, both because largequantities of illicit drugs are produced in Mexico and becausethe 1,945-mile border is mostly unguarded. In addition to bridgeand river crossings, it is believed that 200 aircraft carryingillicit drugs daily fly illegally from Mexico into the UnitedStates. 43 In September 1909 President Nixon ordered "the country'slargest peacetime search and seizure operation by civilauthorities" along the United States-Mexico border. 44 Twothousand Customs and border patrol agents began systematicallysearching all cars and persons coming from Mexico into the UnitedStates. There were delays of several hours in what is normally avery quick crossing process over the border. Individuals whoappeared suspicious or argumentative were often stripped andbodily searched. The tourism traffic between the two countrieswas seriously interrupted. And although more than five millionpeople passed over this border during the three weeks OperationIntercept was in full gear, virtually no heroin or any otherillicit drug was confiscated. In defense of the project, thegovernment later explained that its primary intention was not tointerdict drugs at the border, but rather to pressure Mexico intoeradicating its crops of marijuana and Opium.41 While it may havehad this effect eventually, the project had little direct impacton illicit drug trafficking. Elimination of the Supply. The most recent major Americansupply reduction strategy is "eradication at thesource." This policy was created in part because of the lackof success in controlling supply through traditional domesticenforcement and international interdiction and in part becauseadvanced technology seemed to make it more feasible than before.In brief, the objective is to eliminate the crops which furnishillicit drugs to the American market. Bolivia, Peru, and Columbia are the major U.S. sources ofcocaine, while opium (the raw material for heroin) is grown inmany countries throughout the world, including Thailand,Cambodia, Vietnam, Mexico, Turkey, India, and Iran. Marijuana isgrown throughout Mexico and Central and South America in additionto the United States. However, heroin is the major drug priorityof the federal government, and the most advanced"eradication at the source" program underway now isagainst the opium poppy. Although substantial amounts ofcocaine-from fifteen to one hundred tons annually-regularly flowinto the United States, cocaine remains a lower priority .411 Nomajor cocaine eradication program has been attempted, because ofthe hardy nature of the coca plant (from which cocaine isderived) and because these plants are grown near drinking watersupplies and closely intermingled with food crops, makingeradication programs extremely difficult if not impossible toaccomplish in safety. Marijuana, despite official disclaimers ofinterest, results in the greatest annual seizures47 and is theobject of current American-supported eradication efforts inMexico .41 The key to any eradication program's success is thecooperation of the foreign government in whose country the drugis grown and the ability of that government to effect aneradication policy in its rural areas. Basically, the theory oferadication rests on the simple premise that if opium poppies ormarijuana plants are-eliminated in sufficient numbers the drugthey produce will also be largely eliminated. To this end, theUnited States now actively participates in eradication programsfor both of these illicit drugs. Opium poppies are grown in many regions of the world; nospecial climate or soil conditions are needed. The mainrequirement is cheap, abundant manual labor to do the painstakingwork of harvesting. It is estimated that only sixty to onehundred tons of raw opium are required each year to supply theentire illicit U.S. market with heroin, an amount which could beproduced from only ten square miles of opium poppies." (Onehundred tons of opium yields approximately ten tons of pureheroin5O; the raw opium, which is extracted directly from theopium poppy, is converted into a morphine base and then intoheroin by a relatively simple cooking and chemical-bondingprocess.) There are two other significant factors which work againstthe success of the eradication strategy. First, the opium poppyhas a long tradition in many cultures where it is grown; it isused for fodder, fuel, oil, and as a pain-killing agent. In manyregions of the world indigenous families have been growing opiumpoppies for centuries. Second, opium poppies are a valuable cashcrop in those regions. Even when sold legally, the poppy cropssupport many farmers and their families. There are few substitutecrops that will earn more per unit of land.51 Although the United States has encouraged worldwideprohibition of illicit opium cultivation through bilateral andmultilateral agreements for more than sixty years, these effortshave largely failed. One of the reasons for this is that ourprohibition of heroin has inflated the price of the drug, therebymaking it even more profitable to cultivate opium poppiesillegally. In 1971 this country launched a major effort to restrict thecultivation of foreign opium when it reached an agreement withTurkey to ban the cultivation of opium poppies there. In return,the United States agreed to reimburse the Turkish government $35million for lost revenues. (Ultimately, only part of this amount was actually paid toTurkey. )52 Although the United States selected Turkey as thesite for trying its new policy because Turkish opium was believedto account for 80 _percent of the illicit heroin used in theU.S., there was no way to verify this estimate, since it isnearly impossible to trace heroin back to its original source. 53It is in fact uncertain that Turkish opium poppies did supply 80percent of American heroin, since it is also believed that Turkeygrew only about 8 percent of the world's opium poppies.54 Inaddition, the existence of other opium-growing areas and theprofitability of the American heroin trade would make thelong-term impact of such a ban questionable; other countriesgrowing larger amounts of opium had controls as lax as Turkey's,and much of the opium from these countries also found its wayinto the black market. It has also been suggested that Turkey wasselected because, as a NATO ally, it was more susceptible to U.S.leverage than many other countries. Whatever the reasons for choosing Turkey, the results of theopium ban not only failed to stop the flow of heroin into thiscountry but seriously strained relations between the twocountries until Turkey unilaterally rescinded the ban in 1975 .5-1 In place of the opium-growing ban, the Turkish government atthis time initiated a centralized poppy-harvesting method calledthe "poppy straw process": This process requires thatthe opium poppies be harvested whole rather than lanced, meaningthat the raw opium is brought to secure, central locations beforethe extraction process is carried out, and forbids farmers tolance the poppy pods themselves. This change has reduced if noteliminated the export of illicit Turkish opium. This stoppage ofTurkish opium, however, led to a substantial increase in illicitheroin from Mexican sources. As one study noted, Although the opium ban in Turkey, together with a majorenforcement effort in France which broke up a ring of French andFrench-Corsican chemists and traffickers in 1973, did put atemporary crimp in the supply of heroin in the U.S., Mexicanopium growers and traffickers rapidly took over the market. By1975 the U.S. government was declaring that over 80 percent ofthe heroin available in the U.S. came from Mexico, instead ofTurkey. " As the illicit Turkish opium supply dwindled and the price ofheroin rose in response, the economics of heroin trafficking thusbecame even more favorable, and new suppliers were attracted toit. For example, in opium-producing countries an investment of$250 now buys one ounce of 90 percent pure heroin; when cut withforty dollars' worth of quinine, thereby converting the originalounce of heroin into one kilo of 21/2 percent purity (an averagelevel for American heroin), the value becomes $15 per gram, or atotal of $15,000 for the original investment of $290. 57 Theseeconomics keep the international heroin market flourishing andmake significant and lasting eradication extremely difficult toaccomplish. Mexican heroin-noted for its brown color, a result of therefining process which has no effect on the quality of theheroin-quickly filled the vacuum created by the Turkish poppyban. In fact, heroin is a great economic boon to regions innorthern Mexico; that mountainous and largely inaccessible regionproduces some twenty tons of heroin a year. As noted in onereport on the Mexican heroin trade, Assuming, however, that only the 10 tons of heroin (from thetri-state area) reached the border where it would sell in 1975 at$45,000 a kilo (border value), the value of that crop alone wouldbe $450 million. The heroin crop alone is thus Mexico's mostvaluable commodity. Sugar, shrimp, coffee and cotton, the nextfour most valuable commodities, do not total $450 milliontogether. '8 In response to this new influx of heroin, the United Statesand Mexico agreed in 1973 to attempt another type of eradicationstrategy. Essentially, the United States agreed to providetechnical assistance and equipment for a herbicide-sprayingprogram to eradicate illicit Mexican drug producing crops.Although marijuana was included, the opium poppy was the primarytarget of the eradication program from the American point ofview. This program remains the United States' most ambitiouseradication effort. 59 During the early phases of the program less than ten thousandopium poppy fields per year were destroyed manually. These tenthousand fields represented approximately three to four thousandacres. In November 1975 aerial spraying began, and by 1976 thetotal number of fields reportedly destroyed had risen to twentythousand. In 1977, some forty seven thousand poppy fields,representing an estimated fourteen thousand acres, weredestroyed. This increase was primarily due to the change frommanual to aerial herbicide spraying.60 The spraying program is conducted year-round and affectslarge sections of Mexico, including nearly half of the westerncoast. At the present time the herbicide paraquat is used toeradicate marijuana-a major goal of the Mexican government-andthe chemical "2,4-D," is used on opium poppies. Theprogram is assisted by the U.S. government in a number of ways. AState Department official recently described the Mexicaneradication effort to a congressional committee thus: The principal forms of State Department-administered supportto the Mexican drug effort have included the furnishing ofaircraft and telecommunications equipment, together with therequisite training to enable the Mexicans to use them in modernapplications to drug detection, poppy eradication, andenforcement work. Our technical assistance together with certaincommodities, is also helping them to establish and administer anetwork of forward bases in the important eradication areas andto improve intelligence collection, retrieval, and analysis.Training and salary supplements are provided to aid. the Mexican]Federal judicial Police to develop and hold a cadre of qualifiednarcotics agents."' The United States provided Mexico with approximately $50million in assistance funds for marijuana and opium poppy controlfrom 1973 to 1977. Proposed assistance for 1978 was estimated tobe about $13.3 million. Most of these funds are used to purchaseaircraft and support services for the aerial eradication program.Aircraft supplied by the United States includes more than fortyhelicopters and thirty-five fixed-wing aircraft. In addition,some twenty to twenty-five DEA agents are assigned full time withthe Mexican eradication effort to provide technical assistance.112 As an enforcement strategy, eradication at the source mayhave some advantages over other reduction and control strategies.First, there is less potential for domestic police corruption.Second, as compared to interdiction and undercover efforts it isa relatively inexpensive way of preventing illicit drugs fromentering the United States. However, the criteria for determining the success of such anoperation are uncertain. For instance, it is not known whatquantity of illicit drugs were smuggled into this country fromMexico either before the program or now. However, the StateDepartment and the Drug Enforcement Administration report thatMexican brown heroin, which formerly accounted for 80 to 85percent of the heroin available in this country, has dropped to60 to 65 percent of the total. Also, the retail and wholesaleprices of heroin have reportedly increased as much as 50 to 75percent along the U.S.-Mexican border, and increases of as muchas 150 percent have been noted. 113 However, a rise in heroinprices is not in itself a totally accurate indication of theeffects of a control strategy on heroin use. In fact, higherheroin prices may be, at best, a mixed blessing. Eradication policies, when they successfully interruptillicit drug production, as the Mexican opium poppy program hasapparently done, may reduce the American heroin supply for atime, perhaps two or three years. In 1977, heroin-related deathsdropped approximately 40 percent in this country, a possibleindication that the eradication program was having a beneficialeffect.114 It was also reported by enforcement officials thatAmerican heroin supplies in 1978 were at their lowest level inseveral years; however, they admit they have little hard evidenceon which to base that estimate. Moreover, as will be discussedlater, reducing the heroin supply may lead to other socialproblems. There are a number of possible side-effects to such aneradication program which must also be considered. For example,Mexican marijuana sprayed with paraquat has reached the UnitedStates; samples seized near the border after the eradicationprogram began showed that 21 percent were contaminated withsignificant levels of paraquat.115 It has been indicated thatparaquat may pose a significant health danger to those who ingestit. The Secretary of the Department of Health, Education, andWelfare announced a National Institute on Drug Abuse study inMarch 1978. The report's preliminary findings suggest that if anindividual smokes three to five heavily contaminated marihuanacigarettes each day for several months, irreversible lung damagewill result. The report cautions, however, that there could be arisk of lung damage for individuals who use marihuana less oftenor in smaller amounts. Although these results are preliminary,the report concludes that Paraquat contamination may pose aserious risk to marihuana smokers. 66 Although one might argue that anyone who uses an illegalsubstance like marijuana must bear the consequences and therisks, the fact remains that as many as forty-five millionAmericans have tried marijuana and approximately eleven millionare regular users. The preponderance of medical evidence to dateshows that marijuana is a relatively harmless intoxicant whenused moderately. Therefore, it seems ironic that an officialprogram may itself produce a serious health risk for theindividual smoker, when the ostensible reason for prohibition inthe first place was to protect users from harming themselves. The eradication strategy has another shortcoming as well:Experience has shown that as one opium supply system isdiminished, another develops to take its place, at even moreattractive profits due to the rise in heroin prices caused by thetemporary shortage. Shortly after the Mexican eradication programbegan, for example, white heroin from the "GoldenTriangle" in Southeast Asia began to enter the country. Drugenforcement officials suspect that many Turkish nationals areinvolved in this Southeast Asian traffic, which suggests that theTurkish opium ban may have been more effective with the crop thanwith the traffickers. There is a larger problem, however, which holds the greatestpotential danger. If the country designated for crop eradicationefforts-in this case Mexico-is not part of a vigorous ongoingprogram, then its illicit opium production will probably berevived after the eradication efforts slow or stop. And it mayrevive at a time when other areas of the world are also producinglarge amounts of illicit heroin for the U.S. market. Then, ratherthan facing illicit heroin smuggling from only one major area,this country could be faced with two or more major supplysources. This possibility remains a strong one, because theeradication program depends upon the internal policies andpolitics of foreign governments, any one of which for any reasoncould end existing agreements and permit the former state ofaffairs to reappear. Drugs and Crime The persistent belief that illicit drug use is inextricablylinked to crime has traditionally been advanced as a reason forlaws and policies against particular drugs. A 1972 survey by theNational Commission on Marihuana and Drug Abuse found that 58percent of adults believed that marijuana users often commitcrimes they would not have committed had they not used marijuana.In that same survey, more than 90 percent of those interviewedbelieved that, in the commission's words, "Heroin usersoften commit crimes to get the money to buy more heroin. -117 Crimes that relate to illicit drugs can generally be placedinto four categories."" Two of these are not germane tothis discussion; these are crimes among individuals involved inthe illicit-drug distribution system-e.g., drug or money theftsby one drug dealer from another-and the crimes of simply using,possessing, or selling the drug itself, activities which arecriminal by definition, since they are illegal. Generally, the perceived drug and crime relationship whichmost concerns the public falls into two basic categories. Thefirst category involves the pharmacological effect of a drug onthe user. Historically, the presumed pharmacological connectionbetween illicit drug use and assaultive crime has been theimpetus behind antidrug laws. However, the evidence to date showsthat alcohol and secobarbital-both legally produced psychoactivesubstances-are the drugs most likely to be involved withsubsequent assaultive behavior. There is no substantial evidenceto link the use of any other drug, licit or illicit, withassaultive crime. Some stimulant drugs, such as the amphetamines,have reportedly led to aggressive behavior in some individuals,but there is insufficient evidence to show a causal link betweentheir use and assaultive crime. The second category consists of revenue-producing crimes likeburglary, shoplifting, and larceny. More recently, the use ofheroin has been linked to crimes of this sort. The assumption isthat the use of heroin invariably results in addiction; thatheroin addicts require ever-increasing amounts of the drug; andthat, due to the high cost of the drug on the American market,they must commit various crimes to support their use. As pointedout by the press and electronic media, the stereotypic portraitof the heroin user is of a dishevelled, trembling individualwithout motivation or legitimate source of income. However, whilethere is evidence to suggest that many heroin users may commitproperty crimes to support use, 70 nobody really knows how muchcrime is actually committed to obtain money to support heroinhabits. Police and court records do not contain this information,and estimates-which are not particularly reliable-vary, callingit anywhere from 10 to 50 percent of all revenue-producingcrimes, depending upon the type of offense and the location .71 A survey by the Law Enforcement Assistance Administration often thousand inmates of correctional facilities concluded that 13percent of the inmates had used heroin at the time of theirarrest. The same survey estimated between 13 and 60 percent ofincarcerated criminals to have been heroin users ' 12 Althoughthis kind of data suggests links between heroin use and crime,nothing was established in that survey to demonstrate that theseindividuals began to commit crimes because of their heroin use,nor does the study indicate whether the correctional populationsurveyed was typical of all those arrested, or of all committingcrimes. It may indicate a tendency to jail heroin users indisproportionate numbers. The studies which indicate that after the onset of opiateaddiction individuals generally increase their criminal activitycome closest to demonstrating a causal link between drug use andcrime .73 These studies suggest that although an individual mayhave been a criminal before he used heroin, his heavy use led toan increase in criminal activity to meet the new income need. Onits face, this implies a connection between heroin use and crime.However, there is an across-the-board increase in crime among menbetween ages eighteen and twenty-five, irrespective of drug use.74 Thus, any data suggesting increased crime because of heroinuse would have to correct for the general increase in crime forthis age bracket. The evidence relating to a heroin-crime link could best bedescribed as showing that regular, heavy opiate use in the UnitedStates probably means a higher rate of revenue-producing crime bythe addict. Because of its broad political appeal, however, thisconnection has been repeatedly overstated and even misrepresentedto support tough enforcement policies. For example, GovernorRockefeller of New York told the legislature, by way ofintroducing a "get tough" drug law, that addicts were"robbing, mugging, murdering day in and day out for theirmoney to fix their habit. "75 The state estimated that drugaddicts committed a total of $6.5 billion per year in crime. ffthat were in fact the case, it would have meant that theseaddicts were committing on the order of 44 million robberies,muggings, and murders each year in New York to support theirhabit, 400 times more than all of the reported crimes in NewYork, well beyond any conceivable total of reported andunreported.crimes in that state .711 Other data indicate that such figures had little factualbasis. The Federal Bureau of Investigation's 1971 Uniform CrimeIndex reported a total of $1.3 billion in theft in 1970 for theentire nation. Thus, New York State's claim of $6.5 billion incrime losses for New York alone exceeded the national figure byfive times .77 Another study, an economic analysis by the HudsonInstitute of New York of the extent of heroin use nationwide,estimated that in 1970 there were 250,000 addicts who wereresponsible for a maximum cf $1.7 billion in crime .78 The New York figures disseminated by Governor Rockefeller'soffice were misleading in another important respect. In New YorkCity, which is generally acknowledged to have more illicit druguse than any other American city, only a small percentage of the110,000 reported crimes in 1973 (the year of the"tougher" New York drug law's passage) were attributedby police to heroin users. The New York Police Departmentestimated only 4.4 percent of those arrested for felonies againsta person-which would include robbery, muggings, and murder-couldbe classified as heroin users, and only a small percentage ofthose users could be classified as addicts .79 In a 1974 study by the Crime Analysis Unit of the New YorkCity Police Department it was found that among arrested criminalheroin users and nonusers, the 'rates of property crime wereabout the same, suggesting that there is little difference inpatterns of property crime between them. However, the percentageof nonusers who committed serious crimes against a person wassubstantially higher than for heroin users.80 A Hudson Institutestudy reported even lower figures for assaultive property crimesamong heroin users in New York City. It reported that less than 2percent supported their heroin use by either robbery ormuggings.81 These studies call into question the more dramatic statementsabout the extent of crime committed by those who use illicitdrugs, particularly heroin. It does seem that property crimesare. committed by some unknown proportion of regular heavy heroinusers not as a result of the drug itself but of the high cost ofobtaining it in America's black market. Little hard statisticalevidence exists to show a cause-and-effect relationship betweenthe use of any drug and criminal behavior. The Impact of Demand and Price. One goal of drug enforcementis to cut back the supply of heroin and thereby raise the streetprice, which in theory will drive heroin addicts into treatment.This concept has proved to be more unpredictable and complex thansimple cause-and-effect scenarios generally concede. There arestudies which demonstrate that such law enforcement policies maybe a double-edged sword, at least in the short run. A study of heroin prices in Detroit indicates that as heroinprices rise because of diminished supply there is a consequentincrease in property crime. The study, performed by the PublicResearch Institute of the Center for Naval Analyses noted, The relationship between drug addiction and criminality iscomplex and, because of the lack of data, hard to supply. Thisstudy has shown that the level of property crime in Detroit is inpart affected by the price of heroin. When the price rises, crimerises. When the price falls, crime falls. This finding supportsthe general hypothesis that criminal heroin users as a class tryto maintain their level of consumption in the face of priceincreases, and that they rely partly on property crime for theadditional funds. The level of personal crime is little affectedby the price of heroin. 82 The Detroit study also found that the areas hardest hit bythe crime increases were the poor neighborhoods. It said,"We have preliminary evidence that poor people arevictimized by addict criminals; thus, law enforcement policiesthat tend to raise the price of heroin hurt this income class."83 The impact of many national policy shifts is often feltmost acutely in neighborhoods with the least political power;this phenomenon is particularly profound with drug policies. The reason why diminished heroin availability may lead tomore crime relates to the economics of the illicit heroin market,which lies at the raw edge of laissez-faire capitalism. It restson the fundamental economic principle of supply and demand: Whenthe supply is less, the price is more. It should be kept in mind,however, that supply is but one factor governing the price ofheroin; the purity of the drug and experience of the dealer, aswell as other factors, also affect its price. Supply of the drugremains, however, one of the strongest single influences onprice. A 1971 East Coast dock strike, for example, is believedresponsible for a temporary heroin shortage and a consequent risein street-level prices. After settlement of the strike, suppliesincreased and prices dropped, from a high in New York ofsixty-two dollars per gram (for a two-gram purchase at 10 percentpurity) to fifty dollars, all over a period of three months. 84 The predicted crime increase is of course based on the ideathat if it costs more for a heroin user to support his use and hehas no other income sources than crime, he will need to commitmore crimes to support use at the same level. Also, because manyusers support themselves by selling small quantities of drugsthere is the possibility that they could turn to other forms ofcrime besides dealing. The American experience in Vietnam in attempting to eradicateuse of a drug without fully considering the possible consequencesis also instructive. When the army clamped down on marijuana usethe demand for a drug among soldiers who had used it did notdecrease; when they could not get marijuana, they turned in largenumbers to another easily purchased and more easily concealeddrug-heroin. It was a classic example of attempting to controlsupply without addressing demand.,"* *The Vietnam drug experience also underscores other importantpoints about illicit drug use, i.e., the setting and theavailability. The setting in Vietnam, at once boring and verydangerous, created a situation which encouraged many individualsto use drugs there. Also, the fact that drug supplies were soplentiful contributed to their widespread use. Despite these occurrences the notion persists that use ofillicit drugs can be brought under control with enforcementpolicies, and that bringing it under control will in greatmeasure solve the crime problem. In part, this notion persistsbecause of the common stereotype of the heroin user as anunscrupulous individual willing to commit any crime for his nextfix. Like all stereotypes, it does not encompass the diversity ofthe individuals who use drugs compulsively. Many illicit drugusers and opiate addicts hold steady, legitimate jobs. Not allheroin users are, as previously assumed, heroin"addicts." Some, perhaps many, enjoy the euphoriceffects of heroin but do not have a compulsive need forit."' Many, perhaps most, of these would not considerstealing in order to buy their drugs. These occasional heroinusers, sometimes called "chippers," may, ifmathematical projections are correct, outnumber compulsive heroinusers by as much as six to one. 117 The very notion that they canexist is frequently met with skepticism because it is contrary tothe well-entrenched belief that to use heroin is to be addictedto it. Because heroin users are a diverse group with no uniformpatterns of drug use and widely different ways of earning money,one cannot simply multiply estimated users by a single monetaryfigure to arrive at an accurate estimate of the amount of crimethey commit. It is interesting, however, to speculate on whatmight happen to the crime rate if no heroin were available inthis country. The Nixon administration, which like otheradministrations before it adopted the conventional assumption ofa direct link between heroin and crime in many of its publicutterances, did not find such a link in a private study itcommissioned. While stating publicly that American drug-relatedcrime amounted to $18 billion a year, a 1971 White House DomesticCouncil decision paper circulated within the Executive Officenoted, "Even if all drug abuse were eradicated, there mightnot be a dramatic drop in crime statistics on a national level,since much crime is not related to drug abuse. -811 The difficulty of threading through all of the data on drugsand crime and arriving at any certainties will persist, as willthe unpredictability of the effects of various enforcementpolicies. Despite these uncertainties, however, the drug-crimeissue often invokes emotional responses having little to do withthe facts. It is therefore likely that the presumed drug-crimelink will continue to inspire "get tough" approaches todrug law enforcement in the future. The New York Drug Law During the early 1970s, a period when the country was greatlyconcerned about illicit drugs, New York State embarked on thestrictest "get tough" enforcement approach to illicitdrugs in the country. It is difficult to discern with precisionhow much of the zeal for the new law came from an angry andfrustrated citizenry and how much came from the state's leaders,or how much they coincided. In any case, the new law receivedwide national publicity and was passed amid bold promises that itwould squarely address the drug problem in that state. There was general agreement that the practice of the 1960s ofdiverting low-level drug users into treatment and meting outharsher penalties for higher-level traffickers had largelyfailed. New York had heavily committed its resources to"civil commitment" during the 1960s, a prograindescribed -at the time as a model for other states to adopt.However, 1972 overdose deaths in New York were six times greaterthan they had been in 1960; the tougher new laws were regarded bymany as a solution. The new legislation, which went into effect on September 1,1973, had two principal objectives. First, it sought to frightenillicit drug users out of using and drug dealers out oftrafficking. Second, it aimed to reduce crimes commonlyassociated with drug addiction, i.e., burglaries, robberies, andtheft; it was believed that potential illicit drug users would befrightened off by the law and that hardened criminals would begiven long prison sentences, thus reducing the crime rate.119 The new law was aimed primarily at heroin trafficking, inparticular at the lower-level "street" dealers. The lawdivided-heroin dealers into three groups, placed them in thehighest felony category in the state, and required minimumperiods of imprisonment plus mandatory lifetime parolesupervision for each group. The groups were: I. The highest level dealers. Those who sell one ounce ormore, or possess more than two ounces. These dealers weresubjected to the most severe penalty: a prison sentence ofindefinite length, but with a minimum of between fifteen andtwenty-five years and a lifetime maximum. II The middle level dealers. Those who sell one-eighth of anounce or more, or possess one or two ounces. These offenders weresubjected to prison sentences of indefinite length, with aminimum term of between six and eight-and-one-third years, and alifetime maximum. III. Street level dealers, also referred to as"sharer-pushers." Those who sell less than one-eighthof an ounce or possess up to an ounce with the intent to sell.These dealers were made liable to prison sentences of indefinitelength, with a minimum term of between one year and eight-andone-third years, and a lifetime maximum.110 The mandatory minimum prison sentences were made a majorprovision of the New York law, even though such sentences hadpreviously been abandoned in federal and state drug laws.Restrictions on plea bargaining were another controversial aspectof this law; a person indicted on a low-level felony charge wasnot permitted to plead guilty to a misdemeanor, a provision whicheventually led to court congestion and a slowdown of the judicialprocess as well as precluding any cooperation of suspects withpolice seeking information on higher-level dealers and suppliers. New York State became in effect a laboratory in which theeffectiveness of a "get tough" drug law could beexamined. By comparing the drug-related statistics for New Yorkbefore and after the new law went into effect, and by examiningsimilar statistics from neighboring states whose laws had notchanged, comparisons could be drawn and evidence could beweighed. A study commissioned by the Association of the Bar ofthe City of New York to find out the effects of the law concludedthat neither heroin use nor the crime commonly associated with itdeclined in New York State as a result of the tough newlegislation. With respect to heroin use, the study found thefollowing: Heroin use [in New York City] was as widespread in mid-1976as it had been when the 1973 revision took effect, and amplesupplies of the drug were available. The pattern of stable heroin use in New York City between1973 and mid-1976 was not appreciably different from the averagepattern in other East Coast cities. The new law may have temporarily deterred heroin use [in NewYork City and other New York State jurisdictions]- There is no evidence of a sustained reduction in heroin useafter 1973 [in New York State as a whole or in upstate New York]. Most evidence suggests that the illegal use of drugs otherthan narcotics in New York City was more widespread in 1976 thanin 1973, and that in this respect New York was not unique amongEast Coast cities." With respect to crime, the study found: Serious property crime of the kind often associated withheroin users increased sharply [in New York State] between 1973and 1975. The rise in New York State was similar to increases innearby states. There was a sharp rise in non-drug felony crimes between 1973and 1975 [in New York City]. However, the rise was apparentlyunconnected with illegal narcotics use: non-drug felony crimesknown to have been committed by narcotics users remained stableduring that period. The available evidence suggests that the recidivistsentencing [predicate felony] provisions of the 1973 law did notsignificantly deter prior felony offenders from committingadditional crimes [in New York City].92 In addition, the study found little enthusiasm for the 1973law within the criminal justice system. Many judges and prosecutors felt that the mandatory minimumsentencing provisions reduced the of individual treatment ofoffenders and, therefore, the quality of justice. Some were troubled because the penalties level drugtraffickers were more severe than those applicable to crimes thatmost citizens consider heinous.... New York City prosecutorstended to believe that the 1973 law was forcing them to scattertheir limited resources on what they considered relatively minoroffenses. (Note: The Class III (lowest level) felony accountedfor 41% of all drug indictments in New York City and 61% of thetrial workload.) ... As for the police, the New York City PoliceDepartment believed that a policy of all-out street levelenforcement would be only marginally productive and wouldhopelessly inundate the courts. 93 Because of the large volume of street-level drug activity inNew York City, the New York City Police Department had theopportunity to make large numbers of street-level arrests underthe new drug law. It did not elect to do so, for the reason thatpast efforts had been perceived as ineffective. As the studyrecorded, In 1969, the Department had implemented a policy similar tothe one implied by the new law. Large numbers of low-level drugarrests had been encouraged, and the number of felony drugarrests had risen from 7,199 in 1967 to 26,379 in 1970. In 1971,however, Police Commissioner Patrick Murphy abandoned this policybecause (a) only a small percentage of the arrests were resultingin prison or jail sentences and (b) the mass arrest policy didnot appear to be having a significant impact on the drug traffic.In the Department's view, the mass arrest policy was alsocreating serious workload problems for the courts. Immediatelyafter the change in policy, arrests fell sharply; in 1973, therewere only a little more than one-third as many as two yearsearlier.... According to Donald Cawley, New York City PoliceCommissioner when the 1973 law became effective, the Departmentdecided not to change its enforcement policies in response to the1973 legislation. The Department continued to focus itsenforcement activities on the middle and upper levels of drugdistribution rather than upon street-level drug activity." The study concluded, "The key lesson to be drawn fromthe experience with the 1973 drug law is that passing a new lawis not enough. What criminal statutes say matters a great deal,but the efficiency, morale, and capacity of the criminal justicesystem is even more of a factor in determining whether the law iseffectively implemented."95 In addition, the study notedthat implementation of the new law, which included the hiring ofnew narcotics case judges, prosecutors, defense attorneys, andsupport staff, cost the state of New York $32 million. What the study of the New York law indicates is that thereare serious limits to what any law can control. It is apparentnow that the rhetoric which helped create a climate for the newlaw-i.e., statements which attributed exaggerated amounts ofcrime to drug addicts-was also in part responsible for thefailure of the law to live up to expectations. This is not tosuggest that law enforcement approaches to illicit drug useshould be abandoned because they fail in what they attempt to do.Rather, it means that our expectations should be realistic,because our ability to deal with these complex problems islimited. In New York, administrative problems, court congestion,the doubts which many judges and prosecutors had about the newlaw, and the difficulties of policing illicit drugs under anycircumstances all joined together to reduce the law'seffectiveness. The conclusion is that this law changed verylittle in New York. The Impact of Drug Law Enforcement on Drug Using Behavior An interesting contrast to the New York "get tough"law is the Oregon law of 1973 which "decriminalized"the possession of a small quantity of marijuana. The state tookthis action following the recommendations of the NationalCommission on Marihuana and Drug Abuse. The new Oregon law-andthose in other states which subsequently enacted similarlegislation-eliminated the possibility of imprisonment for simplepossession of an ounce or less of marijuana. A civil fine,similar to a traffic citation, was substituted for the formercriminal penalties. There were to be no criminal arrests for suchoffenses nor would there be court arraignment. Critics of the new law predicted an explosion of bothexperimental and regular marijuana use in Oregon. This predictionwas rooted in the persistent belief that it is primarily the lawthat restrains people from using illicit drugs-the same viewwhich in part prompted the tough New York law. However, annual surveys conducted in Oregon during the fouryears following enactment of the new law have shown little changeat all in marijuana use patterns."" Marijuana usershave increased gradually in number, but this is true across thenation. Regular users have remained relatively constant, apattern that is also typical of other state and national trends. Since Oregon passed its law, only ten other states haveadopted the reduced penalty for possession of small amounts ofmarijuana, despite the preponderance of available evidence thatmarijuana is not a major health hazard when used moderately andthat criminal laws apparently do not deter millions from usingit. The New York law was aimed primarily at heroin, and didlittle, if anything, to change use patterns there. The Oregon lawwas aimed at marijuana, and it too did little, if anything, tochange use patterns. What both these experiences suggest is justhow little the criminal law influences an individual's decisionto use a particular drug, illegal or not. Similarly, theprohibition of alcohol in the early part of this century didlittle to prevent millions of Americans from consuming it. These recent legislative developments underscore anotherpoint. Generally, the public and its policymakers have focusednarrowly on eliminating the consumption of one or two drugs inparticular, without giving much thought as to the effect of thisrestricted concentration. These policies seem to be based uponthe theory that once marijuana or heroin or cocaine is eliminatedthen the problems of drug abuse in the United States will besolved. In 1971 the Institute for Defense Analyses (IDA), anorganization established by the joint Chiefs of Staff to developindependent information and analysis, examined aspects of illicitdrug use in this country. The IDA study concluded that heroinaddicts are probably willing to switch to amphetamines,barbiturates, and other drugs should heroin become prohibitivelyexpensive or unavailable .97 Through studies of the urinalysisscreening program of inmates of the Washington, D.C. jails, theInstitute found that before the East Coast dock strike of 1971nearly 20 percent of the inmates tested positive for opiates.During the strike, however, this percentage dropped to zero whilethat for barbiturate and amphetamine use rose from its former 3or 4 percent level to nearly 20 percent.,,,, While it is notconclusive, the study did underscore the fact that we have verylittle hard data on the habits, preferences, alternatives, andattitudes of heroin users. Models, analyses, and otherinformation offer a limited glimpse of these factors, and thenfor only a limited time frame. This study and other more recent ones"" havesuggested that the usage patterns for heroin may be more flexiblethan is generally believed, and therefore less vulnerable tostrategies that focus on the elimination of supply. Althoughbetter domestic enforcement, border control, and foreigneradication efforts might tighten the heroin market to someextent, any long-range improvement as regards drug-relatedproblems remains uncertain. Despite this, and the limited abilityof the criminal justice system to alter human behavior, when lawsfail to discourage an activity' that the majority in a societydeems undesirable the natural impulse is to toughen them toattain the desired effect. Concluding Thoughts Since federal antinarcotics laws have been in force in thiscountry for more than sixty years-and local ordinances for morethan a century-it seems appropriate to ask what such laws can orhave accomplished. if we were expecting our drug laws toeradicate illicit drug use, then the local, state, and federalantidrug effort must be judged an abject failure. Tough laws havenot been a solution to the drug abuse crisis. If, however, onewas hoping for a containment policy, then enforcement effortsmight be judged a partial success, because only a relativelysmall number of people use heroin, the drug with which we seemmost concerned today. This conclusion, of course, is impossibleto prove. Moreover, mere containment of heroin use was never thestated goal of our drug control efforts. The best way to judge the value of our present drug controlpolicies is to weigh their benefits and costs. This may give ussome clues with which to better analyze our current policies andreach a clearer understanding of their worth. In making thisassessment, it is natural that drug law enforcement be examinedmore critically than other approaches, such as treatment oreducation. Drug enforcement has received the majority of theavailable time, money, technology, and hope and faith for thepast seven decades. It is not unreasonable to say that lawenforcement efforts have been given the greatest possibleopportunity to respond to illicit drugs, and that those effortsought to be evaluated in light of their performance. What then are the costs of drug law enforcement? Several canbe identified: money outlays for enforcement; such side effectsas the stigma of arrest, the risk of impure drugs and associatedhealth hazards, the creation of a black market, a potential risein non-drug crime rates, and the risk of police corruption; thealienation of many segments of society; selective enforcementpatterns; diversion of scarce resources; erosion of the rule oflaw; invasion of privacy; reduction of personal freedom;hostility between police and the community; and potential policeperjury and official deception. These are some costs generallyascribed to the current prohibitionist policy approach toparticular drugs. The benefits are less specific and less provable. We canpoint to the arrest of individuals who traffic in illicit drugsas a benefit, at least in the small percentage of cases wherearrest is followed by conviction and punishment But we cannotpoint to drug enforcement generally and argue that it has had adramatically successful impact in prohibiting these activities.One benefit often cited is the channeling into treatment by meansof criminal justice diversion of illicit drug users who mightotherwise not have entered; however, this process may have anegative impact in deterring voluntary applicants from seekinghelp (see Staff Paper 3, "Heroin Treatment", below).Law enforcement efforts may also have had an impact in containingthe spread of illicit drug use during years when strong penaltieshave been on the books and substantial efforts were made toenforce those laws. While drug law enforcement effortsundoubtedly do harass some low-level operatives in the illicitdrug market and make them afraid to deal openly on the street,this may be a marginal benefit, in that it makes it likely thatusers will only become more cautious and harder to detect. Whileease of availability does appear to have some influence on thenumbers who will use a particular drug, making availabilityharder does not eliminate the demand for a particular drug orpsychoactive substances generally. The key question remains: Is the current system of drugcontrol worthwhile? An abundance of data has been collected-someof it presented in this chapter-but it is consistentlycontradictory, imprecise, of questionable reliability, and ladenwith the values we impute to it. Nevertheless, we would concludethat the costs are greater than the benefits derived. Part of thedifficulty with criminal law as a control measure lies in thefact that it has been consistently oversold as a cure for illicitdrug use. A serious consequence of this is that drug lawenforcement has rarely been viewed dispassionately; rather, ithas been the object of either heated attack or staunch defense,and rarely the object of thoughtful analysis. Our current drug control policies exact a heavy toll insocial costs, while data showing a solid return on the investmentare difficult to find. This imbalance has been known for sometime, but the knowledge of it has not materially changed our drugcontrol policies and laws. The basic policy established a centuryago continues today, and there are no immediate prospects of thegovernment, federal or state, seriously reconsidering its heavyreliance on the criminal justice system to deal with illicitdrugs. CliffSchaffer's Home Page WT02-B02-23IA086-000614-B042-51http://206.61.184.43:80/schaffer/Library/studies/lag/psycho.htm 206.61.184.43 19970122020237 text/html 20678HTTP/1.0 200 OKDate: Wednesday, 22-Jan-97 02:02:27 GMTServer: WebSitePro/1.1f (S/N wpo-0deb)Allow-ranges: bytesContent-type: text/htmlLast-modified: Saturday, 28-Dec-96 07:01:58 GMTContent-length: 20460 La Guardia Committee Report - Psychotic Episodes Contents | Feedback | Search DRCNet Library | Schaffer Library | Major Studies | LaGuardiaCommittee Report The LaGuardia Committee Report on Marihuana Psychotic Episodes Psychotic Episodes What has been referred to as psychotic episodes occurred in 9subjects, 7 men and 2 women. A description of the happenings ineach instance is given. (2) (2) Throughout this section fictitious initials are used toavoid any disclosure of the subjects' identities. A.V. Male. Non-user. Given 4 cc. of marihuana concentrate.About three hours later he became restless, tremulous, agitated,fearful of harmful effects, suspicious of examiners. For shortperiods he was euphoric. At one time he had visual hallucinationsof figures making gestures suggesting harm. He talkedcontinuously, mainly expressing fear. His answers to questionswere delayed but intelligent. W.P. Male. Occasional user. Given 3 cc., repeated two hourslater. At first there was a euphoric state; later he becameresistant and negativistic. He showed antagonism to the examiner,demanding to be left alone. He vomited twice. Throughout he washighly excited and talked to himself. The effects in generalresembled those seen in a maniacal state. He returned to hisnormal state in about three hours after the second dose. F.D. Male. Occasional user. Given 4 cc. Five hours later hebecame confused, disoriented and slow in answering questions.There were periods of elation and depression with laughter andweeping. The effects passed off in six hours. R.W. Male. Non-user. Given 5 cc. Three hours later he becamedisoriented with continued talkativeness and rapid shifting ofthought. He had fits of laughter and weeping, grandiose ideas,some paranoid trends. He answered questions clearly but withoutperseveration. He returned to normal after six hours. I.N. Female. Occasional user. Also heroin addict for manyyears. Given 8 cc. Three hours later she became confused andanxious with periods of laughing and weeping. There were severalshort episodes resembling hysterical attacks and dyspnea, pallorand rapid pulse during which she felt that she was dying andscreamed for the doctor and for a priest. Throughout, herresponse to questioning was intelligent but delayed. There was areturn to her normal state in three hours. E.C. Male. Non-user. Given 6 cc. Two hours later he developeda marked state of anxiety accompanied by a sensation ofdifficulty in breathing. This began during a basal metabolismtest. In the Sanborn equipment used there is a nose clipoccluding nasal breathing and a rubber mouthpiece through whichthe air is inspired and expired. During the test the subjectbecame confused, panicky and disoriented as to time. The anxietyover breathing continued for four hours but could be interruptedby distraction. He was then given 4 cc. more. The breathingdifficulty lasted five hours more. The condition here hadfeatures seen in claustrophobia. Before the episode, the subjecthad taken marihuana on five occasions in 2, 4, 5, 5, and 2 cc.dosage, without any symptoms of respiratory distress. However,after the episode he took marihuana on three occasions in 2, 5,and 6 cc. dosage and each time the respiratory symptoms occurred.A certain degree of nervousness was present but there was nomental confusion. The subject realized that there was no physicalobstruction to his breathing and had learned that byconcentrating his thought on other lines he could keep hisrespiratory difficulties in abeyance and would not suffer fromreal anxiety. Smoking up to as many as thirteen marihuanacigarettes did not bring about the respiratory effect. Itappeared then that the respiratory symptoms were precipitated bythe wearing of the apparatus while under the influence ofmarihuana, and through suggestibility there resulted aconditioning to the marihuana concentrate which was givensubsequently. The description of these six psychotic episodes fits in withmany others found in marihuana literature. They are examples ofacute marihuana intoxication in susceptible individuals whichcomes on shortly after the drug has been taken and persists forseveral hours. The main features of the poisoning are the restlessness andmental excitement of a delirious nature with intermittent periodsof euphoric and an overhanging state of anxiety and dread. Three other subjects presented the features of marihuanapsychosis. R.H. Male. White. Age 23. Non-user. In prison for the offenseof living on prostitution. The family history was bad. His fathernever supported his wife or family and there was continualdiscord at home. When the subject was 9 years old the fatherdeserted the family. Three brothers received court sentences, onefor stealing a taxi, one for rape, and one for striking ateacher. R.H. was a problem child at school and on account oftruancy and waywardness he was sent to the Flushing ParentalSchool. He ran away from this school several times and was transferredto the House of Refuge on Randall's Island. At the age of 16 hewas discharged. Since that time he had had two jobs, one forthree months in a factory, the other for four and one-half monthsin the W.P.A. When he was 16 he was run over by a truck and wasunconscious for a time. After his return to the Riker's IslandPenitentiary from Welfare Hospital further questioning concerninghis past revealed that he was subject to "fits"occurring once or twice every two months. During the attacks hisbody became rigid and his mouth felt stiff. The subject was admitted to Welfare Hospital for the marihuanastudy on February 20th. After the usual program of examinationshe was given 2 cc. of the concentrate on February 27th andFebruary 28th. These doses brought on the symptoms of dizzinessand tremor and heaviness of the head and the state called"high" which is characterized by periods of laughterand talkativeness. These effects passed off in a few hours andwere followed by drowsiness and a sense of fatigue. On March 1stat 1 p.m. he smoked one marihuana cigarette. Immediatelyafterwards he became agitated and restless and suddenly lostconsciousness. He recovered quickly and stated that he had hadvisions of angels and had heard choirs singing. Later he had asecond short period of unconsciousness. During the afternoon hecontinued to be agitated and restless and had periods of laughingand weeping. After he was given phenobarbital he went to sleep.On the next day his only complaint was that he felt dizzy.Following this episode he was given 4 cc. Of marihuanaconcentrate on March 3rd and 2 cc. on March 10th and 2 cc. oftetrahydrocannabinol on March 5th and 4 cc. on March 8th. Theeffects corresponded to those seen after the earlieradministrations of 2 cc. doses of the concentrate. On March 11th R.H. was given 5 cc. (75 mg.) of thetetrahydrocannabinol at 11 a.m. and 3 cc. at 2 p.m. No unusualeffects were noted during the afternoon and he ate his supperwith appetite at 4:30 p.m. At 6 p.m. he became restless,apprehensive and somewhat belligerent. He felt that something hadhappened to his mother, that everybody was acting queerly andpicking on him. He continued to be agitated and fearful, refusedmedication and slept poorly. This condition persisted and onMarch 13th he was returned to Riker's Island. After four daysthere he became quiet and composed. The psychotic state clearedup completely. The resident psychiatrist's report was: Impression1. Psychosis due to drugs. (Marihuana experimentallyadministered.) Acute delirium, recovered. 2. Convulsive disorder,idiopathic epilepsy. Petit mal on history. H.W. Female. White. Age 28. Non-user. Drug peddler, servingthree years' indefinite sentence for unlawfully possessing adrug. Her parents died when she was about 10 years old and shewas raised in an orphanage. At the age of 19 she entered atraining school for nurses, but gave this up after four monthsand supported herself by prostitution. Her sister and hersister's husband were drug addicts and through them she begantaking morphine and heroin, being, according to her account,depressed and dissatisfied at the time. She continued using thesedrugs up to the time of her arrest, a period of eight years. In1938 she married a man who was also a drug addict, and engaged inthe drug traffic. On May 7th she was given 2 cc. of marihuana. Aside from aheadache and a feeling of muscular weakness and uncoordination,the effect was to make the subject feel gay and very good-naturedOn May 8th she was given 3 cc. Of the concentrate and becamesomewhat confused and unsteady, irritated and upset at carryingout tests, and greatly worried about the physical symptoms. Fivehours after she had taken the drug the effects had largely passedoff. Six hours later, however, she became restless and agitated,moving about constantly, and worried about past conduct. Thisstate continued for a few hours. On other occasions the subjectwas given marihuana in doses of 2, 3, and 4 cc. Twice after theadministration of 3 cc. The general effect was of a euphorictype, and after 4 cc. Had been given a state of sadness set in ontwo occasions and one of euphoria on a third. Toward the end ofher stay the subject became depressed and moody, constantlydwelling on the belief that she had committed unpardonable sins. She was returned to the House of Detention on June 2nd,transferred to the Psychiatric Division of Bellevue Hospital onJune 9th, and from there was sent to Matteawan State Hospital onJuly 10th. On admission to the State Hospital she appearedconfused, retarded, apprehensive, and depressed. She had a markedfeeling of guilt. She began to improve in September and wasdischarged, cured, in January. Since her return to New York shereports at frequent intervals to the parole officer. She hassecured employment in a food shop and is to be promoted to theposition of manager of the shop. The diagnosis made at the State Hospital was: Psychosis, dueto drugs and other exogenous poisons (morphine and heroin). D.P. Male. Colored. Age 23. Occasional user. Sentenced forunlawful possession of drugs. Since graduation from high schoolat the age of 16 he had had no occupation. His criminal recorddated from his graduation. He was arrested in 1934 for disorderlyconduct and in the same year sentenced to Elmira Reformatory forfive years for second-degree assault. He was paroled in 1936, butduring the same and the following year was arrested three timesfor assault or robbery. He was returned to Elmira where heremained until his discharge in 1940. In August 1940 he wasarrested for the possession of drugs and sentenced to athree-year indefinite term. He had served eight months of thissentence when he was admitted to Welfare Hospital as a subjectfor the marihuana study. During his stay at Welfare Hospital, D.P. was given marihuanain the form of a concentrate and as cigarettes on numerousoccasions. His symptoms and behavior corresponded to thoseusually seen, lasting a few hours with no after-effects. When thetime came for his return to Riker's Island he urged that he beallowed to stay at the hospital and assist in the study. Twoweeks after his return to the penitentiary he developed apsychosis characteristic of schizophrenia. He was transferred toMatteawan where the diagnosis made was: Psychosis withpsychopathic personality. These three cases are of special interest from the standpointof the relationship of marihuana to the psychosis. The firstsubject, R.H., had a definite history of epileptic attacks. Aftersmoking one marihuana cigarette he experienced an acuteconfusional state which lasted a few hours. In the second episodewhich lasted six days there was a more prolonged confusionalstate. Epileptics are subject to such attacks, epileptic orepileptic equivalents, which may be brought on by any number ofupsetting circumstances. In this case marihuana is the only knownfactor which precipitated the attack. The second subject, H.W., was a heroin addict of longstanding. During her stay in the hospital, in her retrospectivereports on her marihuana experiences there were usually includedexpressions of worry and remorse at her failure to answerquestions or perform tests honestly, informing on the other womenin her group, and denials concerning a syphilitic infection shethought she had had. Prior to this incarceration she had had noprison experience. The mental picture developed from the study atthe hospital and at Matteawan and the subject's subsequenthistory represent a fairly typical example of what is termed aprison psychosis. The third subject, D.P., did not develop his psychosis untiltwo weeks after he had been returned to the Riker's IslandPenitentiary. He had shown no unexpected effects from marihuanaand had hoped to be allowed to stay on at the hospital instead ofgoing back to prison to complete more than two years of anunexpired sentence. At Matteawan this subject was considered tohave an underlying psychopathic personality. His case also may betaken as an example of prison psychosis. With both the second andthird subjects, the exact role of marihuana in relation to thepsychosis cannot be stated. Dr. Peter F. Amoroso, Commissioner of Correction of the cityof New York, has given us information concerning the prisonerssentenced to the penitentiary at Riker's Island from whom oursubjects were drawn. During the year beginning July 1, 1941, andending June 30, 1942, there were 1,756 inmates in thisinstitution. They had received an indeterminate sentence, thatis, from a minimum of a few months to a maximum of three years.Of this group, 175 were subjected to intensive study by thepsychiatrist because they were considered possible psychoticcases, 117 were sex offenders, and 200 were miscellaneous casesreferred for mental observation, making a total of 492.Twenty-seven of these cases were committed to state institutionsfor the criminal insane, namely, 25 to Matteawan and 2 toDannemora. Commissioner Amoroso, after reviewing these cases, writes asfollows: "The prison atmosphere may place a most severe strain onthose who are physically or mentally abnormal upon commitment . .. Emotionally unstable persons find themselves duringincarceration denied the assertion and enjoyment of the basichuman urges and impulses and it is natural to expect, therefore,that prison life may result in various types of explosions, suchas psychoses, neuroses, sex perversion, and even physical andmoral deterioration.' "I am indeed surprised that we had so little trouble withour volunteers upon completion of their study and sojourn atWelfare Hospital, and the few psychotic episodes that occurredare exactly what we would expect in the whole group withoutconsidering the administration and effects of excessive doses ofmarihuana." Summary In the study of the actions of marihuana in respect tosubjective and objective symptoms and behavior, the marihuana wasgiven a number of times to each of the subjects in the form ofthe concentrate taken by stomach. The amount given ranged from 2to 22 cc., in most cases from 2 to 5 cc. After marihuana wastaken, the systematic action became evident in from one- half toone hour and the maximum effects were seen in from two to threehours. They passed off gradually, usually in from three to fivehours, although in some instances they did not completelydisappear until twelve or more hours. Of the symptoms occurring, a feeling of lightness in the headwith some dizziness, a sensation of floating in the air, drynessof the throat, hunger and thirst, unsteadiness and heaviness inthe extremities were the most frequent. Tremor and ataxia,dilation of the pupils and sluggishness in responsiveness tolight were observed in all subjects. From observations on the behavior and responses of thesubjects, it was found that a mixture of euphoria andapprehension was generally present. If the subjects wereundisturbed there was a state of quiet and drowsiness, andunawareness of surroundings, with some difficulty in focusing andsustaining mental concentration. If they were in company,restlessness, talkativeness, laughter and joking were commonlyseen. A feeling of apprehension, based on uncertainty regardingthe possible effects of the drug and strengthened by anydisagreeable sensations present, alternated with the euphoria. Ifthe apprehension developed into a state of real anxiety, a spiritof antagonism was shown. However, any resistance to requests madeto the subjects was passive and not physical and there was noaggressiveness or violent behavior observed. Erotic ideas orsensations when present took no active expression. Six of the subjects developed toxic episodes characteristic ofacute marihuana intoxication. The dosage varied from 4 to 8 cc.of the concentrate, and the episodes lasted from three to sixhours, in one instance ten hours. The effects were mixtures ofeuphoric and anxiety states, laughter, elation, excitement,disorientation and mental confusion. The doses given were toxic to the individuals in question butnot to others taking the same or larger ones. Once the drug hadbeen taken the effects were beyond the subject's control. Theactions described took unusual expression because for theparticular subject at a particular time the dose was unusuallyeffective. A corresponding toxicity did not occur from cigarettesfor here the effects came on promptly and on the appearance ofany untoward effects, the smoking was stopped. In three of the subjects a definite psychotic state occurred,in two shortly after marihuana ingestion, in one after a two weekinterval. Of the first two, one was an epileptic and the otherhad a history of heroin addiction and a prepsychotic personality.The third was considered a case of prison psychosis. Theconclusion seems warranted that given the potential personalitymake-up and the right time and environment, marihuana may bringon a true psychotic state. Contents | Feedback | Search DRCNet Library | Schaffer Library | Major Studies | LaGuardiaCommittee ReportWT02-B02-24IA086-000614-B046-9http://206.61.184.43:80/schaffer/Library/studies/dwda/staff6.htm 206.61.184.43 19970122021932 text/html 40474HTTP/1.0 200 OKDate: Wednesday, 22-Jan-97 02:19:07 GMTServer: WebSitePro/1.1f (S/N wpo-0deb)Allow-ranges: bytesContent-type: text/htmlLast-modified: Saturday, 28-Dec-96 07:10:42 GMTContent-length: 40256 Dealing With Drug Abuse - Altered States of Consciousness Contents | Feedback | Search DRCNet Library | Schaffer Library | Major Studies | DealingWith Drug Abuse Dealing with Drug Abuse A Report to the Ford Foundation THE DRUG ABUSE SURVEY PROJECT STAFF PAPER 6 Altered States of Consciousness by Andrew T. Weil, M.D. The Pharmacology of Consciousness-altering Drugs Altered States of Consciousness, Drugs, andSociety THE PHARMACOLOGY OFCONSCIOUSNESS-ALTERING DRUGS The single most important fact to emerge fromresearch on consciousness-altering drugs in this century is thatindividual responses to them result from set and setting as muchas from the drug itself. Occasionally particular combinations ofset and setting completely reverse the "pharmacologicalaction" of a drug as described in a text on pharmacology.For example, with proper suggestion and in a restful setting,amphetamines can produce sedation. Drug, set, and setting,therefore, appear to be interdependent in shaping drug responses;no one factor seems vastly more determining than any other. This principle is logical enough. Nophysiological event takes place without a corresponding event inthe central nervous system. Therefore, every "bodily"response is actually a psychosomatic response. In the case ofmedical drugs like digitalis and atropine, no one is very muchinterested in the psychic component of response, so that we havecome to think of these substances as producing constantphysiological responses (although there is still enough variationfrom patient to patient to make their clinical administration aticklish business). In the case of "psychoactive" drugslike heroin and LSD, the psychic component of response becomesthe focus of attention; but, because we do not understand itaccording to present models of consciousness, we try in vain tomake these drugs, too, fit our simplistic conceptions ofpharmacology. How nice it would be if we could derive a method ofpredicting an individual's response to a psychoactive drug frompurely pharmacological considerations. But we cannot do so. Two upsetting conclusions follow from this lineof reasoning: First, it is impossible to talk meaningfully aboutthe effects of psychoactive drugs, except by reference to theireffects on specific individuals on specific occasions; andsecondly, pharmacology is not a useful approach to understandingthe effects of these drugs either on individuals or on society. Apharmacologist, of course, would disagree with me, but his viewof things would be as biased in its own way as that of thelaw-enforcement officer who favors continued efforts to stoppeople from using drugs by means of the criminal law. Most ofwhat is written about LSD and heroin in pharmacology texts ismeaningless in this sense: It says nothing about what will happento you if you take LSD at eight o'clock tonight; gives you nopower to help me if I come to you for assistance in breaking aheroin habit; and is quite irrelevant to any considerations ofwhat the United States ought to do about the continuing increasein negative use of these drugs. What we need is a new science of consciousness,based on subjective experience rather than on objectivephysiology. The materialistic psychology that has dominatedWestern thought about consciousness is no longer adequate to thetask of explaining the mind in terms that are useful to us. (Anespecially galling aspect of the drug problem for the medicalprofession is that psychologically ignorant users of drugs appearto have more practical information about their effects thandoctors have.) I predict that, from an experiential viewpoint,many unifying principles of drug states will become visible. Inthe pharmacological model, there is some unity; for example,alcohol, barbiturates, and minor tranquilizers are groupedtogether as sedative-hypnotics-a useful grouping, because italerts us to the danger that drugs like chlordiazepoxide(Librium) and meprobamate (Equanil) produce a dependenceresembling dependence on alcohol. But pharmacology offers no cluewhy the psychological changes of a marijuana high have much incommon with those of an LSD trip, or why heroin users may be ableto satisfy their need for a certain experience by inhalingnitrous oxide, a general anesthetic. In the following pages, I will review brieflywhat is known and what is not known about the majorpharmacological classes of psychoactive drugs-briefly, because,in view of the limited usefulness of this scheme ofclassification, it is not worth discussing, except at the mostgeneral level. SEDATIVE-HYPNOTICS Alcohol and the barbiturates are associatedwith stubborn forms of drug dependence, marked by relativelyconstant, doserelated physiological changes, some of which becomeirreversible over time. These changes include tolerance (probablythe clinical correlate of the induction of degradative enzymes inthe liver) and withdrawal (a syndrome that persists untilmetabolism readjusts to its predrug state). Unlike narcotics,alcohol and barbiturates cause life-threatening reactions whenthey are withdrawn from addicted persons. Chronic use ofsedative-hypnotics is associated with structural damage to thenervous system; this association is stronger than for any of theother classes of drugs discussed below. Alcoholism isparticularly associated with chronic liver disease, possiblybecause alcohol is directly toxic to liver cells. Barbituratesare often implicated in accidental selfpoisonings, becausetolerance to the lethal dose does not develop as fast astolerance to the hypnotic dose. The minor tranquilizers have beenpromoted as anti-anxiety agents, but they behave just like mildsedative-hypnotics. Most persons use sedative-hypnotics to reduceanxiety by substituting a "high" state of consciousnessthat permits sleep, relaxation, or the mild disinhibition valuedin certain social encounters. These drugs are associated with dependencebecause (1) they do not affect the source of anxiety; (2) thedevelopment of tolerance encourages more and more frequent use;(3) their use in our culture is strongly linked to destructive(especially self destructive) behavior patterns; and (4) peoplein our society do not know how to make use of altered states ofconsciousness. The pharmacological model of- these drugsoffers no hope of cure or prevention of dependence onsedative-hypnotics. It can, however, offer treatment of acutetoxic episodes and withdrawal reactions. It seems unlikely thatelucidation of the exact metabolic derangements underlyingdependence will open the way to any pharmacological means ofintervening in the course of the disease. Nothing important is known about the action ofthese drugs on the mind. Since their major action is depressionof neurological activity in the central nervous system, it hasbeen assumed that the "paradoxical stimulation"observed with low doses (the high that precedes the stupor ofalcohol intoxication) is the result of inhibition of inhibitorybrain centers (which are conveniently postulated to respond tolower doses). However, some researchers have suggested that lowdoses may have direct excitatory action on nerve cells. That thiskind of debate should still be going on in 1970 suggests how farwe are from understanding conscious experience in physiologicalterms. (If alcohol intoxication were looked at by an experientialscience of consciousness, it might turn out that the high is notcausally related to the drug, which might be a pure depressant,after all.) It is ironic that we have chosen our onesanctioned intoxicant from this class of drugs. In no other classis pharmacological action (in this case, on liver and nerve-cellmetabolism) so clearly related to long-range physiologicaldeterioration. NARCOTICS Like sedative-hypnotics, narcotics are centraldepressants that produce stubborn dependence. Unlikesedative-hypnotics, they are not directly associated withlong-range physiological damage or life-threatening withdrawalreactions. Tolerance to narcotics develops faster than toleranceto sedative-hypnotics; hence, visible dependence develops faster.Because narcotics are illegal, their use is much more bound upwith antisocial, negative, and, often, self-destructive behavior. "Addiction" to and"withdrawal" from narcotics have become stereotypes inthe public mind, but reality does not often conform to theseconceptions. Far from being a physiological constant, dependenton dose and frequency of administration of a drug, the physicalcraving for narcotics is very much a matter of set and setting.Some individuals, when they find tolerance appearing, work out amethod of spacing injections of heroin so that they never becomereally "hooked," even though they use the drugregularly for years. (The number of such persons is unknown butmay be greater than the number of hooked addicts; they often leadstable lives and may never come to the attention of groupsconcerned with narcotics.) Other people seem not to be able tohandle the development of tolerance and quickly go on toexperience strong physiological dependence. Similarly, withdrawalreactions from narcotics are strongly shaped bynonpharmacological factors. In a supportive setting with strongpositive suggestion, a heroin addict can undergo comfortablewithdrawal with no medication other than aspirin. Narcotics do not affect the primary receptionof pain or other sensory stimuli; rather, they alter secondaryperception. A person in pain, given morphine, might say,"The pain is still there, but it doesn't bother me." Inother words, the pain is perceived through an altered state ofconsciousness. Pharmacological research on narcotics has beenunproductive. In the first place, no real success has beenachieved in separating the analgesic and addicting properties ofthis class of compounds. Secondly, the metabolic changesaccompanying narcotics dependence are beyond our presentunderstanding; even if they were understood, there is no reasonto think our difficulties with addiction would be any fewer.Thirdly, no purely pharmacological method of controllingaddiction has come along. The problems associated with heroin (death fromoverdose; hepatitis; crime; mental and physical deterioration)appear to have no causal relationship to the pharmacologicalaction of the drug. Rather, they correlate better with featuresof the social context in which heroin exists in our country. Infact, the discrepancy between pharmacology and experience is bestillustrated by phenomena accompanying dependence on drugs of thisclass. AMPHETAMINES AND RELATED DRUGS Drugs that stimulate the central andsympathetic nervous systems include the amphetamines (a chemicalclass), several drugs that are chemically but notpharmacologically distinct from the amphetamines (likemethylphenidate-Ritalin; and phemnetrazine-Preludin) , andcocaine. These drugs cause the release of norepinephrine fromadrenergic nerve endings. Tolerance to them develops veryquickly, but withdrawal from them, although sometimes apsychological ordeal, has few physiological accompaniments incontrast to withdrawal from sedative-hypnotics or narcotics. Little is known about the neurologicalconsequences of chronic, heavy use of amphetamines. Speed freakswho take enormous doses of amphetamines intravenously develop aparanoid psychosis that looks suspiciously organic and may becorrelated with depletion of the body's stores of norepinepbrine.(It may just as well be correlated with the prolonged wakefulnessinduced by these drugs.) To date, there is no firm evidence ofactual neurological deterioration resulting from any of thesedrugs, including cocaine. Although low doses do not change eatingbehavior in most people (contrary to the claims ofpharmaceutical-industry advertising), very high doses do shut offthe hypothalamic hunger center and can result in severemalnutrition. The high incidence of hepatitis among amphetamineusers has led to speculation that the drug may be directly toxicto liver cells. (If this hepatitis is, indeed, chemical, it mayalso be due to a common contaminant of black-market methadrine.) Until recently, amphetamine dependence wasconsidered less serious than narcotic dependence, because it was"Iess physiological." In fact, however,amphetamine dependence is more serious, because it is inherentlyless stable. When a person begins to use a tolerance-producingdrug, he must soon face the problem of trying to stabilize hisuse in order to keep his life from being disrupted. More than anyother class of drugs, the amphetamines foil a user's attempt toreach equilibrium with his habit, because they induce suchpowerful and unrelenting tolerance. Consequently, users developerratic patterns of use, such as "spree shooting" andalternation with barbiturates and, eventually, with heroin. Thehigh correlation of amphetamine use with impulsive and violentbehavior is consistent with this pharmacological instability. Abusive oral use of diet pills may beassociated with serious psychological problems but is notaccompanied by the physical changes associated with intravenoususe. HALLUCINOGENS Hallucinogens stimulate the central andsympathetic nervous systems (some are simple derivatives ofamphetamine) but, in addition, induce perceptual changes and thekinds of mental states associated with trance, mystic rapture,and psychosis. Except for the visual hallucinations (inparticular, the everchanging, geometric patterns seen onsurfaces), most of these effects are common in altered states ofconsciousness unrelated to drugs. The hallucinogens differ fromone another only in duration of action and in relative prominenceof stimulant versus psychic effects. Pharmacological researchtells us little more about them than about the amphetamines; itoffers no satisfactory explanation for the effects ofhallucinogens on consciousness. No one takes these drugsfrequently enough to get into pharmacological trouble with them.(Tolerance is so rapid that regular consumption is impractical;you can't stay high on LSD for too long at one stretch.)Therefore, the pharmacological body of data is quite irrelevantto our understanding of the difficulties people get into withhallucinogens. Also, there is no indication that use of thesedrugs is associated with physical damage of any kind, in eithershort- or long-term use. Most bad trips on hallucinogens arenonpharmacological panic reactions. Others are nonspecific toxicpsychoses-overdose reactions that disappear when the drug wearsoff. MARIJUANA Marijuana differs from the hallucinogens in twoways: It does not cause hallucinations, and it is not astimulant. In fact, marijuana has virtually no significantpharmacological actions, which probably accounts for itspopularity. It provides a high with minimal physiologicalaccompaniment, so that people who are anxious about it can easilypretend to themselves that they have done nothing to their bodiesor minds. For the same reason, it is useless to study marijuanain the pharmacological laboratory, because there is nophysiological handle on the phenomenon under consideration. Except for the possibility of lung diseaserelated to chronic inhalation of the drug, there is no evidencethat marijuana is physically harmful in short- or long-termusage. No other drug is like marijuana in having so fewphysiological effects. For this reason, it seems wise to think ofmarijuana as a class unto itself, no more closely related to thehallucinogens than to the sedative hypnotics. Its unique chemicalstructure is consistent with this idea. TOXINS, GENERALANESTHETICS, AND SPECIAL SUBSTANCES Persons who enjoy the altered state ofconsciousness called delirium (actually, a nonspecific responseof the brain to a toxin) will occasionally induce it by inhalingvolatile solvents and petroleum distillates such as glue.Repeated use of defiriants appears to be correlated withstructural damage to the central nervous system. In addition,petroleum distillates are frequently toxic to the liver,especially when taken with alcohol. Delirium is characterized byconfusion, disorientation, and hallucination; it is sometimescalled "acute brain syndrome" or "toxicpsychosis," and it can also occur in response to overdosesof any of the classes of drugs mentioned above, includingmarijuana. General anesthesia is an altered state ofconsciousness induced by a heterogenous class of chemicals, someof which (ether and nitrous oxide) are occasionally taken fornonmedical purposes. It is instructive to reflect that nosatisfactory theory has been proposed thus far to explain generalanesthesia in pbarmacological or neurophysiological terms, eventhough millions of persons have been put into this state underclose observation. Because the psychic phenomena of generalanesthesia can be reproduced nonchemically (by hypnosis, forexample), it is tempting to speculate that this altered state ofconsciousness, too, would be better understood from the point ofview of subjective experience rather than from the point of viewof objective pharmacology. Drug users who are deprived of their usualdrugs sometimes resort to special substances like nutmeg andmorning-glory seeds to get high. Many natural products of verydiverse pharmacology have been so employed, and it seems likelythat set and setting determine whether they produce pleasantaltered states of consciousness, sickness, or, indeed, no effectsat all. ALTERED STATES OFCONSCIOUSNESS, DRUGS, AND SOCIETY The general thesis of this paper is that drugexperience can be understood only if it is viewed as an alteredstate of consciousness rather than as a pharmacological event. Asubthesis is that this approach will make it possible for societyto reduce significantly the problems now associated with the useof psychoactive drugs. All of us experience occasional states ofconsciousness different from our ordinary waking state.Obviously, sleep is such a state. Less obviously, perhaps, aredaydreaming and movie watching unusual modes of awareness. Otherdistinct varieties of conscious states are trance, hypnosis,psychosis, general anesthesia, delirium, meditation, and mysticrapture. In our country, until recently, there has been noserious investigation of altered states of consciousness as such,because most Western scientists who study the mind regardconsciousness as annoyingly nonmaterial and, therefore,inaccessible to direct investigation. Their research has focusedon the objective correlates of consciousness instead of onconsciousness itself. In the East, on the other hand, wherenonmateriality is not seen as a bar to direct investigation, muchthought has been devoted to altered states of consciousness, anda science of consciousness based on subjective experience hasdeveloped. It would make sense to study all forms ofnonordinary consciousness together, because they seem to havemuch in common. For example, trance, whether spontaneous orinduced by a hypnotist, is in many ways simply an extension ofthe daydreaming state in which a person's awareness is focusedand directed inward rather than outward. Except for its voluntaryand purposeful nature, meditation is not easily distinguishablefrom trance. Zen masters warn their meditating students to ignoremakyo-sensory distortions that often take the form of visionsseen by mystics in rapturous states or hallucinations similar tothose of schizophrenics. And, curiously, the state of being highon drugs shares many characteristics with these other forms ofaltered consciousness, regardless of what drug induces the high. It is my contention that the desire to alterconsciousness is an innate psychological drive arising out of theneurological structure of the human brain. Strong evidence forthis idea comes from observations of very young children, whoregularly use techniques of consciousness alteration onthemselves and one another when they think no adults are watchingthem. These methods include whirling until vertigo and collapseensue, hyperventilating and then having another child squeezeone's chest to produce unconsciousness, and being choked aroundthe neck to cause fainting. Such practices appear to beuniversal, irrespective of culture, and present at ages whensocial conditioning is unlikely to be an important influence (forexample, in two- and three-year-olds). Psychiatrists have paidlittle attention to these common activities of children. Freud,who did note them, called them "sexualequivalents"-which they may be, although that formulation isnot very useful for our purposes. As children grow older, they soon learn thatexperiences of the same sort may be had chemically-for instance,by inhaling the fumes of volatile solvents found around thehouse. General anesthesia is another chemically induced alteredstate of consciousness that many children are exposed to in theirearly years. (The current drug-using generation was extensivelytonsillectomized, by the way.) Until a few years ago, mostchildren in our society who wanted to continue indulging in thesestates were content to use alcohol, the one intoxicant we makeavailable legally. (Incidentally, there are some good reasonsthat alcohol may not be a wise choice for sole legalintoxicant-apart from its devastating medical effects.) Now,large numbers of young people are seeking chemical alterations ofconsciousness through a variety of illegal and medicallydisapproved drugs. It is possible to see this change as primarilya reaction to other social upheavals-and, certainly, much hasbeen written about the social causes of drug use. It may be moreuseful, however, to consider what many drug users themselves say:They choose illegal drugs over alcohol in order to get betterhighs. There is no question that social factors influence theforms of drug use in a society, or that changes in patterns ofuse of intoxicants go along with major cultural upheavals, but wemust remember that every culture throughout history has made useof chemicals to alter consciousness.* Instead of looking forexplanations of drug taking in a foreign war or in domestictension, therefore, perhaps we should pay more careful attentionto how we allow people to satisfy chemically their innate driveto experience other states of awareness. Most societies, like our own, are uncomfortableabout having people go off into trances, mystic raptures, andhallucinatory intoxications. Indeed, the reason we have lawsagainst possession of drugs in the first place is to discouragepeople from getting high. But innate, neuropsychological drivescannot be banned by legislation. They will be satisfied at anycost. And the cost in our country is very great, for, by tryingto deny young people these important experiences, we maximize theprobability that they will obtain them in negative ways-that is,in ways harmful to themselves and to society. Why are altered states of consciousnessimportant? Primarily because they seem to be doorways to the nextstages of evolutionary development of the human nervous system.We commonly assume that a major division of our nervous system(the autonomic system) is involuntary-beyond our consciouscontrol -and that this leaves us open to many kinds of illnesseswe can do nothing about (for example, cardiovascular diseases).Yet, hypnotized subjects often show an astonishing degree ofautonomic control, to the extent of developing authentic blisterswhen touched with cold objects represented to them as being redhot. And Yogis frequently demonstrate voluntary control of heartaction and blood flow that astonishes physicians; they themselvesascribe their successes to regular periods of meditative effort,asserting that there is no limit to what consciousness can effectthrough the "involuntary" nervous system. In addition,creative genius has long been observed to correlate well withpsychosis, and much of the world's highest religious andphilosophic thought has come out of altered states ofconsciousness. At the very least, altered states ofconsciousness appear to have potential for strongly positivepsychic development. Most Americans do not get the chance toexploit this potential, because their society gives them nosupport. The prevailing attitude toward psychosis isrepresentative. We define this experience as a disease, compelpeople who have it to adopt the role of sick, disabled patients,and then ply them with special kinds of sedatives that we call"antipsychotic agents" but that simply make it hard forthem to think and to express their altered state of consciousnessin ways disturbing to the staffs of psychiatric hospitals. Theindividual learns from early childhood to be guilty about, orafraid of, episodes of nonordinary awareness and is forced topursue antisocial behavior patterns if he wants to continuehaving such episodes. Negative drug taking has become a popularform of this kind of behavior. I implied earlier that alcohol may not fulfillthe need for alteration of consciousness as well as other drugs.Like all psychoactive drugs, it does induce a high with positivepotential. (A vast body of prose, poetry, and song from all agestestifies to this "good side" of alcohol.) The trouble,however, is that an alcohol high is difficult to control; indrinking, one slips easily into the dose range where the effectsbecome unpleasant (nausea, dizziness, uncoordination) andinterfere with mental activity. Marijuana, on the other hand,maintains a "useful" high over an extremely wide doserange and allows a remarkable degree of control over theexperience. But, as with other drugs, set and setting determinethe effects of marijuana by interacting with the drug's pharmacologicalaction. Unfortunately, current social factors create stronglynegative sets and settings, thus increasing the likelihood thatusers will be drawn into the negative side of consciousnessalteration instead of being encouraged to explore its positivepotential. By focusing our attention on drugs rather thanon the states of consciousness people seek in them, we developnotions that lead to unwise behavior. Users who think that highscome from joints and pills rather than from their own nervoussystems get into trouble when the joints and pills no longer workso well (a universal experience among regular consumers of alldrugs) : Their drug use becomes increasingly neurotic-more andmore frequent and compulsive with less and less reward. In fact,this misconception is the initial step in the development of drugdependence, regardless of whether the drug is marijuana orheroin, whether it produces physiological dependence or not. Anddependence cannot be broken until the misconception isstraightened out, even though the physiological need isterminated. (Hence the failure of methadone to cure addicts ofbeing addicts.) By contrast, a user who realizes that he has beenusing the drug merely as a trigger or excuse for having anexperience that is a natural and potentially valuable element ofhuman consciousness comes to see that the drugged state is notexactly synonymous with the experience he wants. He begins tolook for ways to isolate the desired aspect of the chemicallyinduced state and often finds that some form of meditation willsatisfy his desire to get high more effectively. One sees a greatmany experienced drug takers give up drugs for meditation, butone does not see any meditators give up meditation for drugs.This observation has led some drug educators to hope that youngpeople can be encouraged to abandon drugs in favor of systemslike the transcendental meditation of Maharishi Mahesh. Society labors under the same delusions asdependent users. It thinks that problems come from drugs ratherthan from people. Therefore, it tries to stop people from usingdrugs or to make drugs disappear rather than to educate peopleabout the "right" use of drugs. No drug is inherentlygood or evil; all have potential for positive use, as much as fornegative use. The point is not to deny people the experience ofchemically altered consciousness but to show them how to have itin forms that are not harmful to themselves or to society. Andthe way to do that is to recognize the simple truth that theexperience comes from the mind, not from the drug. (Once you havelearned from a drug what being high really is, you can begin toreproduce such state without the drug; all persons who accomplishthis feat testify that the nonpharmacological high is superior.)Ironically, society's efforts to stop drug abuse are the veryfactors causing drug abuse. There really is no Drug Problem atall, rather a Drug-Problem Problem. And it will continue growinguntil we admit that drugs have a positive potential that can berealized. Many non-Western societies have experimentedwith this alternative. The primitive Indian tribes of the Amazonbasin, for example, make free use of drugs but have no problemsof abuse. That is, although these groups use a multitude ofhallucinogenic barks seeds, and leaves, no one takes the drugs toexpress hostility toward society, to drop out of the socialprocess, to rebel against his parents or teachers, or to hurthimself. These Indians admit that their world contains substancesthat alter consciousness; they do not try to make them go away orto prevent theiruse. They accept the fact that people, especiallychildren, seekout altered states of consciousness. And, ratherthan attempt to deny their children experiences they know to beimportant, they allow them to have them under the guidance ofexperts in such matters, usually the tribal shamans. Recognizingthat drugs have potential for harm, the shaman surrounds theiruse with ritual and conveys the rationale of this ritual to hischarges. Furthermore, the states of consciousness induced bydrugs in these remote areas are used for positive ends, and arenot just lapsed into out of boredom or frustration. Some drugsare used only by shamans, for communing with the spirit world orfor diagnosing illness; others are used by adolescents incoming-of-age rites; still others are consumed by the whole tribeas recreational intoxicants on special occasions. I am not suggesting that we return to aprimitive life in the jungle, but I do think we have much tolearn from these Amazonian peoples. One reason we are so lockedinto wrong ways of thinking about drugs is that no one can see agoal worth working for, only problems to work against. The Indianmodel is an ideal -not something to be substituted overnight forour present situation, but something to be kept in mind as thedirection to move toward. Let me list the three chief features ofthis ideal system as proposals for our own society: 1. Recognition of the importance of alteredstates of consciousness and the existence of a normal drive toexperience them. There is a considerable lack ofenlightenment in scientific circles concerning the nature ofconsciousness, in both its ordinary and its nonordinary forms,and there would doubtless be resistance from the professionalcommunity to these propositions. But, because consciousness is,above all, a matter of inner experience, most laymen are quitewilling to accept these ideas. Many adults have simply forgottentheir childhood experiences with altered states of consciousnessand recall them vividly as soon as they try to. Therefore, Ithink the possibilities for re-education are good. As thinking about drugs moves in thisdirection, society will become less and less inclined to try tofrustrate the human need for periods of altered awareness, sothat the role of the criminal law in this area should diminish.At the same time ' there may be a culmination of the presentefforts of younger scientists to bring the study of alteredstates of consciousness into the "respectable"disciplines and institutions. A very great body of informationexists on these states; it simply needs collecting and arranging,so that we can begin to correlate it with what we knowobjectively about the nervous system. 2. Provision for the experience of alteredstates of consciousness in growing children. Rather thandrive children to seek out these states surreptitiously, we mustaim to do as the Indians do: let children learn by experienceunder the watchful guidance of an elder. "Drugeducation" in the United States means thinly disguisedattempts to scare children away from drugs. True education wouldlet those who wanted to explore consciousness do so without guiltand with adult support and supervision. Such explorations shouldinclude drug experience, because drugs are legitimate tools foraltering awareness. Because they have a potential for negativeuse, they cannot be used wantonly but must be used in certainprescribed ways, at certain times, and for certain purposes.Thus, we must develop a "ritual" for drug experienceanalogous to the Indian tribal rituals. We will also need analogsof the shamans-persons who, by virtue of their own experiencewith altered states of consciousness, are qualified to supervisethe education of the young. 3. Incorporation of the experience intosociety for positive ends. It is not enough that we come totolerate alterations of consciousness. We must put them to usefor the good of individuals and society. We have come to think ofdrug experience as an escape from reality; but, if it is so inour society, we have made it so. People who can openly andpurposefully spend time away from ordinary consciousness seemsuperior when they function in ordinary consciousness.They are healthier, both physically and mentally; they lead moreproductive lives; and they can become numerous enough toconstitute a great natural resource in any society. In addition,they may be utilizing their nervous systems to their fullestpotentials goal most of us are far from reaching. To these three aims, I would add a fourth, notderived from the Indian pattern: 4. Encouragement of individuals to satisfytheir needs for altered consciousness by means that do notrequire external tools. Any tools used to alterconsciousness-not just drugs-tend to cause dependence, becausethey delude people into believing that the experience comes fromthem rather than involuntarily from within the mind. To guardagainst this tendency, therefore, we must educate people and nottry to do away with the tools. Our goal should be to train peopleto live safely in a world where there are things with potentialfor both harm and good, to show them that inimical forces can bechanged into friendly ones. To do this, we should not try toshield young people from things that may harm them; they mustlearn by experience. Perhaps it is possible to convinceadolescents that meditation is better than drugs as an approachto altered consciousness, but they will not believe it unlessthey have been through drug experience and seen its limitationsfor themselves. I will conclude by affirming my belief thatthis system is a real possibility and not a hopeless,unattainable ideal. As such, it is well worth working toward. Thefirst step need be nothing more than to stop what we are nowdoing to prevent us from reaching the goal. And that is nearlyeverything we are doing in the name of combating drug abuse. Contents | Feedback | Search DRCNet Library | Schaffer Library | Major Studies | DealingWith Drug Abuse WT02-B02-25IA086-000614-B045-26http://206.61.184.43:80/schaffer/Library/studies/dwda/dwdamenu.htm 206.61.184.43 19970122021559 text/html 3396HTTP/1.0 200 OKDate: Wednesday, 22-Jan-97 02:15:52 GMTServer: WebSitePro/1.1f (S/N wpo-0deb)Allow-ranges: bytesContent-type: text/htmlLast-modified: Saturday, 28-Dec-96 07:11:14 GMTContent-length: 3179 Dealing with Drug Abuse -- Table of Contents Contents | Feedback | Search DRCNet Library | Schaffer Library | Major Studies Dealing with Drug Abuse A Report to the Ford Foundation THE DRUG ABUSE SURVEY PROJECT Patricia M. Wald, Co-chairman, Peter Barton Hutt, Co-chairman James V. DeLong, Executive Director Edgar May, Annette Abrams, Peter A. Wilson, Peter B. Goldberg,John F. Holahan, Paul A. Hermingsen, Andrew T. Weil, M.D. Contents Foreword, by McGeorge Bundy Preface, by Patricia M. Wald andPeter Barton Hutt The Drug Abuse Survey Project: Summary of Findings, Conclusions, andRecommendations, by Patricia M. Wald and Peter Barton Hutt Staff Papers 1. The Drugs and Their Effects, byJames V. DeLong 2. Drug Education, by Patricia M.Wald and Annette Abrams 3. Treatment and Rehabilitation, byJames V. DeLong 4. The Economics of Heroin, by JohnF. Holahan, with the assistance of Paul A. Henningsen 5. Federal Expenditures on Drug-AbuseControl, by Peter B. Goldberg and James V. DeLong 6. Altered States of Consciousness,by Andrew T. Weil, M.D. 7. Narcotics Addiction and Control inGreat Britain, by Edgar May The Contributors Contents | Feedback | Search DRCNet Library | Schaffer Library | Major StudiesWT02-B02-26IA086-000614-B045-50http://206.61.184.43:80/schaffer/Library/studies/dwda/dwdfwd.htm 206.61.184.43 19970122021614 text/html 5927HTTP/1.0 200 OKDate: Wednesday, 22-Jan-97 02:16:06 GMTServer: WebSitePro/1.1f (S/N wpo-0deb)Allow-ranges: bytesContent-type: text/htmlLast-modified: Saturday, 28-Dec-96 07:11:11 GMTContent-length: 5710 Dealing With Drug Abuse -- Foreword Contents | Feedback | Search DRCNet Library | Schaffer Library | Major Studies | DealingWith Drug Abuse Dealing with Drug Abuse A Report to the Ford Foundation Foreword by McGeorge Bundy This report grew out of an effort by the Ford Foundation tounderstand the massive and complex problem of drug abuse in theUnited States and to determine the most effective ways in whichthe Foundation might contribute to efforts to deal with theproblem. Like many institutions working in such fields as education andpoverty, we encountered the growing blight of drug abuseincreasingly in the 1960's. The Foundation made a number ofgrants to projects that dealt with drug abuse as an aspect of alarger problem, as in work with high school students, faculty,and parents to understand and overcome the alienation of youth.As drug abuse increased, however, the Foundation consideredwhether it might undertake a larger program. The study that ledto this report, undertaken in mid-1970, was the first step inthat consideration. The second important step was to join with three otherfoundations that have shared our concern with drug abuse-theCarnegie Corporation, the Commonwealth Fund, and the Henry J.Kaiser Family Foundation-in financing one of the principalrecommendations of the report, namely, the establishment of anindependent national Drug Abuse Council. The four foundationshave now committed substantial funds for the first several yearsof the Council's work. The functions of the Drug Abuse Council will include: Analysis of the development and results of public policies in the drug-abuse field Dissemination to the public of accurate data on the causes, extent, and treatment of drug abuse Promotion of needed research Synthesis and distribution of available information in research and treatment Evaluation of treatment and education programs Details of the Council's composition and plans are expected tobe announced shortly after this manuscript goes to press. The report leading to the establishment of the Council-thework of an outstanding independent task force of lawyers,scientists, and other investigators-identified four major problemareas in the drug-abuse field: heroin addiction in urbanghettoes; drug experimentation by the young; overuse of legalstimulants and tranquilizers; and the use of drugs to controldeviant behavior, especially among children. The task-force report was intended principally for the FordFoundation's guidance. Yet, the scope and quality of the workwere such that the Foundation shared the first draft, inDecember, 1970, with legal, scientific, and governmentalauthorities active in efforts to control and prevent drug abuse.The reaction to the report was strongly affirmative. The reportwas praised for its thorough, clear, and sober analysis, and anumber of authorities urged the Foundation to make it availableto a wider audience. Accordingly, the Foundation asked the staffof the developing Drug Abuse Council. to bring up to date thosesections dealing with aspects of the problem in which there hadbeen substantial change since the first draft was prepared. Webelieve that this revised, expanded, and updated report is both aforerunner and the first product of the Drug Abuse Council. Assuch, we believe it is a promising harbinger of othercontributions the Council may make, both in understanding thisspreading danger to American society and in helping to curb it. We hope that the report will be useful to the public at largeas well as to specialists, for the drug-abuse problem is so broadand complex that effective efforts to overcome it will demand theunderstanding and support of as many Americans as possible. Contents | Feedback | Search DRCNet Library | Schaffer Library | Major Studies | DealingWith Drug Abuse WT02-B02-27IA086-000614-B045-78http://206.61.184.43:80/schaffer/Library/studies/dwda/dwdprfc.htm 206.61.184.43 19970122021628 text/html 6235HTTP/1.0 200 OKDate: Wednesday, 22-Jan-97 02:16:23 GMTServer: WebSitePro/1.1f (S/N wpo-0deb)Allow-ranges: bytesContent-type: text/htmlLast-modified: Saturday, 28-Dec-96 07:11:07 GMTContent-length: 6018 Dealing With Drug Abuse - Preface Contents | Feedback | Search DRCNet Library | Schaffer Library | Major Studies | DealingWith Drug Abuse Dealing with Drug Abuse A Report to the Ford Foundation Preface In April, 1970, the Ford Foundation asked us to undertake abroad survey of the drug-abuse problem in this country and toreport back by the end of the year on what activities privatefoundations might usefully undertake in this field. During May toDecember, 1970, we had the opportunity to review the drug-abusefield, both through a study of the literature and throughextensive interviews. The report was completed by December 1,1970, and submitted to several foundations for theirconsideration. We did not anticipate making any startling new discoveries inthis field, and, in fact, we have made none. We cannot say thatthere is a magic solution to the problem of drug abuse. Rapid orremarkable results in this area cannot be promised. Alleviationof local and national drug-abuse problems will come, in ourjudgment, through a slow and painful process of social change andaccommodation. Insofar as our report can help to establish themechanisms by which such change and accommodation may begin, andeven be accelerated, it will have more than served its intendedpurpose. The report is reproduced here without change. Although we haveadded occasional footnotes to indicate significant developmentssince December, 1970, we have concluded that any attempt to takenote of every factual change would be both futile andunnecessary. Suffice it to say that developments during the pastyear have only underscored the thrust of the original report. Appendixes to the main report were developed largely by theproject staff both during 1970 and after the report itself wascompleted and submitted to the foundations, in order to recordsome of the more detailed information gathered in the course ofthe survey. These staff papers may be considered current as ofabout September, 1971. Although they do not always represent aconsensus of the project participants, they do make a usefulcontribution to knowledge and discussion in the field. It is not possible to name all of those to whom we areindebted for assistance with the survey and the report. We spoketo hundreds of people throughout the country, all of whomgenerously provided time and material. The trustees, officers,and staff of the Ford Foundation provided complete freedom forthis inquiry, together with ample financial support. We areespecially indebted to Mitchell Sviridoff and Thomas Wright fortheir personal involvement. The Carnegie Corporation, theCommonwealth Fund, and the Kaiser Foundation have been mostencouraging in their consideration of the report, as havenumerous other foundations and organizations. We could not have undertaken the work involved in this surveyor completed the report without the strong support of James V.DeLong, the only professional staff member who worked on theproject from beginning to end. His tenacity in ferreting out thetypes of elusive facts on which any useful report must inevitablyrely, and his detailed and repeated review of the work producthave won him the respect of the entire drug-abuse field. We wouldalso like to give special thanks to Peter Wilson, who was withthe project during the first hectic period. Substantial support in the form of time and resources wasfreely donated by the Washington law firm of Covington &Burling. We also wish to thank the support staff-Meg Gleason,Jacqueline Volpe, Angela Corley, Joan Henderson, Janine Yunker,and Lilly Smith-for their skill and patience in finding andkeeping track of material and in preparing and revising endlessdrafts. Finally, we are gratified by the announcement that the DrugAbuse Council proposed in the report has been established and isbeginning operations. We wish its new President, Thomas E.Bryant, M.D., and the Chairman of its Board, Bethuel M. Webster,success in bringing this new venture to fruition. PATRICIA M. WALD PETER BARTON HUTT Co-chairmen Washington, D.C. December, 1971 Contents | Feedback | Search DRCNet Library | Schaffer Library | Major Studies | DealingWith Drug Abuse WT02-B02-28IA086-000614-B045-107http://206.61.184.43:80/schaffer/Library/studies/dwda/dwdsum.htm 206.61.184.43 19970122021645 text/html 140343HTTP/1.0 200 OKDate: Wednesday, 22-Jan-97 02:16:35 GMTServer: WebSitePro/1.1f (S/N wpo-0deb)Allow-ranges: bytesContent-type: text/htmlLast-modified: Saturday, 28-Dec-96 07:10:03 GMTContent-length: 140124 Dealing With Drug Abuse -- Summary and Recommendations Contents | Feedback | Search DRCNet Library | Schaffer Library | Major Studies | DealingWith Drug Abuse Dealing with Drug Abuse A Report to the Ford Foundation THE DRUG ABUSE SURVEY PROJECT Summary of Findings, Conclusions, and Recommendations by Patricia M. Wald and Peter Barton Hutt The Present Problem and Efforts to Control It A More Promising Approach to Drug Abuse The Drug Abuse Council This report, which summarizes the results of the Drug AbuseSurvey Project, is based upon extensive reading and numerousinterviews with workers in the field throughout the country. Part I describes the present drug-abuse problem in thiscountry and what is currently being done to control it. Part 11summarizes the project's views on a more promising approach todrug-abuse problems. Part III sets forth the project'srecommendations for private foundation activity in this field. Two preliminary observations are essential to this discussion.First, in many aspects of this field, important basic facts havenot yet been determined and perhaps cannot be determined in thenear future; conclusions, therefore, depend on fragmentaryinformation and primarily on judgment. Because of the emotionaland moral attitudes involved in drug issues, conclusions differwidely among individuals and are strongly and deeply held.Secondly, even where facts exist, experts in the field oftendisagree on their meaning and significance. We have found fewareas in which there is not widespread disagreement. As a result, in arriving at the project's conclusions andrecommendations, we have relied strongly on the judgment of theCochairmen and the Executive Director. It should be understoodthat at least one recognized expert could readily be found tochallenge, perhaps vehemently, virtually any statement we make ormight make. It appears that there can be no such thing asconsensus or a noncontroversial report on drug abuse. THE PRESENT PROBLEM AND EFFORTS TO CONTROLIT THE NATURE AND EXTENT OF DRUG ABUSE Staff Report I describes the characteristics of the mostcommon drugs of abuse. For purposes of this report, such sociallyaccepted and legal drugs as alcohol and nicotine have beenexcluded, and "drug abuse" has been limited primarilyto heroin, marijuana, stimulant and depressant drugs, andhallucinogens. The effects of a drug, the pattern of drug use, the prognosisfor the user, and the bases of social concern all vary widelydepending on the drug used, the age and class of the user, andthe circumstances. No categorization, therefore, is totallysatisfactory. The four core problems, however, have been broadlydelineated by many commentators as: (1) the use of heroin inurban poverty areas, (2) experimentation with a wide variety ofdrugs by the young, (3) the use of drugs by middle-aged and olderpersons as a form of quasi-self-medication, and (4) the use ofdrugs as a behavior-control device. Heroin in Urban Poverty Areas. According to our bestestimates, there were, as of November, 1970, approximately150,000 to 250,000 active heroin addicts in the United States.'(Some estimates run as high as 300,000 heroin addicts in New YorkCity and 600,000 nationally, but these figures have littlesupport.) The addicts are heavily concentrated in the poorestareas of large metropolitan areas. Probably half live in NewYork, and 60 to 70 per cent of them are black, Puerto Rican, orMexican-American. Almost 85 per cent are male. These figures represent people who use heroin on a dailybasis, injecting a dose every six to eight hours as the effect ofthe previous dose wears off. They may spend anywhere from $10 to$100 per day on heroin, depending on their dosage and tolerance,their economic ability to sustain the habit, the purity of thedrug bought, and the price level of the city in which they live. There is an additional, though unknown, population that usesheroin only occasionally, either alone or as part of a pattern ofmultiple drug use. The size of this group is a matter ofconjecture and debate. Some experts believe that repetitive useof heroin leads inexorably to addiction, whereas others believethat there is a substantial number of intermittent users who donot become addicted. It is not possible to resolve this issue definitively. Itseems probable, however, that a large number of persons haveexperimented with heroin a few times without becoming addicted.Heroin is easily available in the slum areas of most majorcities. Although a large habit is expensive, a single dose ischeap ($1 or less for a capsule containing about I mg. of heroinin Washington, D.C.), and the unit of sale in many places is sosmall that a neophyte can take it without much fear of anoverdose. It seems likely that a large percentage of the youngblack males in any large urban lower-class area have triedheroin. The majority who have experimented with it have notbecome addicted. And, although the potency of heroin makes itdifficult to believe that large numbers of intermittent usersnever become addicted, this possibility cannot be ruled out onthe basis of present information. Although heroin is a primary drug for the addict, multipledrug use is exceedingly common. According to some studies,between 40 and 60 per cent of the addicts use one of theamphetamines or barbiturates as a secondary drug on a regularbasis. Cocaine, a strong nonaddictive stimulant, is also usedwidely. The tremendous wave of concern about heroin that has swept thecountry appears to be caused primarily by the fear of crimeassociated with addiction. Heroin itself does not cause criminalbehavior in any physiological or psychological sense, but theneed to maintain an expensive habit often does. A heroin addictwill do almost anything to obtain money to buy the drug. There isvirtually no way in which a poor, black, unskilled youth can earnlegally the $30 per day that is required for the average habit.To maintain his addiction, he can deal in drugs, engage inconsensual crime, or steal. It is reasonable to estimate thataddicts steal between $1 billion and $2 billion in merchandiseper year. Estimates of thefts in New York City alone range from alow of $.25 billion to a high of $1.9 billion. There is someevidence that up to 50 per cent of property crimes in the majormetropolitan areas with a serious heroin addiction problem arecommitted by addicts. On the other hand, there is evidence thatmost addicts engaged in crime before they became addicted.Addiction, therefore, cannot necessarily be regarded as the causeof a criminal life-style, although it unquestionably intensifiescriminal activity. A secondary cause of the current concern about heroin is thefear that it has, or will, spread throughout society. Whileheroin is undoubtedly now available in the suburbs, there islittle evidence that it represents a substantial problem there.It remains largely a lower-class drug. A third cause commonly cited for the concern about heroin isfear of the effects of the drug on the user. Actually, there isno proof that heroin itself causes any organic damage to the bodyor brain similar, for example, to the extensive damage caused byalcohol. Death through overdose has been attributed by medicalexperts to the fact that heroin is a powerful nervous-systemsuppressant that may cause respiration to cease when the dosageexceeds the individual's tolerance, or to the fact that someindividuals may experience a severe allergic reaction to heroin. It seems possible that many addicts would function normally ifgiven a steady supply of good-quality drugs. The real harm tousers is that they presently tend to become social dropouts, inthat the illegal status of the drug causes them to spend alltheir time obtaining and using it. There seems little doubt that,if it were not for the fear of crime and the spread of heroin tothe suburbs, most of society would not be seriously worried aboutheroin addiction. Youthful Drug Experimentation. Within the last five yearsthere has been a substantial increase in the use of illicitnonopiate drugs by the young, particularly among middle-classcollege and high school students and young military personnel.The prevalent drugs of abuse for this group are marijuana (and,to some extent, the more potent cannabis product, hashish), oralamphetamines and barbiturates, LSD, and other hallucinogens.During 1971 the use of heroin by GI's in Vietnam became, for thefirst time, a matter of grave public concern. As of November, 1971, the best estimates are that 15 millionpeople in this country have experimented with marijuana. Possibly30 per cent of these go on to become occasional users, and 5 percent become frequent users. While these estimates are veryuncertain, survey research supports the conclusion that marijuanause has spread fantastically in the last few years. One survey of200 colleges found that 47 per cent of those interviewed hadsmoked it 34 per cent occasionally and 13 per cent frequently.There are major differences among colleges, of course. Othersurveys found that 70 per cent of the student body at one medicalschool were current users of marijuana, as compared with 44 percent and 5 per cent at two other medical schools. Extrapolatingfrom available statistics, it is likely that 20 per cent of allAmericans between the ages of. 15 and 35 have used marijuana atleast once -a crime for which they could have been imprisoned bythe federal government for up to ten years.' There is currently little evidence that marijuana causesphysical harm. The federal government is now engaged in a crashresearch program to find out the short- and long-term effects ofmarijuana. Critics of this research program argue that it isintended simply to justify current federal policy and is not asound independent scientific investigation. Even persons who aresympathetic to marijuana use will be surprised, however, if it isdiscovered that marijuana use in large amounts over a long periodof time is totally harmless. The real issue over marijuanaappears to be not whether it causes mild physical damage butwhether its use has already spread so widely that, as is true ofalcohol, the social costs of efforts to prohibit it exceed thephysical costs that would be incurred by eliminating criminalpenalties for, or even legalizing, its use.' Experimentation with oral amphetamines and barbiturate drugs,all of which have recognized medical uses and are therefore ofteneasily obtainable, is probably second only to the use ofmarijuana. Some 18 per cent of the students in the 200-campussurvey had tried amphetamines, and 15 per cent had triedbarbiturates, but only 2 per cent and 1 per cent, respectively,had used them frequently. There are no more reliable estimatesavailable. A quite dangerous pattern of middle-class youthful amphetaminedrug use is the injectable methamphetamine ("speed")Culture. Intravenous injections of methamphetamine usually takethe form of continuous use of massive doses for several days.Users may become psychotic while under its influence, and it isprobably the drug most likely to lead directly to violence. Thereis some evidence that it causes serious organic damage. Speedalso tends to make the user lose interest in food, sleep, andhygiene. Because of these extreme effects, a speed"run" is hard to sustain over any length of time, andthe end of a period of heavy speed use-the"crash"-produces serious depression. Users have learnedover time that they can make the crash smoother by takingbarbiturates or heroin. Reports from San Francisco, the firstcity to have a sizable speed culture, are that heroin is becomingthe drug of choice for a large proportion of former speed usersbecause it is a more pleasant "down" than thebarbiturates. The use of LSD originally peaked in about 1967, declinedbriefly, and then started to increase again as the early reportsabout genetic damage caused by the drug were discredited and asuse spread downward into the high schools. The survey that foundmarijuana use among 47 per cent of college students on 200campuses found that 11 per cent had used LSD, but only I per centused it frequently. The National Institute of Mental Health hadearlier reported surveys showing a 2 to 9 per cent range of LSDuse among college students, with an over-all average of 5 percent. While a ratio of one LSD experimenter to every five triersof marijuana seems too high for the population at large, or evenfor most colleges and high schools, it does illustrate a higherrate of current usage than has been suspected. There is general agreement that LSD is a powerful drug thatshould be used with care. In clinical use, severe reactions arerare. One study found that 25,000 administrations of LSD ormescaline to 5,000 people resulted in serious complications inonly 0.08 per cent of experimental subjects and 0.34 per cent ofsubjects who were undergoing therapy. There is no scientificcertainty concerning other types of reaction that have beenalleged, but not proved, to result from LSD use, such asflashbacks and birth defects. The long-term effects are notknown. Youthful . experimentation may also involve heroin, especiallyin the ghetto. A recent survey of juvenile addicts in Washington,D.C., showed that over half started directly by mainlining heroinrather than first using other drugs. Among middle-class youth,however, experimentation with marijuana predominates, and heroinis probably the least used drug. Youthful middle-class experimentation with heroin as part of apattern of multidrug use does appear to be increasing. Thisphenomenon is too new, and information is too fragmentary, tojudge whether it represents the beginnings of significant growthin middle-class addiction. Preliminary reports indicate thatpeople who become involved with heroin in this non-ghetto contexthave less tendency toward heavy involvement. The extent of penetration of drugs other than marijuana isdifficult to assess. Considerably fewer young people seem to havetried oral doses of amphetamines and barbiturates than have triedmarijuana, but more appear to have tried them than have triedLSD. The number of young people who become heavily involved withamphetamines (especially injectable methamphetamine) andbarbiturates is unknown but is probably of about the samemagnitude as those heavily involved with LSD. Society's current concern about youthful drug experimentationis often attributed to the possible detrimental effect on thehealth of drug users. Certainly, concern about the potential harmfrom heroin experimentation in the ghetto is far more justifiedthan concern about marijuana experimentation in the suburbs. Itis our judgment, however, that physical harm is actually only apartial cause of this public concern. There are, after all, up to9 million alcoholics, whose alcohol abuse affects a total of wellover 30 million people in this country, a far larger number thanare affected by drug abuse; yet, this enormous health problem hascreated relatively little public concern. Rather, the principal force behind the present public concernabout youthful middle-class experimentation seems to relate todifferences in perceptions and life-styles between older andyounger generations. Older persons tend to accept the use ofdrugs only for therapeutic purposes. They do not regard alcoholand nicotine as "drugs" and believe that the substancescan be properly used for social and personal pleasure. But theolder generation regards the use of drugs, such as marijuana andLSD, for social and personal pleasure as symptomatic ofdisrespect for law and authority and as an attempt to escaperesponsibility. In contrast, many in the younger generation tendto regard the use of drugs for social and personal pleasure asentirely proper. Use of such drugs as marijuana and LSD istherefore viewed by them as an opportunity for enhancement ofpersonal experience, an act of social custom within a peer group,or a mark of youthful rebellion and independence similar tosmoking weeds or sipping beer behind the barn fifty years ago. Drug Use among the Middle-aged and Elderly. Millions of peopleuse psychoactive drugs as a way of coping with the tensions andproblems of everyday living. Current estimates are vague, but ina 1967 survey 25 per cent of all persons over 18 reported use ofa psychoactive drug during the preceding year. The number ofpersons reporting use of a tranquilizer at some time in theirlives rose from 7 per cent in 1957 to 27 per cent in 1967.American industry apparently produces about 4 billion dosageunits of barbiturates (not including other major and minortranquilizers) and 8 billion dosage units of amphetamines eachyear. It is charged that half of these are diverted to theillegal market at some point, and an unknown proportion of therest are prescribed carelessly. Some of these drugs are used byheroin addicts and youthful experimenters. Most are not so used,however, and the problem of self-prescribed use of these drugs isone that pervades all strata of society. (In addition, about 10per cent of the 80 million people who use alcohol have a seriousproblem of dependence.) The National Institute of Mental Health (NIMH) is nowconducting a series of comprehensive drug-use surveys, whichshould provide an accurate picture of the extent of middle-ageand elderly drug abuse with legal as well as illegal drugs. Theproject includes research into the frequency and situationalaspects of this problem. Why certain persons become dependent on these drugs is notclear. As in the case of heroin addiction, there is considerabledebate as to what physiological and psychological factors areinvolved. The personal costs of this type of drug abuse can be veryhigh. Of all the potential drugs of abuse, alcohol is one of themost damaging, since even relatively light consumption clearlycauses some damage to such organs as the brain and liver, andheavy consumption causes serious damage and sometimes death.Barbiturates cause damage very similar to that caused by alcohol,and, in the formal literature, these two drugs are regarded asessentially additive and interchangeable in chronic intoxication.With barbiturates, as well as alcohol, there is a serious risk oflethal overdose. The personal costs of steady amphetamine use arenot clear. Experts believe that large doses entail a high risk oforganic damage. There appears to be no clear evidence concerningsmaller doses. The social costs of alcoholism are now fairly well known andneed not be detailed here, but the social costs of the abuse ofbarbiturates and amphetamines are still largely unknown. Thesocial benefits attributable to these drugs are equallyuncertain. There is clearly a widely felt need for the particulareffects of the various drugs. It is far from clear thatelimination of this form of drug abuse would result in netbenefits to the society, because one cannot be sure that otherpossible responses to life situations would be less harmful. Itis possible that reducing the use of tranquilizers would resultin a rise of the violent crime rate, or in the divorce rate, orin child beating. It almost certainly would require greaterinstitutionalization of persons with borderline emotionalproblems. Drugs in Behavior Control. A fourth emerging problem is theoverprescription of drugs to control the behavior of captivepopulations, such as overactive school children and nursing-homeresidents, where other, nondrug methods of control shouldproperly be used instead. Recent information has revealedsignificant use of amphetamines to calm down behavior in theclassrooms of urban public schools. At the other end of the agespectrum, tranquilizers are reportedly being used far tooextensively on elderly patients in nursing homes to keep themfrom clamoring for the attention of overworked attendants. These drugs are properly used, within limits of sound medicalpractice approved by the Food and Drug Administration, forhyper-kinetic children and elderly patients with emotionalproblems. There is a serious danger, however, that they may beused as a simple method of managing school children,institutionalized patients, and correctional inmates as asubstitute for a competent staff and the other resources neededin dealing with those not able to care for themselves. And, asthe range of behavior-controlling drugs becomes wider, we cananticipate even greater problems in their use in unwarrantedsituations. BASIC RESEARCH ON DRUG ABUSE Existing Research. Most of the basic research now being doneon drugs of abuse is conducted by the NIMH Addiction ResearchCenter (ARC) at Lexington, Kentucky, or conducted or financed bygrant or contract through the NIMH Division of Narcotic Addictionand Drug Abuse and the NIMH Division of Psycbopharmacology. ARC is an interdisciplinary group doing basic research on thephysiological effects of a number of drugs of abuse, and one ofthe very few to our knowledge that has recently conducted anyresearch with heroin. Its 1970 budget is about $.8 million. Itsprincipal functions are research on the abuse potential of drugsand on opiate antagonists. ARC would need far more personnel,ranging from senior research scientists to technicians andparaprofessionals, and far more funds if it were to expand itsactivities broadly to include basic research on the cause andnature of all drug abuse and drug dependence. NIMH funds for intramural and extramural research relating todrug abuse have increased threefold in five years.' The figuresbelow include research in pharmacology, sociology, psychology, Year Budget Authority (1,000,000) 1966 6.4 1967 10.6 1968 13.3 1969 14.1 1970 16.3 1971 18.3 TOTAL: $79.0 and many other areas. They also apparently include at leastsome of the research on psychoactive drugs sponsored by the NIMHDivision of Psychopharmacology, which is interested primarily inthe use of drugs in the treatment of mental disorders. The research funds are dispersed among the various drugs ofabuse, not concentrated on one or two. For 1970, the only yearfor which we now have information, the division by drugs was asfollows: Drugs Allocation 000,000) Opiates 3.8 Marijuana 2.3 Hallucinogens 1.8 Barbiturates 5.3 Amphetamines 2.8 Other .3 TOTAL: $16.3 NIMH is unable to provide either a dollar breakdown on thetypes of research represented (pharmacology, sociology, etc.) ora breakdown by drug for previous years. In 1970, $1.3 million ofthe money spent on marijuana research was dispersed throughspecial contracts. ARC received $.8 million of the moneydesignated for opiate research to operate its program. Anundeterminable amount is spent by the Division ofPsychopharmacology and other parts of NIMH.' The balance ofresearch expenditures represents about 50 grants to specificindividuals and institutions given on application. The allocation of grant resources is determined primarily byan advisory committee of physical and social scientists thatreviews all applications for funding and assigns them a priorityranking on the basis of scientific merit. While NIMHadministrators have some authority to overrule the committee(they can fund a low priority project instead of a high-priorityone, but they cannot fund a project if the committee refuses toassign it any priority at all), we have been informed that thishappens rarely. We have also been informed that little or no effort is made tocreate a program of research. Applications are reviewed in avacuum. Consideration is not given to the importance or relevanceof the research to policy issues or to major scientific andmedical questions, or to alternative uses of the research budget.The results of prior projects are reportedly not made availableto the committee for its consideration in reviewing current grantapplications. No significant effort is made to encourage grantapplications in areas of particular interest to scientists,physicians, and the government. The Justice Department's Bureau of Narcotics and DangerousDrugs (BNDD) has engaged in some research in the past and stillhas some ongoing efforts on the abuse potential of drugs, thesociology of drug use, the characteristics of dealers, and themarket structure of the drug traffic. The decision has recentlybeen made, however, that BNDD's research role is to be limited tosubjects related to law enforcement. A major problem with basic research conducted or funded by thefederal government is that it is necessarily limited bygovernmental policy. Thus, as might be expected, there are largegaps in our basic knowledge about drugs of abuse. In particular,basic experimentation with the effects of heroin on chronicheroin addicts has been virtually ignored in view of the strongfederal policy against any such research. Until very recently,federal policy also virtually precluded marijuana research inhumans. Federal regulations single out LSD and a handful of otherhallucinogens, from among all known drugs, as requiring specificFood and Drug Administration (FDA) approval of an InvestigationalNew Drug Plan (rather than just filing the plan, as is true forall other drugs) before clinical investigation may begin. Underthe 1970 federal drug-abuse law, research with heroin, marijuana,and LSD may be conducted only after the Secretary of HEW hasapproved the researcher and the protocol. In short, currentgovernmental policy is a critical factor in determining the typeof research that may be done under federal auspices or approval. Other possible sources of funding for basic research on drugsof abuse are the states, the universities, and the pharmaceuticalindustry. Thus far, the states have concentrated on appliedresearch, primarily in the area of treatment. The universitiesappear to have no significant source of funds for basic researchother than the federal government. And the pharmaceuticalindustry concentrates primarily on product-oriented appliedresearch. As a practical matter, therefore, most basic researchdepends on federal funds. The pharmaceutical industry's research efforts are not onlyproduct-oriented but, indeed, have the goals of increasing thenumber of psychoactive drugs, enhancing their effect, orimproving their activity in some other fashion. From thestandpoint of drug abuse, the pharmaceutical industry is workingnight and day to create products that will intensify the problem.Many of these drugs, of course, have enormous medical value thatfar outweighs their abuse potential. The Need for Additional Basic Research. It is apparent thatthere is a serious lack of basic information about how drugs ofabuse work and their long-term effects on the body. Many examplescould be given, but a few will make the point: Since World War 11, there have been over 3,000 technicalpapers on LSD. But scientists still do not know why LSD causes apsychoactive effect, or whether it is toxic, or whether it causesbirth defects, or whether the widely reported"flashback" effect is real or imagined and, if real,has an organic basis. In short, many of the most importantquestions remain unanswered. Morphine was first isolated in the early 1800's, and heroinwas synthesized in the late 1800's. Among the things we still donot know about these drugs are the mechanisms by which tolerancedevelops, or whether an addict can be stabilized on a given dose,or whether the drugs cause any organic damage, or the mechanismby which they alleviate pain, or even whether withdrawal can bepsychologically as well as physically induced. While it is common knowledge that many drug users, includingthose on methadone, use combinations of drugs, little is knownabout the effects of these combinations. For example, mixtures ofheroin and cocaine, or of amphetamines and barbiturates, areoften taken, but we do not know how they interact. We have been unable to discern agreement among researchers onwhat is and is not known, or on the priority needs for research,with respect to the drugs of abuse. Basic research questions concerning psychoactive drugs can bedivided roughly into two groups: (1) toxicological andpharmacological effects, and (2) psychological and perceptualeffects. Scientists probably know most about the toxicology (organicdamage done to the human body) of drugs of abuse, yet even herethere are many unanswered questions. It is known, for example,that excessive use of alcohol and barbiturates causes extremedamage to the brain and liver. It is suspected that amphetaminesin massive doses also cause organic damage, but scientists arenot yet sure. There is insufficient toxicological information onthe opiates (e.g., heroin, morphine), the cannabinols (e.g.,marijuana, hashish), and the hallucinogens (e.g., LSD,mescaline), the three categories of drugs with which the countryis most concerned. The organic damage caused by drugs is, of course, only oneaspect of the more general study of pharmacological effects thatis, on what cells does a drug operate, how does it operate, whatmetabolites are triggered, and so forth. Nor are such questionsunique to drugs of abuse. There appears to be no general theoryof drug action based on the chemical structure of drugs intowhich discrete studies of the pharmacology of the drugs of abusecan be fitted. And there is a question whether psychoactive drugsdo or do not represent a separate class of pharmacologicalcompounds that can be studied at a theoretical level, independentof the study of pharmacology generally. Basic pharmacological research would undoubtedly provideuseful knowledge for basic researchers, from which they may someday construct a general theory of psychoactive drug action. Thecentral-nervous-system effect of drugs is, however, aparticularly difficult area of study. Many of the drugs withwhich we are concerned have effects that are apparently quitesubtle and difficult to delineate. Some of the majortranquilizers, which exert immensely potent effects on the brain,have been studied intensively by NIMH for almost twenty years,and we still do not really know how they work. It is uncertainwhether more could be learned faster by studying LSD, marijuana,or even heroin. In short, the road to a general understanding ofthe pharmacological effects of psychoactive drugs is difficult,and basic research in this area is not guaranteed to beproductive. Brain functioning is, of course, one of the current frontiersof science, and the complexities of studying the central nervoussystem make it likely that this area will remain a frontier foryears, if not decades. Although drugs are simply one type ofinstrument for the study of the broader questions, the drugs ofabuse may be a particularly interesting input because theyclearly have large effects on the brain. There is a great deal of work to be done here, and much of itwill be important. As the pharmacologists study the physiologicalcorrelates of drugs and the psychopharmacologists andexperimental psychologists study the psychic correlates, at somepoint in time linkages will be made leading to a unified view ofthe entire process. The second category of potential research concerns the generalinteraction between drug taking and psychological and perceptualawareness. Such psychological variables as anxiety levels,attitudes toward self, perceptions, attention span, and mentalability are all affected by drug taking. Conversely, pre-existingstates of mind and attitude have a significant impact on whetheran individual will seek drugs in the first place and on theactual effects of a drug once it is taken. Historically, because drug abuse has been looked at primarilyfrom the standpoint of deviant behavior, the study of itspsychological and perceptual effects has been placed largelyunder the heading of psychopathology. Interest in the role ofexternal stimuli, of which drugs are but one example, in alteringthe individual's perception and awareness of his surroundings hasincreased in recent years. There is, for example, greaterscientific interest in the subjective experiences anddescriptions, rather than simply objective phenomena, connectedwith drug taking. As with basic pharmacology, there is muchimportant information yet to be obtained in this developing area,all of which is fundamental to a better understanding of humanfunctioning; but the progress of such research will likely beslow and uncertain. This area of interest, also, is not discrete. There areclearly physical correlates for different states of perceptionand awareness, although the links have yet to be forged. DRUG EDUCATION AND PREVENTION There is substantial uncertainty and confusion in the area ofdrug education and prevention. Although nearly all workers in thefield believe strongly that sensitive and accurate drug educationprograms can play an important role in preventing harmful drugexperiences among youth, there is no real evidence that sucheducational efforts are successful. Educators are cautious aboutnew programs because of concern in some quarters that too muchdiscussion about drugs of abuse could glamorize them and lead toexperimentation. There is also increasing concern about the useof ex-addicts in schools. Although they are popular with studentsfor "telling it like it is," there is justifiable fearthat providing them with an aura of prestige may lead significantnumbers of students to believe that they can and should try drugsthemselves. Past efforts have generally been of the "scare"type, emphasizing the moral and physical degradation of drugabuse and generously sprinkled with blatant misinformation,especially about marijuana. In schools, such lectures are usuallydelivered by gym teachers or visiting law-enforcement officials.Their aim has been one-dimensional-to stop young people fromtrying any illegal drugs. It is now widely recognized that drug education, to succeedwith increasingly sophisticated young audiences, must beaccurate, factual, and consistent with the listener's ownexperiences or observations. Although a truly candid educationalprogram may reduce involvement with the more dangerous drugs,such as heroin, it may also increase experimentation with theless dangerous drugs, such as marijuana, and many educators arereluctant to be drawn into an approach with such potentiallycontroversial consequences. The federal government spent $3.5million during the summer of 1970 in an attempt to train 350schoolteachers, administrators, and student leaders to conductworkshops in their home communities dispensing information aboutdrugs. The ability to withstand attitudinal confrontations ofskeptical students was stressed. We have no indication whetherthis program was successful. Virtually none of the myriad drug-education programs swampingthe market from private companies, civic organizations, and eventhe government itself has been evaluated. The only detailedevaluation we have seen, involving a model-education program in ahigh school, showed that students improved not only in theirfactual knowledge but in their cautionary attitude toward druguse. That evaluation showed that the students liked the personalaccounts of ex-addicts best but chose doctors to tell the facts.The students wanted more emphasis on the particular drugs incommon use in their school and an approach that took the drugs upone by one rather than all grouped together. The current emphasis among educators is on a continuousspectrum of education about drugs generally (legal and illegal),from kindergarten through high school, and on the integration ofdrug education into other social-problems curricula, which wouldinclude alcohol, smoking, sex, family living, and so forth. Dr.Norman Zinberg of Harvard has been evaluating such anexperimental course for senior and junior high schools outside ofBoston and expects to produce an effective and exportablecurriculum. Dr. William Soskin in California has a different kindof program, for which school credit is given, that creates athird force besides family and school in the youth's life-aprimary group with which he shares experiences all week,including a heavy emphasis on inner exploration. One intrinsic problem with any kind of school-based educationis that a large portion of serious student drug users havealready rejected school. The motivational exploration thateducators stress can be carried on only in a spirit of trust, andtoo many schools still require teachers and counselors to reportall known or suspected users to the police. Only a few schoolshave had the courage to experiment with the designation of one ormore teachers or counselors as official confidants to whomstudents can turn for help without fear of exposure. Few schoolshave close working alliances with treatment resources to whichthey can refer students. Parental permission for such treatmentposes another legal obstacle to such desirable arrangements. Itis doubtful that the federal government's crash summerteacher-training program can surmount these basic problemswithout a more fundamental change in community attitudes. The National Coordinating Council on Drug Abuse Education andInformation, composed of nearly one hundred government andprivate agency members, has recently entered the drug educationfield.' It conducts evaluations of the explosion of anti drugfilms and literature and stresses rational, coordinated effortsby city leaders to explore the basis and true extent of acommunity's drug problems and how the community can best utilizeits resources for dealing with them. NCC's approach is that drugeducation should not aim at suppression of all illicit drug usebut should teach children to make rational decisions based onreliable information about which drugs they will use and how muchthey will use them. It can reasonably be expected that more federal money will bechanneled to the states and cities for drug education, withlittle direction on how it should be spent. There are only themost primitive notions of how to determine whether adrug-education program has been successful. Even the goals ofsuch programs are hotly contested. And there is little emphasison evaluation techniques by the federal government. At least in the immediate future, most schools will probablybe unable to alter their basic authoritarian structure to thekind of open-minded approach to drug education that will helpearly experimenters or drug-prone students. The mere presentationof basic facts,, even if honestly set forth, can be expected tohave limited value in stopping the spread of youthfulexperimentation, and a law-enforcement orientation that requiresschool personnel to report all users will totally undermineeducation efforts. It is probably also true that adults, more than schoolchildren, need accurate drug information to counter long-heldmyths. An appalling number of well-educated parents, as well astheir children, still fail to understand the real differencesamong drugs of abuse. This misunderstanding is perpetuated in the1970 federal drug-abuse law, which provides a one-year maximumprison sentence for possession of any illegal drug, regardless ofwhether it is quite dangerous (like heroin) or less harmful (likemarijuana). TREATMENT With respect to treatment, two basic problems exist. First,relatively few drug-dependent persons are currently in treatmentprograms, largely because the programs do not have sufficientfacilities or staff. Second, existing treatment for drug abuseand drug dependence has not produced impressive results (exceptfor some methadone programs), and, even if all drug abusers anddrug-dependent persons had treatment available to them, theoutcome would be uncertain. There are three general types of treatment modalities forusers of drugs other than heroin. In many urban centers wheredrug use flourishes, crisis clinics have been set up to offerimmediate emergency services to drug users and other troubledyouths. They are typically staffed by youths under volunteerprofessional direction. They give out drug information, analyzestreet samples, "talk down" people with bad reactions,and see that those in genuine medical danger get to hospitals.Some also refer persons to long term treatment programs orthemselves offer individual or group therapy to drug users. SanFrancisco's Haight-Ashbury Free Medical Clinic is the best-knownexample of such clinics now found in many cities. Therapeutic communities, which operate on the basic assumptionthat a character defect causes drug use, treat all drug userswith encounter-group therapy or a more gentle form of "rapsession" therapy. Users of speed and LSD, and even heavy marijuana users, maywell have underlying psychiatric problems. The only treatmentavailable for them thus far is the kind of individual or grouptherapy used with other mental-health patients. Its successremains largely unevaluated. Because heroin is regarded as the most serious drug threat tosociety, there has been a much more concentrated effort attreatment for heroin addicts. In New York City, where probably 50to 60 per cent of the nation's heroin addicts reside, anestimated 10 per cent are in some form of treatment. Washington,D.C., has perhaps 15 per cent of its estimated 15,000 addictsunder treatment. As of October, 1970, there were about fiftymethadone projects throughout the United States serving a totalof about 9,00010,000 persons.' Nationally, it is safe to say thatwell over 90 per cent of all heroin addicts are not in anytreatment program at all. The two main treatment modalities for heroin addicts are (1)abstinence, bolstered by outpatient or inpatient group therapy,and (2) methadone maintenance, with or without supportiveservices. (A possible third approach is longer-term"detoxification" with methadone, which is given indecreasing dosages until the subject is entirely drug-free.) InNew York City, nearly 4,000 heroin users are currently in fiftyresidential therapeutic communities, and 5,000-7,000 arereportedly on methadone. In Washington and Chicago, about half ofall persons in treatment programs are on methadone and half onabstinence programs. There were, until recently, only a handfulof addicts on methadone in California because of a legalrestriction on its use outside institutions. Some legalrestrictions still exist today. Many other large cities stillhave no methadone program at all. Most methadone programs have long waiting lists. Almost alltreatment programs have selective admission criteria and thus areprobably skimming off the cream of the addict population. They donot appear to handle the most criminally active and hard-coreaddicts. As compared to abstinence, methadone is clearly showing betterresults. Depending upon the degree of prescreening and the amountof supportive services built into the program, between 45 and 80per cent of those admitted to methadone programs are successfullytreated, as measured by continuation in the program, decreasedarrests, job stability, and other social indicators.Experimentation is being tried in a few places with"barebones" methadone (without supportive services) tosee what portion of the addict population can make it on thesubstitute drug alone, without concomitant social-adjustmenthelp. The most promising approach we have seen is putting bothmethadone and nondrug treatment programs under the sameadministrative roof. From a research standpoint, this permitsaccumulation of a body of data from which a typology may bedeveloped to show which kind of addict succeeds in which kind ofprogram. There is some concern, however, that a multimodalityprogram, combining maintenance and abstinence alternatives, mayconfuse patients and reduce the effectiveness of both approaches. The more comprehensive the methadone program, and the morecomplete the data collection and evaluation, the more costly theprogram will be and the fewer patients it will be able to serve.Costs per patient per year may vary from a high of over $2,000for a full service program to a low of $500 for a"barebones" program. Methadone has thus far been used primarily with older addictswho have volunteered for treatment. Except in Washington, theaverage age of persons in methadone programs has been overthirty, close to the age when statistics indicate that a sizableportion of both addicts and criminals tend to "matureout" of their deviance. Whether methadone will do as wellwith an involuntary population of younger age remains to be seen. There is a sizable problem of methadone acceptance, especiallyin the black community, because of opposition from groups whoview it as a crutch indistinguishable from heroin and a source ofwhite enslavement of blacks. Detoxification from methadonemaintenance is being tried with a small number of patients. Ifthis proves successful, the cloud of lifelong dependence nowhanging over methadone will be removed and methadone should provemore acceptable among blacks. Another problem is the possibility of "leakage" inthe control system. Diversion of methadone poses a danger, as isindicated by the death of several non-opiate users who had notbuilt up a tolerance and who ingested large doses. On the otherhand, methadone appears to be safe for use by addicts incontrolled maintenance programs. Although all available evidence indicates that methadone is asafe and effective method of treatment, the federal governmenthas nevertheless concluded, apparently for policy reasons, toinhibit its use by giving it only investigational status. Thisraises costs and staff requirements and limits the number ofaddicts who can be treated. It is unclear what additionalinformation, if any, would persuade the Food and DrugAdministration to alter this decision.' Until methadone leaves the research context in which it nowlegally resides, its potential parameters will remain unclear.And just how much federal money will be available in the futureto encourage methadone or multimodality programs in all majorcities is unknown. Some work is also being done on the nonnarcotic antagonists,primarily cyclazocine and naloxone, which block the euphoriceffect of heroin. Several hundred people have now used theseantagonist drugs. The chief problems in their use have been theshort duration of action of both drugs-four to eight hours fornaloxone, about the same as heroin, and 22 to 26 hours forcyclazocine, about the same as methadone-and, until recently,unpleasant side effects from cyclazocine. Work has beenundertaken on longer-acting antagonists and on an implant thatcould discharge the drugs over a period of weeks. Theantagonists, however, apparently do not satisfy the drug cravingas methadone is said to do and have not proved as popular withaddicts. Other, more conventional methods of treating heroin addictionappear to have a substantially lower success rate than methadone,although comparison is difficult because of the differences inthe types of drug users treated, the criteria for success, thestatistics kept, and so forth. Therapeutic communities like Daytop Village, Odyssey House,and Phoenix House purport to have up to a 75 per cent successrate with those who stay in the program, but they do not includein their figures the large number of addicts (estimated as highas 50 per cent) who drop out within the first month or two. Dr.Jerome Jaffee's work in Chicago, which to our knowledgeconstitutes one of the few attempts to compare the effectivenessof methadone and therapeutic communities with the samepopulation, shows a startlingly greater success with methadonethan with the therapeutic community. Of the 2,500 addicts whohave been treated in the New York City Addiction ServicesAgency's Phoenix Houses since 1967, only 130 have graduated backinto community life (and 90 per cent of these work in addictionprograms). An inpatient in such a facility costs $3,000 to $5,000per year compared to a cost of $500 to $2,000 for a methadonepatient, but methadone may require a longer, or even a permanent,period of treatment. It seems highly unlikely, in any event, thatthere could ever be a sufficient number of residentialtherapeutic communities to have a major impact on the problem. Black community organizations, such as Colonel Hassan'sBlackman's Development Fund and the Bonabond Agency inWashington, also claim a special ability to keep black addictsoff heroin by abstinence therapy following detoxification withmethadone and appeal to racial pride. But thus far their claimsof success have received no objective evaluation. NIMH is still committed to comprehensive community mentalhealth centers as the answer to the drug-treatment problem, butrecent federal legislation for the first time permits support ofdrug-treatment programs unaffiliated with these centers. We havebeen able to find only a few examples of success with thecommunity-mental-health-center approach and an equal number ofoutright failures. The successful community-mental-health-center,drug-treatment programs would appear to be just as successful ifthey were not affiliated with the centers, and even in theorythere is reason to question the inclusion of drug treatment underthe umbrella of the centers. In any event, we are unable to findstatistics on the effectiveness of this approach. Virtually everyone agrees that individual psychiatric therapynot only is impractical because of the large number of addictsbut generally produces poor results with addicts. There is one method of treatment that has not been attemptedin this country since the Bureau of Narcotics, with the supportof the American Medical Association, stamped it out in the early1920's-heroin maintenance. At one time, there were some fortyheroin-maintenance clinics in several areas of the country,unfortunately under rather loose procedures. The Bureau succeededin banning them by 1923 and has since done everything possible todiscredit this method of treatment. The suggestion by aprestigious joint American Bar Association-American MedicalAssociation Committee in the late 1950's that experimentationwith a heroin clinic program again be undertaken was met with avicious attack by the Bureau of Narcotics. During the past fiveyears, the Bureau of Narcotics (now the Bureau of Narcotics andDangerous Drugs) and NIMH have argued that the British system ofnarcotics maintenance has utterly failed and could not reasonablybe considered for use in this country. (Staff Paper 7 of thisreport, prepared for the Project after an extensive on-siteinspection and investigation, concludes that the British systemof narcotics maintenance appears to have succeeded in containingthe narcotics problem there.) One outstanding deficiency in the treatment field involvesevaluation. Several treatment programs, mostlymethadone-maintenance programs, have data-collection andevaluation components. The Dole-Nyswander program in New York hasbeen intensively evaluated by a prestigious medical committee,and indeed the evaluation of methadone in various programsthroughout the country has now reached the point where there canno longer be serious question about the general usefulness ofthis treatment approach. The vast majority of the treatmentprograms, however, and particularly the non-methadone programs,have relatively narrow or quite inadequate data-collection andevaluation components, or no such components whatever. Moreover,data collection and evaluation are not standardized, with theresult that comparison of programs or techniques for differentpatients, taking into account the many possible variables, issimply not possible at this time. The Illinois Drug Abuse Rehabilitation Program, under Dr.Jerome Jaffe, has an unusually sophisticated system of datacollection and analysis combined with a multimodality treatmentprogram, thus permitting direct comparison of the effectivenessof different techniques. Similar programs with useful researchcomponents include the Washington, D.C., Narcotics TreatmentAgency, under Dr. Robert Dupont, and the Connecticut MentalHealth Center in New Haven, under Dr. Herbert Kleber. But no suchprogram has the funds or time to standardize data collection forall other programs or to persuade others to adopt a uniformsystem, much less to attempt to standardize and persuade othersto adopt uniform evaluation criteria. Without sufficient detailed data collected on a standardizedbasis by a substantial number of different projects, there can beno satisfactory comparative evaluation of various treatmentapproaches for different types of drug users. Largelyunsubstantiated and disputed claims of success and failure willcontinue to dominate the field until adequate evaluation isaccomplished. A second deficiency apparent throughout the country is thelack of enough trained administrators to run treatment programs.The few outstanding treatment projects emphasize the need forscholar-administrators with a medical and drug-abuse backgroundbut also with management skills. The most able project directorsdo not fall into the typical civil-servant mold but, rather, aremen willing to take gambles and basically to let themselves be"burned out" in a few years. How to create a reserve ofpeople equipped with this unique combination of talents and bowto provide incentives for them to enter the field are criticalquestions in the future of treatment. LAW ENFORCEMENT Law enforcement has, of course, been the primary means bywhich society has attempted to control drug abuse in the past andat present appears to represent the principal effort for thefuture also. Arrests for drug offenses have increaseddramatically during the past few years, from 31,752 in 1960 to134,006 in 1968 and over 230,000 in 1969. Such arrests of personsunder eighteen rose from 1,688 in 1960 to 33,091 in 1968 and over57,000 in 1969. There is, however, an acknowledged lack of direction and oftrained manpower in state and city efforts, which results inscant disruption of illicit traffic above the street level. Mostarrests are of users. The principal sellers arrested areamateurish young softdrug peddlers and addict street dealers.Studies show that almost all heroin addicts get arrested at leastonce every two years of active addiction and spend an average of15 per cent of their addicted life in jail. In New York City inJune, 1970, there were 4,000 drug arrests compared with 1,800 inJune, 1969. About 60 to 70 per cent of those arrests involvedheroin. In Washington, D.C., arrests doubled in the first sixmonths of 1970 and now run about four hundred per month; over 50per cent involved heroin. California reportedly made 150,000 drugarrests for use and possession in 1969, a 300-per-cent increaseover 1967, and it is unclear whether all of these are reflectedin the national statistics. BNDD has recently announced that it will provide no more thanconsultative services to local police in use, possession or smalltrafficking cases, and it is increasingly shifting its resourcesto the apprehension of large traffickers. In 1969, its agentsmade or instigated 4,000 arrests; for 1971, this figure isexpected to fall to about 1,875. Basically, however, thecriminal-law approach appears to have had little impact on thegrowth of the problem, as is demonstrated by the fact thatillegal drug use, by everyone's calculation, is increasing andshows no signs of leveling off. The federal government formerly took the position that illegaldrugs that are imported, such as heroin and marijuana, could bestopped at the border if sufficient resources were allocated tothis effort. In spite of recent large increases in budget andmanpower, however, no significant impact has been made. Borderseizures of heroin amounted to less than 5 per cent of theestimated imports in 1970. Indeed, the price of heroin has beenfalling steadily and the quality increasing, which indicates afailure to stem the supply. There is strong evidence thatOperation Intercept, the attempt to impede the flow of marijuanafrom Mexico into the United States, has resulted in significantsubstitution of other drugs for marijuana. The illegality of heroin is, of course, the sole reason forits high cost in this country. In England, the pharmacy cost ofheroin is $.04 per grain (60 mg.), or $.00067 per mg. In theUnited States, the recent street price is $30-$90 per grain, or$.50-$1.50 per mg., depending on the time and place of sale andthe quantity and quality of the drug. As a result of the failure to stop heroin at the border,recent federal government 'policy has concentrated on cooperationwith foreign governments, primarily Turkey, to reduce their opiumproduction. Since it is estimated that the United States requiresonly 50,000 to 60,000 pounds of opium each year for illicitheroin use, since this amount is about 1.5 per cent of the totalworld production of opium, and since the entire U.S. demand couldprobably be met by cultivation of about five square miles ofopium,' and since opium could readily be grown in other parts ofthe world, a program based upon suppression of opium productionseems no more likely to succeed than the program based uponprevention of importation. Finally, the initial hypothesis that drugs were notinterchangeable-that, for example, a heroin addict would not belikely to switch to a different drug (e.g., the barbiturates oramphetamines) if heroin were unavailable-does not appear to betrue. There is evidence that users will freely substitute evenless potent drugs if their drug of choice is not immediatelyavailable. There is a far greater pattern of multiple drug usethan was previously thought to exist. Suppression of one drug fora period of time, whether long or short, appears, therefore, tohave a limited effect on drug abuse generally. The law-enforcement approach to drug-abuse problems has beenameliorated by legislation permitting civil commitment in lieu ofcriminal punishment. Under present legislation, however, suchtreatment is largely illusory, since it is almost whollyinstitutionalized and often results in greater punishment thanwould be imposed by a criminal sentence. It is doubtful thatinstitutionalization under these programs has been markedly moresuccessful in rehabilitation than criminal sentencing. New York, California, and the federal government have civilcommitment treatment programs that take a relatively restrictedclass of criminal defendants in lieu of prosecution or sentencing(as well as persons committed voluntarily or by relatives andothers). The New York and California civil-commitment programshave proved very expensive-$4,000 to $5,000 per patient per yearfor care and treatment in New York, and a total of $12,000 forall costs. About $250 million was spent by New York State in1967-70, the major share for capital construction and custodialsalaries. Only one out of five patients successfully survives theparole period in the California program, and less than 25 percent the New York program. The federal Narcotic AddictRehabilitation Act (NARA) program currently has under 1,000persons in an outpatient status and 800 in an inpatient status.Many addicts are ineligible for treatment because of therestrictive admission criteria contained in the Act, and almosthalf of the cases referred for evaluation are rejected becausethey are found "not likely to be rehabilitated." Ingeneral, civil commitment programs have suffered from cumbersomelegal machinery, restrictive admission requirements, inflexibleterms of inpatient residence, expensive security consciousness,lack of dynamic programs, and active resentment among inmatesbecause of the prison like climate and poor treatment efforts. juvenile courts appear to offer one of the most flexible waysof channeling youthful users into early treatment, yet they arerarely used for this purpose. Almost all addicts are arrestedfirst while in their teens. Most juvenile courts already have thepower to divert drug users rapidly to a treatment agency, evenwithout a formal finding of law violation, and they can keep allrecords confidential. Speedy urinalysis and a closer workingrelationship between juvenile courts and community treatmentprograms might have an impact on the problem. Ordinary juvenileinstitutions are less useful. They are experiencing an increasingproblem with contraband drugs (we have been told that many youthsget their first drug experiences there), and few, if any, havedrug education or therapy programs, or indeed any urinalysissurveillance, after inmates leave the institution. The federal government (as well as local and state policeagencies) has been severely criticized for devoting itslaw-enforcement efforts to drug users and addict pushers andfailing to prosecute large drug wholesalers. In New York andWashington, and probably elsewhere as well, grassrootsorganizations claim to know the identity of the largerwholesalers and in some instances state that they have turnedinformation over to law-enforcement officials without results. The short working life of undercover agents, the large amountsof cash necessary to make substantial "buys," and thestructure of the heroin market, which is designed to insulatehigher figures from contact with the drug, are the reasons mostcommonly cited by law-enforcement and community officials for thepaucity of results in disrupting the heroin traffic. But thefactor more commonly cited by ghetto groups, and increasinglyalso by such respected citizens as former Chief justice EarlWarren, is corruption of narcotics agents. More than thirtyfederal agents were reportedly indicted on bribery andnarcotics-sale charges during 1969 and 1970. The view is endemicin ghetto areas-and apparently it is justified at least inpart-that the federal, state, and local police are not doingtheir job, and that they should be able to arrest more dealersand distributors than they do. Although it may be partly aquestion of better training, direction at the top, and placementof a higher priority in the area, there may also be widespreadcorruption involving pay-offs at the lower levels between policeand pushers. Both previous and present federal drug statutes makepossession of an illegal drug of abuse a crime. When the DrugAbuse Control Amendments of 1965 were enacted to cover nonopiatedrugs, possession for personal use was not made a crime, but thiswas changed in 1968 because of the LSD scare. The legislationenacted by Congress in 1970 to recodify and modernize all thefederal drug-abuse laws continues the policy of making possessiona criminal offense, with a one-year maximum sentence forpossession of any illegal drug and twice this term for second andsubsequent offenses. Neither prior law nor new legislationprovides that an addict is not criminally liable for possessionof a drug to support his habit. Test cases are being litigated todevelop this defense as a matter of constitutional or common law,and the staff of the National Commission on Reform of FederalCriminal Laws has proposed that this should in any event be astatutory defense. Congressional support for such a defensewould, however, appear difficult to obtain. Regardless of judicial or legislative reform, it appears thatthe law-enforcement process will remain a significant, andprobably by far the most important, intake unit fordrug-dependent people for many years to come. At present only afew, crude attempts are being made to utilize this intake path tochanneling addicts into useful treatment programs outside thecivil commitment procedures. Drug users are generally processed as ordinary criminals, and,conversely, a large percentage of ordinary criminals, when testedby urinalysis, are found to be drug users. Urinalysis tests inthe criminal courts and detention facilities of major urbancenters show that one-third to one-half of all criminaldefendants, including juveniles, are currently using drugs, andsome estimate that 80 per cent of the serious property crime inWashington, D.C., is committed by drug users. The likelihood thata criminally processed drug user will be given any specifictreatment during his incarceration is slight. But even morebasic, attempts at treatment programs in the prison setting havebeen markedly unsuccessful. Indeed, there is evidence that manynonusers or experimenters are first introduced to drug use orhave their habits reinforced while in prison. One survey showedthat 90 to 95 per cent of the heroin addicts who leave prisonwithout treatment follow-up lapse almost immediately into druguse. Many of the major urban areas now have parole programs thattest for drug use through urinalysis, and a few offer paroleesmethadone, group-therapy, and/or halfway-house programs.Nonmethadone programs with probationers and parolees, however,have not proved very successful. The majority of suchprobationers and parolees have had to be returned to prisons orcourt for drug violations. LEADERSHIP It is our belief that a major reason for the confusion anddivision within the drug-abuse field and the country in generalis the lack of effective leadership, on both a governmental and anongovernmental level. Effective leadership, by our definition,includes such functions as keeping the country informed aboutdrug abuse and the latest drug research and arranging an openclimate for medical and social research and for reasonableexperimentation with different models of control. Effectiveleadership should, further, avoid eliciting emotional publicreaction to isolated incidents and attempt to remove the drugproblem from national politics. Within the federal government, there are three organizationssubstantially concerned with drug abuse: BNDD, NIMH, and theDepartment of Defense." BNDD has for years pursued a national approach to drug abusecharacterized by suppression of illegal drugs and the enforcementof criminal penalties for drug abusers. Although Bureau officialsnow emphasize the need for rehabilitation, the basic policyposition of BNDD has not been significantly altered. Thelegislation recodifying federal drug-abuse laws, drafted by BNDDand passed by Congress in October, 1970, represents little changein fundamental narcotics policy and only reinforces and codifiesexisting law (except for some modification of penalties). Thereason for the recodification, indeed, was not a desire forreform but a need to repair legislative provisions voided by theSupreme Court on constitutional grounds. The new law still includes marijuana and heroin in the sameclassification, provides a uniform penalty for possession of anyillegal drug, and contains such harsh sanctions as a thirty-yearmaximum prison sentence for an eighteen-year-old with a prioroffense who sells marijuana to a twenty-year-old friend if thereis any profit involved in the transaction. Any change in thebasic BNDD approach of penalizing drug abuse seems highlyunlikely in the near future. During the past two crucial years of public-policydevelopment, NIMH has been singularly impotent as an independentvoice in policy decisions and has seemingly been forced to accedeto the BNDD approach of relying almost exclusively upon lawenforcement. There is no reason to believe that NIMH will begiven substantially more leeway in putting forward policyalternatives in the immediate future. Although there are a numberof NIMH personnel working on drug abuse who do favor a moreflexible and health-oriented approach toward drug users and whowould promote such an approach if allowed and encouraged to doso, a significant change in federal policy is required beforethey can be expected to speak out publicly on these matters. Until mid-1970, the Department of Defense denied that therewas any drug-abuse problem at all in the military. It has nowadmitted that drug abuse does indeed exist in the armed servicesand is initiating a program for treating users as an alternativeto punishment and dishonorable discharge. Legislation has been introduced in the U.S. Senate toliberalize treatment under the Narcotic Addict RehabilitationAct, to revitalize the narcotics work of NIMH, and to authorize afar more comprehensive health, welfare, and rehabilitationapproach to the problems of drug abuse by the federal government.But even if such legislation is enacted, the presentadministration's emphasis on the law-enforcement approach couldundermine its effective implementation. The state government picture varies, of course, from state tostate. Suffice it to say that, thus far, few states have refusedto follow the lead of BNDD with respect to narcotics policy andthat of the U.S. Congress with respect to narcotics legislation.As an example of the current climate, the August, 1970,Conference of Uniform State Law Commissioners approved a draft ofa uniform state drug-abuse law, prepared by a BNDD attorney, withthe understanding that it could be revised before finalpublication to reflect any appropriate changes in light offederal legislation then pending in Congress. An earlier draft,based upon what BNDD had hoped to have passed by Congress, wasenacted by two states before the final version was available. The nongovernmental organizations interested in the field ofdrug abuse have not exerted significant leadership during thepast two years. During this critical time of public-policydetermination, professional, medical, and scientificorganizations such as the American Bar Association, the AmericanMedical Association, the American Public Health Association, andthe National Academy of Sciences-National Research Council havespoken out only on specific issues of interest to them and onlyon isolated occasions. Because all these organizations deal onlytangentially with drug abuse and must rely for their effortsprimarily on busy professionals who have full-time jobs outsidethe organization, none of them could be expected to exert theeffective leadership that is needed in this field. There is no national voluntary citizens' organization in thefield of drug abuse comparable to the National Council ofAlcoholism (NCA), and NCA has recently decided that it will enterthis field only to consider problems in which drug abuse andalcoholism interact. Both the North American Association ofAlcoholism Programs and the National Association of State MentalHealth Program Directors, which are organizations representingstate tax-supported agencies, also deal only tangentially withdrug abuse and have made no serious effort to become concernedwith the field in detail. Largely because of this void, a paper organization, theCommittee for Effective Drug Abuse Legislation, was created torepresent the medical-scientific viewpoint before Congress duringthe hearings on the new drug-abuse legislation. Since thisorganization has been concerned almost exclusively with thefreedom to conduct research and is poorly funded, it has had toignore many other important public-policy issues. Another new organization is the previously mentioned NationalCoordinating Council on Drug Abuse Education and Information,created in 1969 to bring together virtually all nationalorganizations, from the drug industry to consumer groups, andfrom the PTA to the National Student Association, for the purposeof developing an effective drug-abuse education program. Althoughthe Coordinating Council is financed to a significant extent bythe federal government and has governmental representatives onits board of directors, it has shown independence and a reasonedapproach to education and community planning in the drug field.The Coordinating Council's achievements are largely the work of avery few people, however, and, because of its precariousfinancial underpinnings, it is uncertain how long and howvigorously it can continue its efforts. A MORE PROMISING APPROACH TO DRUG ABUSE The foregoing summary discloses a lack of leadership in thefield of drug abuse, a law-enforcement approach that is oftenineffective and even harmful, and a country deeply and evenbitterly divided over the proper approach to drug abuse. Webelieve that an effective attack on drug abuse can be launchedonly in a climate of reason and tolerance, allowing us to discernthe real evils of drug abuse while rejecting policies based onconfusion, misinformation, and emotion. Before we can begin to cope adequately with drug-abuseproblems, therefore, we must begin to refine and clarify ourthinking about them. The world is full of drugs, large numbers ofwhich are psychoactive. The majority of adult Americans takealcohol as a tension reliever or to facilitate socialintercourse, and the use of nonprescription and prescriptiondrugs for similar purposes is endemic. The availability andvariety of these drugs will probably not only continue butincrease. Many of the drugs used have profound therapeutic benefits thatallow people to offset physical or mental pathology and functionmore normally. Few of us would be willing to forego thesetherapeutic benefits, and no one perceives the use of drugs toachieve normal functioning as abuse. An increasingly large numberof people, however, are not willing to limit their drug taking tomedically supervised attempts to offset pathology. Some engage inself-medication with drugs they have become acquainted withthrough legitimate medical use. This pattern often occurs in thecase of tranquilizers. Some wish to escape an unwelcome realitywith heroin or barbiturates. Others desire the very acutefunctioning associated with the amphetamines. Still others,especially the young, seek the pleasurable effects ofhallucinogens or marijuana. The basic philosophy underlying our present drug-control lawsis that all of these self-induced effects are to be shunned, orat least are not to be sought through drugs other than alcohol.This is a decision based partly on the fear of actual physicaldamage caused by the drugs, but primarily on the belief thatdrugs damage society because they contribute to crime andalienation. It seems inevitable to us that all segments of society willcontinue to be exposed to a myriad of drugs in the future, andthat society must learn to cope with these chemicals as part ofeveryday life. It is not possible at present to foresee exactlyhow the necessary adjustments in social attitudes and policieswill be made. We do feel, however, that current national policy-whichsingles out particular drugs and makes their possession or use acrime-should be changed for very important empirical reasons. Webelieve that the individual and social harm caused by imposingcriminal sanctions on drug users far outstrips the benefits ofthis approach. Handling drug users as criminals has createdwidespread disrespect for the drug laws, has resulted inselective enforcement, has possibly done more to encourage thanto discourage illegal drug use, has undercut bona fide efforts toexplain the important differences among various drugs in thephysical and mental damage they cause, and has deterred drugabusers from seeking necessary help. We feel that, as a firststep in bringing the problem back into perspective, criminalpenalties for possession of illegal drugs for personal use onlyshould be abandoned in many jurisdictions. If this were done,drug users but not drug traffickers-could then be handled on apublic health and social-welfare basis. Like the Canadian LeDainCommission on Non-Medical Use of Drugs, which in its April, 1970,Interim Report recommended retention of only a perfunctory $100fine for illegal possession of drugs as an interim measurepending issuance of its final report, we have seen no evidencethat eliminating the criminal penalties for possession of illegaldrugs for personal use would materially impede the effectivenessof law-enforcement efforts against trafficking or remove anincentive for drug users to seek treatment or have otherunfortunate consequences. This conclusion in no way depends on a belief that chemicalsshould be freely used to induce pleasure. Nor do we believe thatit is necessary to await final resolution of the currentlypopular debate about whether alcohol or marijuana is the moredangerous drug, a debate that has succeeded only in provokingfurther generational confrontation about hypocrisy,permissiveness, and life styles. Most of those who advocate apublic-health approach disapprove strongly of the unsuperviseduse of dangerous drugs, especially by young people. Ourconclusion is based, rather, on a recognition that our presentmethods of handling the drug abuser are at best ineffective andat worst counterproductive, and that other approaches must betried. Eliminating criminal penalties for possession for personaluse would neither legalize a particular drug nor permit its use.Law-enforcement efforts would, and in our opinion should,continue, but they would be directed at illegal distribution. Andillegal drugs would remain subject to confiscation whereverfound. If the confrontation over the role of the criminal law inenforcing private moral judgments or choices of drugs wereeliminated, the country might be able to unite behind anintensified approach to research, prevention, treatment, and lawenforcement directed against the upper echelons of the illegaldrug traffic. Restrictions on scientific research inquiries intoparticular drugs might then be lifted and substantial public andprivate funds more easily directed toward the understanding ofhow drugs work on the mind and body and what effects, both shortand long term, they produce. Education of young people againstthe reckless use of powerful substances that affect the mindcould proceed in a free and open climate more calculated toinfluence their behavior. As research discloses more about specific drugs, some mighteventually become candidates for limited legalization, in thepattern now used for alcohol. In other cases, disclosure ofsevere or permanent damage to the mind or body would require thatdistribution controls remain under criminal penalty. With suchpotentially harmful drugs, the user who refuses to accepttreatment, and who can be shown to constitute a danger to others,might be committed civilly for appropriate treatment. Voluntary treatment for harmful effects of drugs couldsimilarly be made more flexible and accessible under such asystem. Restrictions against any experimentation with heroinmaintenance and unjustified limitations on the use of methadonemaintenance could be reviewed and possibly removed. More publicfunds would be devoted to current treatment efforts and tosearching out new treatment methods, to permit adequate handlingof all voluntary and involuntary patients. Finally, law enforcement could continue to act as an intakeunit for treatment programs for those drug abusers accused ofminor trafficking or other crimes. Where the drug taking resultsin dangerous antisocial acts, it is not unjust to require theoffender to undergo treatment as a condition of liberty or evento offer it to him within the confines of the institution. Butlaw enforcement's main focus would be directed at illegal drugwholesalers. In this endeavor, it would have the wholeheartedbacking of vast numbers of Americans, young and old alike. THE DRUG ABUSE COUNCIL In the previous section, we outlined an alternative approachto drug abuse that we believe is more promising than the presentnational approach. Private foundations do not have the meansfully to implement such an alternative approach, nor could theylegally do all that would be required to bring it about. Afoundation cannot, for example, properly engage in efforts tochange legislation. On the other hand, pursuit of the publicwelfare is a well-recognized task of all private foundations, andan important aspect of the approach described above involveseducation, research, and related activities that have longconcerned private foundations. The basic goal might be summarizedas one intended to make national drug-abuse policy responsive tofacts rather than emotion. This is clearly an area wherefoundations could properly play a very large role. Our primary recommendation is that an independent, nonprofitDrug Abuse Council be established to fill the leadership voidthat now exists in all areas of the drug-abuse field. This wouldpreferably be undertaken as a joint project by a number ofprivate foundations and organizations. The Council would striveto become a vitally needed center of excellence for drug-abuseinformation, basic research, education, and prevention,evaluation of treatment and education programs, and relatedactivities. The federal government is not equipped to perform thisfunction. Its activities in the drug-abuse field are fairlynarrowly circumscribed by political necessities, it relieslargely on recruitment of civil-service personnel even at the topleadership levels, and its financial commitments are short termand subject to the vagaries of Congressional and administrationdecisions. Federal activities in the drug-abuse field tend to bead hoc reactions to current crises, such as the 1970 crashdrug-education program in response to the well-publicized deathof a twelve-year-old heroin addict, rather than well-considered,long-term programs. Assuming that drug abuse will exist for years to come, andthat the country's policies should be grounded on fact and reasonrather than on emotion and politics, a long-range investment ineducation, research, and treatment is necessary. The Drug AbuseCouncil would be a long-term (ten years at a minimum) effort toobtain the factual information needed to provide a basis forsound policy and to disseminate to the public and to persons inkey policy positions the best knowledge available in the fieldand the best analysis of this knowledge as it pertains to currentprograms. The Council would have a board of 10 to 15 trustees. Workingunder the board's direction would be an interdisciplinary staffresponsible for performing the Council's daily work, headed by afull-time president. The president would be a member of the Boardof Trustees, but not its chairman. The majority of the Board of Trustees should be professionalsknowledgeable in the field of drug abuse. A few might beprestigious figures in the national scene, but persons who wouldcommit themselves to a heavy working schedule consisting at aminimum of one formal meeting a month and substantial contactwith the staff between meetings. The Board of Trustees should include representatives ofmedicine, psychiatry, pharmacology, education, communityleadership, law, and sociology. Board members would beappropriately compensated for their time and efforts. Thechairman of the board should probably be located in, oraccessible to, the city where the Council's headquarters arelocated-preferably Washington, D.C.-and he should beappropriately compensated for his additional work. The president would initially work out with the board thedirection for the Council's first efforts. He would then recruithis staff and proceed to implement those directives by drawing upa detailed set of proposals for Council action. The initial core of the Council staff might consist of amedically trained person (probably a psychiatrist), a basicresearcher in the biochemical field, a social scientist, alawyer, and an editor writer schooled in simplifying technicalwriting. This small nucleus could, of course, be expanded as theCouncil's president and board define priorities and activities. It is obvious that the President must be a key personality,with proved administrative ability, and soundly grounded in thedrug abuse field, its politics, personalities, and peculiarhistory. He would be responsible for proposing projects to theboard, arranging for their financing or administration, preparingdraft reports for board consideration, and so forth. Successfulimplementation of the Council's objectives would depend to adegree on the president's capabilities. The relationship of the staff to the Board of Trustees alsodeserves comment. Basically, there seem to be three types ofstaff-board working relationships. First, a board of trustees mayoperate as a figurehead, exercising minimal influence over theactivities of the staff. Secondly, it may have broad policy- andpriority-setting powers but leave most operating decisions to theworking group. This requires a far greater commitment of time bythe members of the board than the first relationship. Finally,the board may directly run the organization through a staffhaving little or no independent decision-making capabilities. Inessence, this third type of relationship would require themelding of the board of trustees with the working group. In the case of the Council, it appears that the mostproductive staff-board relationship would be the second type-aBoard of Trustees with policy authority over the working groupbut not actively involved in the actual day-to-day operations ofthe group. Such a board would have an important role. Because ofthe controversial nature of the drug field, board members must beprepared personally to back Council projects and policystatements and to withstand the inevitable attacks almost fromthe day they convene. If the Council's pronouncements and workare to carry weight in professional and governmental circles andamong the general public, the board must stand solidly behindthem. Once under way, the Council should explore the potential foraction in many different areas. The following representativelist, which reflects areas of current immediate concern, is notintended to exhaust the possibilities. Additional matters will beuncovered, and priorities will change, as developments occur inthe field that cannot be predicted at this time. Finally, it should be noted that the Council may carry out itsobjectives either by persuading others to undertake and financethe work or by underwriting the work itself. Whenever possible,the Council should encourage federal, state, and localgovernments to increase their roles in drug-abuse programs. Inthis respect, the Council should act as a watchdog, to makecertain that public agencies fulfill their intendedresponsibilities. In many instances, however, private action,either funded or undertaken directly by the Council, will also benecessary and appropriate. SPONSORSHIP OF BASIC RESEARCH Although not nearly enough is known about the effects of drugson the mind and body, the investment of new research funds mustbe carefully directed toward specific objectives, rather thanmerely toward supplementing federal funds. Some knowledgeablepeople are dubious about what could be accomplished by thecontribution of a few million dollars in private research funds.Nevertheless, we believe that there are finite areas of basicresearch that the Council could profitably explore. Encouragement of Interdisciplinary Research. Universities,where most basic research is done, tend to be structured alongdepartmental lines. The incentive structures for researchers and,even more important, for graduate students tend to force theresearcher to stay within his area and not become part of aninterdisciplinary group. The Council might usefully promotecenters of interdisciplinarianism in this field. There are cogent reasons for encouraging interdisciplinaryresearch. The question of why the same amount of drug ingested bythe same person produces dramatically different effects indifferent settings puzzles scientists and must be studied outsidethe laboratory as well as within, by psychologists and socialscientists as well as by pharmacologists. Many of the basicpharmacological studies on the effects of heroin or methadoneshould be attached to treatment programs, so that the subjectscould be studied and tested in the environment and under theconditions in which they become and remain drug-dependent. Someof the most creative hypotheses for basic research come from thecross-fertilization of different disciplines thinking about thesame problem from different approaches. This is the kind ofinnovative exposure that the federal government's researchprogram, based on the funding of finite projects to explorealready articulated hypotheses, does not at present have thecapacity to encourage. One way of supporting this type of work would be to establisha new in-house center for the scientific study of drug abuse onan interdisciplinary basis. Another would be to put money intothe best existing university centers, on the condition that theymake some effort to study drugs of abuse in the context of theirover-all work. Of these two courses, the second seems preferable. A number offirst-class researchers in a relevant field may not regard drugabuse as their primary area of interest or as an area on whichthey would wish to concentrate their full time, and in any eventthey might not wish to move. The best researchers in the fieldmight be more willing to study drug abuse, either separately oralong with other matters of interest to them scientifically, ifpermitted to remain at their present location. To a large extent,this means funding interdisciplinary efforts in universities,because that is where the best researchers are currently found. In addition to multidisciplinary research in universities, itmight also be productive to fund a narcotics-research section inan existing institution or simply to fund individual projectswherever the best researchers exist. Finally, the Council mightwish to participate in an ongoing treatment program for theunique information that the program might provide with areasonable additional investment in a research component. Suchquestions as why heroin addicts stabilize at different levels ofmethadone dosage and whether long-term tissue changes are causedby a variety of drugs are often researched best with a largetreatment population at hand. Each of these possibilities must beexplored in greater detail by the Council staff before finalrecommendations can be made. Detection of Drugs in the Body. Pharmacologists have informedus that the basic problem of drug detection in the body wheredrugs go, how long they stay, what metabolites they produce, andwhat happens to them-is not being studied in the way presentmethodology would permit if research funds were available toperfect it. The technology of drug detection is an area that isvery important to research but is not a high-priority item forany single researcher or university because the benefits arelargely external to any particular project. This type oftechnological development would be of value to all researchersworking in basic pharmacology. It would also enable the accurateidentification of drugs in cases of acute toxic reaction and thusthe development of better methods of treating or preventing suchtoxic reaction. Research in this area could also be directed towarddevelopment of more accurate, rapid, and inexpensive equipmentfor a variety of purposes. Of particular importance for bothlaw-enforcement and treatment programs is the chemical analysisof urine specimens to detect heroin and other illegal drugs.Urinalysis is used in broad surveillance programs in determiningwhether bail should be set for criminals, in probation and parolesurveillance, in methadone-maintenance programs, and indeed invirtually all types of drug-treatment programs. It is essentialto any evaluation of the success of these programs. Yet, in manyburgeoning methadone programs, such as that in Minneapolis, noprompt and cheap urine testing is available, and samples must bemailed hundreds of miles for analysis. There is substantial doubt whether surveillance programs arein all instances lawful, and even whether their use is productiveor counterproductive with respect to treatment results. It willbe some time before final answers can be obtained to thesequestions. Meanwhile, it is clear that urinalysis surveillance isincreasing and will continue to increase (particularly if it ismade mandatory for all methadone programs, as has been proposed).The problem is that urinalysis detection techniques can becostly, inaccurate, and very time-consuming. They may thereforelimit the number of patients who can be admitted to treatmentprograms because of the cost involved in continuous urinalysissurveillance, wrong decisions may be made because of theerroneous results obtained, and persons may be deprived ofliberty, placed under suspicion, or not given adequate treatmentfor long periods of time while awaiting results. BNDD and a few private companies reportedly are interested inimproving technology and methodology in this area, and there aresome indications of progress. One company has apparently produceda marketable electronic device that would improve the speed andreliability of urinalysis but not reduce the cost. We have beenassured that the technology for cheaper, reliable urinalysis isavailable but requires an initial investment to produce themodels. Reducing the cost per unit from $1 to $2 to $.50 or lesscould mean a savings of $.25 million for large-scale projects andmore for a city offering centralized urinalysis for all itsprograms. Hopefully, the Council could persuade the federalgovernment to make the initial investment of a few hundredthousand dollars to conduct this work, if the need is nototherwise met in the near future. Interaction of Different Drugs Taken in Combination. Largenumbers of drug abusers use several drugs, some legal and someillegal, together or in substitution for another. The net effectof their interaction may be quite different from that of eitherone used alone. (There is some indication, for example, thatheavy barbiturate use may neutralize the effect of birth-controlpills used simultaneously.) Research on drug interaction couldlead to knowledge that might prevent toxic fatalities. Research with Heroin and Heroin Maintenance. We are unaware ofany significant experimentation with heroin in this country,either in animals or in humans. Such research would bepotentially very valuable in determining such questions as how anaddict stabilizes on any given dose of heroin, how well hefunctions in society when consistently maintained on his drug,how wide a range of variation in dosage can be given withoutwithdrawal, whether some people can use heroin indefinitelywithout becoming addicted, and how long a person must use a givendosage of heroin in order to become addicted. The usage patternsof different types of heroin addict also remain a mystery andhave important research implications for treatment and education.Research on such issues as these might well have to combine fieldinvestigation and medical diagnosis. One of the first problems the Council would face if it decidedsuch research was desirable would be obtaining the necessaryfederal and state government permission, setting up the researchin a way that would satisfy medical ethics, and justifying theneed for the work to the public. Miscellaneous. Another vital area not now being adequatelyresearched is the effect of drugs, including marijuana andmethadone, taken by pregnant women on the behavior and physicalcharacteristics of the child. A high-priority question is whether there is either an inbornphysiological predilection to opiate addiction (as Dr. Dolesuggests) or a drug-induced physiological readdictionvulnerability (as Dr. Martin suggests) or a learned response toexternal stimuli (as Dr. Wickler suggests) or none of these.Although we are not certain how this can be made the subject of adirected research project, it is a question of the greatestimportance to the direction of treatment efforts, drug education,and even legal responsibility for addictive behavior. An attemptshould be made to devise a series of experiments to advance thiskind of research. FUNDING PROGRAMS RELATING TO TREATMENT AND RESEARCH WITHRESPECT TO TREATMENT We recommend that the Council should not, as a general rule,fund ongoing treatment programs, except insofar as they makepossible unique research efforts not otherwise available. TheCouncil's efforts in this area should instead be directedprimarily toward providing the public climate necessary to assureappropriate public financing of any drug-abuse or drug-dependencetreatment programs that are found worthy of support. As apractical matter, Council funds could not begin to match theamount of funding available from federal and state sources, ifthose sources could be persuaded to allocate appropriate amountsfor treatment. The failure of the Council to support ongoing treatmentprograms will undoubtedly subject it to criticism from communityaction leaders. We feel, however, that the Council should havethe more fundamental role of generating public support for drugabuse programs and supporting and conducting research andevaluation that will begin to establish criteria by which theeffectiveness of these programs can be measured. The Councilshould, further, disseminate information throughout the countrywith respect to programs that have proved to be worthwhile andthat, therefore, will have a broad and long-range nationalimpact. The Council should, however, be on the lookout for trulyexperimental and research-oriented treatment programs that,absent nongovernmental support, will not be undertaken. Areasthat deserve careful consideration include the following: Basic Field Work in Programs for juveniles and Hard-CoreAddicts. The populations least successfully treated are juveniledrug abusers and hard-core addicts for whom all known treatmentmethods have repeatedly failed. In our present state of almosttotal ignorance as to what kind of prevention or treatmentprograms will work with these populations, it may be necessary tosend people out into the field to study the problem for sixmonths to a year and then to come back and design operationalprogram models. There is to our knowledge no present source offunding for any such basic field approach in new prevention ortreatment techniques. Prototype projects designed to testspecific hypotheses resulting from such field investigationsmight then be recommended for operation by federal, state, orlocal governments. Heroin Maintenance. A related area that definitely seems worthexploring would be an experiment with heroin maintenance. Adetailed study of heroin maintenance in the United States beforeit was stamped out by the Bureau of Narcotics and of theheroin-maintenance techniques that have been utilized in Englandshould undoubtedly precede initiation of such experimentation inthis country. Research with respect to heroin maintenance-its possible useas a bait to get young addicts into other forms of treatment, itspossible use as long-term maintenance for addicts who haverepeatedly failed with other treatment methods, and otherpotential uses-might be a high-priority item for the Council. As already noted, a substantial driving force behind thepresent public concern about heroin addiction is the fear ofdrug-related crime. Assuming that not all addicts can berehabilitated, and indeed that the addiction problem will remainat least as great for some years to come, the hypothesis thatdrug addiction leads to crime and that a major portion of ourcrime wave is attributable to the high price of heroin must beput to the test. Such a controlled experiment could determinewhether, using a heroin maintenance system, crime is indeedreduced. The superiority of methadone over heroin, or vice versa,in maintenance programs could also be explored for the firsttime. Management Assistance to Ongoing Programs. The Council mightalso consider providing ongoing or nascent treatment programswith desperately needed managerial assistance. A team ofmanagement consultants who could look at local programs andpersuade their administrators to adopt proven techniques andperhaps to create a data-acquisition and digestion system whereappropriate would be a major contribution to good treatment. Thefew successful project administrators we have seen are workingfull time in their own projects and cannot spend the necessarymonths advising other projects. Many methadone programs aresubject to justified criticism, and a resultant loss of money,because of sloppy or uninformed management practices or failureto keep and record their data accurately. The kind of service wepropose could reduce such needless problems. Regional Networks. Finally, the Council might work with statesand cities to help treatment centers from regional networks toshare knowledge and experience, and even to cross-refer patientsfor specialized attention. This kind of regional network couldalso make cross-comparisons of variable techniques easier andallow interchange of personnel and pooling of funds forurinalysis, data collection, and training programs for personnel. EVALUATION OF TREATMENT APPROACHES Several different treatment approaches are in use today. Thereis also massive distrust among these programs, misinformation asto what is and is not being done, and a lack of any reliablemeans to separate truth from fiction. Evaluation approaches andcriteria for the various programs are not standardized, and basicdata often are not kept. Even when it exists, useful material isoften not organized or published. It is therefore virtuallyimpossible at this time to compare the effectiveness of any oneapproach with any other, or to study the effectiveness of a givenapproach for different types of patients. Because of lack ofevaluative data, we do not know, for example, whether and to whatdegree the concurrent use of social services increases theeffectiveness of methadone, or the per them cost of patienttreatment under different programs correlated with the rate ofrehabilitation, or the dropout rate under various treatmentprograms, or the type of person (age, pattern of drug use, race,economic background) who volunteers for and is best handled undervarious treatment programs. There is a great need for animpartial body to attempt standardization of evaluation criteriaand techniques nationally and to disseminate the results ofobjective evaluation of ongoing programs in order to promote themost useful components of these approaches and discourageineffective and unproductive efforts. One approach that the Council might consider in attacking theinformation gap is to develop a uniform data-processing systemfor drug-abuse projects and to provide several of the programswith the necessary software and consultative services to installsuch a system. Local treatment programs must participate activelyin working out a good data-evaluation system if they are to bepersuaded to cooperate. The results of the data collection mightbe fed to a central receiving station where Council experts couldanalyze it and interpret its meaning to the individual programsas well as to other interested parties. The decision as to what criteria should be used to evaluateany treatment program, however, involves not merely data analysisbut basic value judgments based on experience. The Council shouldbe involved in setting these criteria. Major methadone programs,for example, have been attacked because some of the participantscontinue to use drugs intermittently. This raises the question ofwhether eschewing all illegal drugs should be the sole or eventhe primary goal for a treatment program, or whether enhancedsocial functioning and cessation of antisocial acts, such asstealing, are sufficient criteria for success. If the Councilcould contribute toward formulating uniform criteria that reflecta realistic and flexible perspective on what treatment programscan be expected to accomplish and in what period of time, and onthe immediate and long-term nature of some of the goals oftreatment, it would be doing a tremendously worthwhile job. INFORMATION DISSEMINATION Technical Information. Technical personnel in the field,researchers, treatment project personnel, and educators need acomprehensive and accessible service that they can tap forcomplete, accurate, and up-to-date information on specificaspects of drug abuse, such as treatment proj ects, ongoing orpast research, model school curricula, or film listings. Thereare at present several fragmented attempts to provide this kindof informational coverage. On request, NIMH will supply, throughits National Clearinghouse for Drug Abuse Information, selectedmaterial on drug-abuse problems. Within about six months, it ishoped that the Clearinghouse will be able to provide a computerprintout of abstracts of all publications on any subjectrequested, concentrating on publications appearing within thelast decade, and without evaluation of content. Because the NIMHClearinghouse is a government service, it feels that it cannotexercise any discrimination in the articles it abstracts, andhence it often abstracts worthless material or several virtuallyidentical publications of the same author in differentperiodicals. NIMH also sends periodically, to certain persons,the protocols of research grants in progress. The NationalCoordinating Council on Drug Abuse Education and Information isplanning a looseleaf service to include information on treatmentprojects, legislation, films, and what is known about the natureand effect of individual drugs of abuse, but is not sure howcomplete it can be because of budget problems. Ideally, there should be one comprehensive index and digest ofall this material, perhaps in several looseleaf volumes, andpreferably one that is not prepared by the federal government. Itshould encompass virtually all information pertinent to thefield, including a reasonably selective cross-indexed review orabstract of past and present books, articles, reports, andscientific papers, reprints from nineteenth- and earlytwentieth-century literature on experiences with drug abuse thatare otherwise not generally available, descriptions of currenttreatment and research projects, public-opinion polls and drugsurveys, evaluated lists of educational materials, digests oflaws, court decisions, and legislative proposals, and othermaterial. The compilation of such a digest and its periodicupdating would be an enormous undertaking, and one that might bebest accomplished by subsidizing another organization to do theactual work. The relationship between the Council and theeditorial board of such a publication would have to be resolved. Another important way of disseminating and highlighting thebest of current research findings is through a technical journal,circulated largely to physicians, scientists, and otherspecialists in the field. The Institute for the Study of DrugAddiction, in New York, currently publishes the Internationaljournal of the Addictions, which covers both alcoholism and drugabuse. We have found this journal a very useful source of basicinformation. The publishers state that the very limited number ofpapers and abstracts, and the very small circulation, are due toa lack of funds. There seems to be no reason to set up a second journal of thistype. Subject to further exploration of this matter, we believethat the Council should give serious consideration to workingwith the Institute for the Study of Drug Addiction to expand thearticles and abstracts in their journal in order to cover thefield adequately (excluding alcoholism, which is covered wellenough in a separate journal), to make the journal a monthlypublication, and to increase its circulation. This would providethe field with the detailed results of all significant researchon a current basis. School Drug-Education Programs. The role of the Council in therace to the schoolhouse must be approached with care. Theconsensus is that private and public organizations are nowgenerating too many drug-education programs without sufficientknowledge of basic educational techniques, pretesting, orevaluation of results. There are not enough professional educators sufficientlyschooled in drug abuse to teach teachers about drugs. Very oftenwe have found that those who teach counselors and othersresponsible for drug education in the schools have themselves hadno training except for a few lectures. It may be that the Councilcan affect this vacuum through support of universityinterdisciplinary research that can train a cadre of experts toteach the teachers in the universities and surroundingcommunities. Another contribution of the Council might be to help subsidizethe evaluation of drug films, literature, and curricula offeredto the schools. It might also design or commission methods ofevaluation by which school programs would be able to assess theirown results. Perhaps the most critical problem of most schooldrug-education programs is their passivity. The Council mightsupport and disseminate information about some less traditionalapproaches, such as active engagement using drugs in behaviorexperiments with animals, discussion of nondrug inducement ofaltered states of consciousness, or extended discussions ofvalues and what youngsters hope to get out of drugs. Theserepresent a few of the more promising (but scarce) approaches wehave encountered. The attraction of television for the young child makes it alogical educational device on drugs. Consideration should begiven to working with a group skilled in educational motivationaltechniques, such as Children's Television Workshop, on films foruse in elementary school or over national television. General Public Information. Perhaps the single most importantservice of the Council would be to act as an independent sourceof relevant information for the public about drug-abuse problems.There is a need for a new and wholly independent perspective onsuch fundamental issues as the nature and scope of the drugproblem, the effects of present law-enforcement policies at alllevels, the real dangers of youthful marijuana use, the treatmentor recovery potential of different kinds of drug abusers, howmuch crime can really be accounted for by drug abusers, how theEnglish system of heroin maintenance works and with what results,the federal government's activity in terms of dollars, and theallocation of those dollars among enforcement, treatment,research, and education, the foreign experience with marijuanausers, and how a school-or a parent-should best react to thepresence of drugs. These are the issues that are troubling Americans. Two NewYork State public-opinion surveys showed that drug use wasconsidered a major neighborhood problem by 23 per cent of thoseinterviewed, surpassed only by burglary, vandalism, and unsafestreets. A New York Times survey of 463 New York voters, reportedon October 4, 1970, placed drugs as the fourth most prominentproblem facing the nation and the foremost problem facing thevoter's immediate community. At present, the public receives itsinformation on these matters primarily from government sources. Many methods must be used to inform the public of keydevelopments in the field and explore key policy issues in drugabuse control. The Council could commission its own publicopinion surveys on key issues to guide the direction of itsinformation efforts. State-of-the-art papers might be published,containing accurate but readable technical material on the natureand effects of drugs. Accounts of comparative experiences ofdifferent jurisdictions with varying law-enforcement, treatment,and education approaches could be prepared and disseminated. Whether such material is widely read will depend in large parton its readability and press coverage. The Council will need agood editor, with a sound basic understanding of the sciences andable to write simply but accurately. It will also need a librarycapacity to collect and analyze information of all kinds; it mayin time want to become a national information center, publishingattractively packaged periodicals for the lay audience containingsuch analyses. It may use radio and TV for forums in whichoutstanding experts in the field can discuss key concepts andthus dispel some of the myths that abound. Different media, ofcourse, would be targeted to different audiences-parents, youths,inner-city residents, and the suburban middle class. Consultative Services for Key Officials and Organizations. TheCouncil might wish to provide counseling services on a selectivebasis for key figures and organizations in the drug-abuse field,such as major professional organizations and leagues of city orstate officials. Such persons might wish to utilize the expertiseof Council staff in many areas before undertaking major policycommitments or advising their members. Meetings and symposiacould be designed by the Council staff to facilitatecommunication between key professionals and policy-makingofficials and to disseminate its own findings. LAW-ENFORCEMENT EFFORTS Basic law enforcement is, of course, a federal, state, andlocal governmental function, and we would recommend that theCouncil not enter this field in any substantial way. Although the federal government is now engaged ininternational negotiations to reduce the supply of opium and itsforeign manufacture into heroin, as well as to increase bordersurveillance to reduce its importation, we cannot be optimisticabout their efforts. Previous attempts by the United States tostop foreign cultivation and manufacture have provedfrustratingly unsuccessful, and the number of world sources ofopium and the ease with which foreign production quotas can becircumvented give no cause for belief that future efforts will beany more successful. There is also a widely held belief amongexperts in the drug field that, if any one drug of abuse wereeliminated, a new one would almost certainly be available todisplace it. Thus, even assuming that all heroin and marijuanawere stopped at the border, marijuana could be grown in thiscountry, synthetic hallucinogens (probably more toxic) couldreadily displace marijuana, and synthetic opiates and other drugscould readily be available for use in place of heroin. Althoughbetter border control or reduction of supply might tighten themarket somewhat, thus forcing the price up, it seems unlikelythat it would have a substantial long-range impact on theunderlying causes and effects of drug abuse, or even on itsprevalence. In sum, this appears to be an area of limitedpotential, wishful thinking to the contrary, and one in which thefederal government is already investing heavily. We do recommend, however, that some exploration be made intothe reasons that law-enforcement officials at present seem unableto prosecute more of the high-volume drug pushers once the drugsget into the country, even though they profess to know who thepushers are, where they engage in their operations, and a greatdeal of other information about them. Prosecution of importantnonaddict drug pushers can have a temporary effect on total drugavailability at the street level and force some addicts intotreatment. It would, in addition, have a substantialpsychological effect in many ghetto communities, where it isoften thought that the police purposely do not prosecute drugpushers because they have made deals with the illicit trader orbecause they wish minority groups to remain enslaved to drugs. Webelieve that exerting pressure on the commercial sellers ofillegal drugs is a desirable objective and should be done in themost efficient way possible. For that reason, we recommend theexploration with federal and local authorities of ways toincrease arrests at the top levels of the drug traffic. If theCouncil enters this area at all, it should work closely with thestaff of the Police Foundation to encourage innovative strategiesby state or local police departments. The active utilization ofantidrug community groups to help in policing and exerting formalsanctions in their own neighborhoods against pushers is one areaof potential. The Council might also want to study the effect of variouslaws and law-enforcement policies on the actual use of drugs andthe treatment of drug abusers. This area is badly in need ofcareful study. The results of such a study might then become thesubject of a "white paper" by the Council forconsideration by local officials, budgetmakers, and the public atlarge. It might also help to create a more open climate forexperimentation in different control strategies. The current pushfrom the federal government is for all the states to committhemselves legislatively to a single model of law enforcement. Itwould seem, however, that states should be as laboratories to tryout different approaches and to evaluate the results stemmingfrom those variations. There also appears to be a real need for educational programsspecifically aimed at law-enforcement and court personnel, whowill probably continue to be the largest intake process forillegal drug users. Although BNDD runs a law-enforcement trainingprogram for state and local police officers with respect tonarcotics laws, it does not appear to emphasize the medical andsocial aspects of drug abuse, its causes and effects, thecommunity resources that can be utilized in combating it from apublic-health and social standpoint rather than from a lawenforcement standpoint, the importance of not ruining the livesof young children as a result of unfortunate experimentation withdrug abuse, and similar aspects of this problem. The Councilmight fruitfully direct its efforts to helping police and courtpersonnel, both juvenile and adults, to develop informalmechanisms for rapidly screening and diverting serious drug usersinto treatment programs in lieu of legal processing. Conferencesmight be sponsored for law-enforcement and judicial personnel tofocus on the best of these diversion programs. An effectivejuvenile court treatment project along these lines is, in ouropinion, one of the greatest unmet needs in the entire field. Finally, many improvements in the present law-enforcementapproach toward drug abuse may have to come from the courts.There will be increasing attacks upon the irrationality ofpresent drug laws, centering upon the right to privacy involvedin the personal use of drugs, and the extension of the ruling inRobinson v. California that a person may not be criminallypunished for addiction to include possession, use, and presencein illegal establishments or association with other addicts. Thequestion of the right to treatment for an addict can be expectedto be raised not only in civil commitment programs, wheretreatment is minimal, but also in communities without methadoneprograms, or where methadone dispensation is severely restrictedby law, or even ultimately where doctors are not allowed toprescribe it for addict patients. In the juvenile field, a long-standing and perhaps legallyvulnerable impediment to treatment is the legal requirement forpaternal permission. Addicts can also be expected to raise theireligibility for welfare as "disabled persons" or as"medically needy" under Medicaid laws. Treatmentprograms all over the country have encountered difficulties inlocating facilities in highaddiction areas because of outmodedzoning laws. The right of "gatekeepers," such asteachers and nurses, to withhold from law-enforcement authoritiesconfidential information received from students may have to betested in the courts. Limitations of treatment programs toselected kinds of addicts will probably also be legally attacked.The adjustment of our now-primitive body of drug-abuse laws tonew medical developments in research and treatment may well haveto come about through a series of court cases as well as, andeven in the absence of, legislative changes. The Council staffshould keep abreast of such legal developments and, whereappropriate, lend financial assistance to legal groups seekingsuch adjustments. The D.C. Lawyers Committee project on traininga corps of addict specialists and the comments filed on themethadone regulations by the Center for Law and Social Policy areexamples of such worthy efforts. THE LEADERSHIP ROLE We have suggested that the most critical reason forestablishing a Drug Abuse Council is to create independentleadership in the field. That leadership must inevitably beearned through professional and public credibility, and throughexcellence of staff and product. The Council must lead informulating and disseminating sound ways of thinking and actingtoward drug use. It must, in short, become a center for policystudy in the drug field, to which researchers, legislators,educators, policy-making officials, and the lay public will turnfor nonpartisan analysis and information. This role can be accomplished primarily by using the bestthinkers in many different fields to find out what is actuallyhappening to drug users-not just the young experimenters ormainliners, but the older pill-takers as well-why they are takingdrugs, and what other ways can be found to satisfy theirunderlying urges and needs. The "drug-abuse problem"needs to be perceived in a less rigid and emotional way by thepublic at large. The nation has to understand how our presentsystem of drug controls really operates, and with whatconsequences to what people. It must be given a realistic notion,rather than palliatives, of what we can expect to accomplishthrough education, treatment, and law enforcement, and what partof the problem must be approached in even more complex and subtleways. At the same time, there must be a sense of urgency about theCouncil's work. As soon as it is organized, the Council mustconsider such matters of immediate importance as The work of the Commission on Marijuana and Drug Abuseestablished under the 1970 federal drug-abuse law The authority of the Secretary of HEW to authorize researchersto protect the privacy of research subjects under the 1970federal law The obligation of the Secretary of HEW under the 1970 federallaw to report to Congress on the proper methods of medicaltreatment of narcotic addiction The authority of the Department of justice to establish quotasfor drugs, like heroin, that have no accepted medical use but areneeded for research purposes The proposed new International Protocol on PsychotropicSubstances being considered by the U.N. Commission on NarcoticDrugs Implementation of the proposed new methadone regulations Theproposals to conform state law to the 1970 federal law and theproposed new Uniform State Act The proposed new federal Rules of Evidence that affect theconfidentiality of the doctor-patient relationship Of equal importance, priorities must be established withrespect to the broad work of the Council and work begun on itslong range objectives. The projects that should be given prompt .consideration include the following information: Analysis of the 1970 federal drug-abuse law for youth, researchers, physicians, and others A publication on the nature and extent of drug abuse in the United States today-what drugs are being used, by whom, the number of users, the relative harm of various drugs, what happens to users, the impact of drug use on crime, and so forth Evaluation of the English system of narcotic dispensationhow it works, the problems it has encountered, and whether it has controlled the spread of opiate addiction-perhaps coupled with an evaluation of U.S. clinics of the 1920's An evaluative synthesis of information about the effects of marijuana, with an explanation for the layman of the implications (or lack thereof) of animal experiments Examination of the legal alternatives to current policy regarding marijuana, how they would work in operation, and their implications An explanation of appropriate criteria for judging a treatment program (especially methadone), analyzing such factors as the expectation that many patients will continue to use drugs, and the importance of recognizing the value of different types and degrees of success A review of the experiences of secondary schools with handling drugs-including the use of confidentiality guarantees, the designation of one or a few teachers as confidential advisers, expulsion or suspension, liaison with community treatment programs, and relations with law-enforcement officials Analysis of the legitimate expectations of curtailing the supply of drugs through border surveillance, Turkish crop subsidies, and similar techniques An examination of the amount of federal resources (and those of a few major states) being spent on the drug problem and their allocation Research and Field Investigation Careful study of the reasons young people use drugs, what they want to get out of them, and how many have left drugs and are trying for the same effects in other ways A field study of peer pressure as a factor in youthful drug experimentation Categorization and review of the major characteristics of the drug-education programs in operation-how many have been evaluated, with what results, and how the children and teachers feel about them A study of the optimal role of the pharmaceutical industry in the prevention of abuse-including consideration of proper production quotas for particular drugs, diversion into illegal channels, needed research on abuse potential, and legitimate advertising to the public and to doctors A state-of-the-art conference on current research on the nature of heroin addiction-including the meaning of animal and human research, hypotheses being worked on, important issues, and productive lines of inquiry A study of the effects of heroin on users, in conjunction with a treatment experiment, to learn such basic facts as immediate effects on users, how to stabilize on heroin, the feasibility of simultaneous use of methadone and heroin, and whether a heroin user can function normally Analysis of the substitution of different drugs with different effects for the original drug of choice Treatment A synthesis of what is and is not known about the treatment of juvenile users of the various drugs-including hypotheses on how to treat this key group and the treatment resources a community should have for experimenters and chronic users, for hard and soft drugs, and for older and younger juveniles A paper on the state of treatment generally, pulling together the record of methadone, antagonists, therapeutic communities, and community mental-health centers, with evaluations where they exist, and consideration of such issues as public or private facilities, professional or indigenous staff, outpatient or inpatient, and voluntary or compulsory treatment A study of the employment of ex-addicts in treatment-the kinds of jobs available, the legal and community barriers, what job-training programs work for this group, and whether persons on heroin or methadone can do everything normal people can Assemble management consultants and material for dataprocessing systems for fledgling treatment programs. Law Enforcement Monitor how the new 1970 federal drug-abuse law works in a few major jurisdictions-how it is enforced, against whom, the penalties given out, and what happens to the classification sections Compare the experience in states with high (e.g., Missouri) and low (e.g., Nebraska) marijuana penalties to see the effect, if any, over a period of time on drug use, attitudes toward drugs, and drug education An analysis of the difficulties facing law-enforcement officials in the enforcement of drug laws against wholesale and retail traffickers It is not possible to lay down a step-by-step program forchanging the present climate surrounding drug abuse in thecountry. How to get the country to focus on the real evils ofdrug abuse and to attack them rationally without contributing tothe creation of even greater ones is a monumental task.Hopefully, the Council will not be alone in working toward suchan end and will be able to enlist the support of state and citygovernments, such branches of the federal government as NIMH, andother private and professional organizations. Hopefully, too,much of its work will affect the related problem of alcoholismand will help to end the fragmented approach toward differentkinds of drug-taking. The pace of the work and the prioritiesmust obviously be decided by the Council board and staff itself,guided by a realistic notion of the magnitude of the tasks facingthem and the opportunity to do something constructive about them. CONCLUSION It is of fundamental importance that man has and. willinevitably continue to have potentially dangerous drugs at hisdisposal, which he may either use properly or abuse, and thatneither the availability of these drugs nor the temptation toabuse them can be eliminated. Therefore, the fundamentalobjective of a modern drug-abuse program must be to help thepublic learn to understand these drugs and how to cope with theiruse in the context of everyday life. An approach emphasizingsuppression of all drugs or repression of all drug users willonly contribute to national problems. There is an urgent need for effective nongovernmentalleadership toward a more reasoned approach to drug abuse in thiscountry. A void exists that we believe can be filled by thecreation of a new Drug Abuse Council. In our best judgment, theCouncil could successfully exert this leadership and could have asubstantial and beneficial impact on drug abuse in this country. NOTES 1. Evidence obtained during 1971 indicates that the number ofactive heroin addicts as of December, 1971, was probably between250,000 and 300,000. 2. The Comprehensive Drug Abuse Preventionand Control Act of 1970 reduced these penalties to imprisonmentfor up to one year for a first offense and two years for eachsubsequent offense. 3. The 1970 Act established a Commission on Marijuana and DrugAbuse to review existing laws and policy and recommend necessarylegislation and administrative action. 4. See Staff Paper 5 for the most recent figures. 5. This information has become available and is presented inStaff Paper 5. 6. In 1971 this organization changed its name to the NationalCoordinating Council on Drug Use Education. 7. By December, 1971, there were over 300 methadone projectsand a large number of persons receiving methadone by prescriptionoutside of these projects. An estimated 50,000 patients are nowusing this drug for maintenance. See Staff Paper 3. 8. In November, 1971, the Food and Drug Administrationannounced it intention to propose broader approval of methadoneunder a closely con trolled distribution system. 9. These estimates are based on an addict population of about100,000 During 1971, official estimates of the number of addictswere raised. It i now estimated that 100,000 to 120,000 pounds ofopium are needed annually to supply the U.S. market. 10. In June, 1971, the President proposed a Special ActionOffice for Drug Abuse Prevention to coordinate federal drug-abuseefforts in treatment, education, and research. Regulation and lawenforcement, and military and veterans' problems are notincluded. CliffSchaffer's Home Page Contents | Feedback | Search DRCNet Library | Schaffer Library | Major Studies | DealingWith Drug AbuseWT02-B02-29IA086-000614-B045-156http://206.61.184.43:80/schaffer/Library/studies/dwda/staff1.htm 206.61.184.43 19970122021734 text/html 137985HTTP/1.0 200 OKDate: Wednesday, 22-Jan-97 02:17:11 GMTServer: WebSitePro/1.1f (S/N wpo-0deb)Allow-ranges: bytesContent-type: text/htmlLast-modified: Saturday, 28-Dec-96 07:09:35 GMTContent-length: 137766 Dealing With Drug Abuse -- Drugs and Their Effects Contents | Feedback | Search DRCNet Library | Schaffer Library | Major Studies | DealingWith Drug Abuse Dealing with Drug Abuse A Report to the Ford Foundation THE DRUG ABUSE SURVEY PROJECT STAFF PAPER I The Drugs and Their Effects by James V. DeLong A Primer on Psychopharmacology Drugs of Abuse A PRIMER ON PSYCHOPHARMACOLOGY Psychopharmacology, as the term is used here, refers to thestudy of the interactions of drugs with the central nervoussystem (CNS), including physical, behavioral, and subjectiveeffects. The term is not always used so broadly; we have chosen acomprehensive definition because this brief paper is neitherdetailed enough nor sophisticated enough to require the finedivisions implied by more exact categorization into suchsubspecialties as neurophysiology, neurochemistry,neuropharmacology, psychopharmacology, neuropsychology, and soforth. As will become obvious, there are many areas in which basicknowledge about the mechanisms of action of psychoactive drugsdoes not exist. Our purpose here is to describe for laymen theframework within which such knowledge must be sought, and thedifficulties involved.* * Since this paper was written by a layman for laymen,technical terms and discussion have been avoided as much aspossible. In most cases where extended discussion would have tobe highly technical, the conclusions of experts on the presentstate of knowledge are set forth with a citation to thediscussion leading to these conclusions. Drs. Avram Goldstein,Norman Zinberg, Andrew Weil, Frederick DiCarlo, and Alan Greenall read earlier drafts of this paper. They prevented someembarrassing errors, but they are not to blame for any thatremain. THE NERVOUS SYSTEM I The nervous system is composed of millions of nerve cells(neurons) that are by no means homogeneous in structure. Some arevery long, even up to several feet; some are bushy, with -manyfibers reaching out to connect with other nerves; some are smalland simple. The cells do not interlock with each other at theends, where the impulse is transmitted from one to another. Thereare, instead, microscopic gaps, called synapses, between them,which must be bridged by the impulse. There are several ways to categorize the parts of the nervoussystem, each useful for different purposes. One division isbetween the CNS-the brain and spinal cord-and the peripheralnervous system, which is everything else. The peripheral systemis composed of nerve fibers extending out from cell bodiescontained within the CNS and, to some extent, of cell bodiesclumped outside of it but, of course, still connected. While theperipheral system has groups of fibers (nerves) and groups ofcell bodies (ganglia), it is simple compared to the CNS, whichconsists of millions of tightly packed neurons, fiber groups(tracts), and clumps of cell bodies (nuclei) with billions ofsynapses. The psychoactive component of the effect of drugs is due totheir effects on the CNS rather than on the peripheral system,and it is the CNS with which we are concerned. The peripheralsystem is relevant only insofar as research into the mechanismsof peripheral action casts light on the workings of the CNS. Another way of dividing the nervous system is by function. Thesomatic system includes both the central and the peripheralneurons that convey impulses from the sense organs, organize themin the brain, and deliver motor impulses to the skeletal muscles.The autonomic system governs the smooth muscles of theintestines, urogenital tract, and blood vessels; the heartmuscles; and the endocrine glands. In short, the somatic systemcontrols the body's response to the external environment; theautonomic system governs the internal environment. The autonomic system is further subdivided into two parts. Thesympathetic system generally mobilizes bodily resources foraction-it constricts visceral blood vessels so that more blood isdirected to muscles and brain, accelerates the heart beat,inhibits intestinal and gastric activity, widens the pupils ofthe eye, and secretes adrenaline The parasympathetic system isthe antagonist of these effects. It acts to conserve bodilyresources, usually by having effects that are the reverse ofthose of the sympathetic system. The parasympathetic system ismore specific than the sympathetic, however. While the lattertends to act diffusely, causing all the effects at once, theparasympathetic system can act independently on different organs. The differentiation between autonomic and somatic systems isclearest at the periphery of the nervous system. As one tracesthe systems toward the CNS, the distinction becomes more vague.In the main trunks of peripheral nerves, for example, the fibersof the different systems are bound together and can be separatedonly by tracing them to their terminations or on the basis ofsome differences in fiber types. Within the CNS centers, divisionof functions is always a matter of degree rather than of completespecialization. While some centers are concerned primarily withsomatic or with autonomic functions, the two are always closelycoordinated, and the separation is not complete. The CNS itself is not, of course, a random melange ofheterogeneous neurons. There are many different and identifiableparts to it-medulla, pons, cerebellum, midbrain, reticularformation, thalamus, optic tract, cerebral hemispheres, basalganglia, and so forth. For some of these, the functions arefairly well established; for others, they are not. To try todescribe these would be far beyond the scope of this appendix.For our purposes, it is enough to state the followingpropositions: There is much specialization within the CNS, in that a particular part will have a specific and identifiable function. (For example, the thalamus is a relay station, with impulses arriving from lower centers and being passed on to higher ones; the hypothalamus has the primary control over autonomic functions; the cerebral cortex contains the more complex psychological functions; and so on.) Each part consists of packed nerve cells with many connections to each other and to different parts of the brain. Many, if not all, functions involve more than one CNS center. It is easier to study motor or sensory functions, where CNS activity can be correlated with an output, than to study pure cognitive functions, where it cannot. PROBLEMS IN STUDYING THE CNS The study of the CNS is extraordinarily difficult. As KennethMoore states, "The human brain contains a complex ofmillions of nerve cells that are anatomically independent butfunctionally interconnected. An impulse starting in one neuroncan propagate throughout the nervous system over a variety ofpathways. The route taken is determined by the inbornorganization of the brain and by ongoing events that, because ofneural plasticity, can establish new circuits."' Obviously,the number of permutations possible in such a system would makestudy difficult, even if no other problems existed. Moore,however, goes on to list some of the major impediments toresearch on the CNS: Many ideas about neural functioning derive from study of the peripheral system, where most synapses are well defined in that only one synapse exists at a particular point. In the CNS, the cell bodies are covered with synapses. They are also closely packed among other cells (the glia), which may perform some neural functions even though they are not neurons. In each peripheral synapse only one chemical transmitter is thought to act. Each CNS nerve cell may be affected by several different transmitters. [Transmitters are discussed on pp.67-68.] Neural reactions occur in milliseconds and are hard to find and measure. The biochemical processes involved in peripheral systems can be studied in test tubes (in vitro) where tissue slices can be made to react. This is not true for studies of the brain, because brain neurons in vitro are in a resting state, disconnected from the other neurons that ordinarily determine their activities. While artificial stimulation can be applied, there is no way of knowing whether this corresponds to actions in the body. In particular, it is difficult to relate any in vitro reactions to such higher functions as thought or emotion. Because the different units of the CNS have different functions and anatomies, the biochemical reactions of any particular part are probably not the same as those of any other part. There is a unique blood-brain barrier between the blood and the brain that makes chemical manipulation of the CNS via injection into the bloodstream more difficult than is manipulation of other tissues. [The capillaries in the brain are somewhat less permeable than the capillaries elsewhere in the body.] The synapses are so densely packed that chemical manipulation by administration directly to the brain is much more difficult. Some brain structures are not accessible in a live subject because they are surrounded by other structures. If it is not useful to study them in vitro, and one cannot study them in situ, it is rather difficult to study them at all. When experiments are carried out in a live subject it is often necessary to stop a chemical reaction quickly so as to preserve the tissue at a particular point in the process. This is usually done by rapid excision and immersion in a low-temperature liquid. Since the entire CNS is surrounded by bone, it is difficult to perform this operation quickly enough. Some chemicals present in vivo may never be identified because they are destroyed too quickly.' This represents a formidable list of difficulties. And, sincepsychoactive drugs are usually fairly specific to the CNS-in thatthey affect the CNS without having much effect on other bodysystems-it is easy to see why knowledge of their sites andmechanisms of action is less than complete, despite intensivestudy during the past several decades. THEORIES OF PSYCHOACTIVE DRUGS The present theory about the manner in which psychoactivedrugs operate is that they affect the transmission of the nerveimpulses across the synapses. This hypothesis is based upon moregeneral theories concerning the chemical nature of thistransmission. Researchers know that in a peripheral systemcertain chemical substances (acetylcholine in the somatic systemand norepinephrine in the autonomic) are associated with thestimulation of nerve impulses. These substances can also be foundin the CNS and appear to be correlated with activity levelsthere. Because nerve impulses are thought to be electrical in nature,the theory of their effect is as follows: A nerve impulse thatreaches the synapse of a particular neuron stimulates the releaseof a particular transmitter substance. This substance affects thereceptors of the adjoining nerve cell (the postsynaptic neuron),changes its electrical potential, and triggers an impulse withinit. Most of the transmitter substance is taken back into theneuron from which it came, although some of it is destroyed byenzymes or diffused by the blood. The postsynaptic nerve thenreturns to its original state. Psychoactive drugs may affect this sequence by stimulating orinhibiting the production of the transmitter substance, bycausing its release from storage, by affecting the process bywhich it is taken back into the neuron, or by stimulating orinhibiting its destruction. These processes have an effect on thelevel and type of activity in the CNS and a consequent effect onthe perceptions and activities of the body. Beyond this, it is difficult to say anything with muchcertainty. Some psychoactive drugs are associated with increasedCNS levels of particular substances that are thought to betransmitters, but the causation is not firmly established.Mandell and Spooner have pointed out that the evidence fortransmitter theory is in many ways startlingly indirect.' Theirfinal comment is: "Even on a neurochernical level, we musttalk about empirical correlates of behavioral states. Rigorousestablishment of the transmitter or modulator role of brainsubstances appears to remain for the future." The strongest evidence that a particular substance hastransmitter functions concerns acetlycholine Wh). Neuronssensitive to this substance are distributed throughout the brain,so that it can have excitatory or inhibiting functions, dependingon the region. ACh is difficult to study, because it does notpass the blood-brain barrier easily and is destroyed rapidlyafter artificial administration. Its effects on certain cells inthe spinal cord have been studied, but not much is known abouteffects at other synapses in the CNS. There is also fairly goodevidence that two catecholamines-norepinephrine (NE) and dopamine(D)-perform transmitter functions. Again, however, much of whatis thought about their action is derived from research with theperipheral system, and conclusions must be approached warily. NEand D, together with their degrading enzymes, are also located invarious regions of the brain.-' Some researchers believe that 5-hydroxytryptamine (5-11T),often called serotonin, is also a transmitter, but the evidenceis not as strong as for the substances already discussed. AsMoore states, "Despite years of active investigation, thefunctional significance of this amine remains obscure."' Thesubstance may excite, depress, or have no effect on neurons, butthe reasons for the differences are not known. It has nofunctions in the peripheral system and is thus even moredifficult to study than the other possibilities. A number of other substances may be transmitters, but theevidence is ambiguous. For example, the brain contains arelatively high concentration of free amino acids, some of whichmay have transmitter functions. And there are a number of otherpossibilities, such as histamine, substance P, Prostaglandins,and ergothioneine. MECHANISMS OF DRUG ACTION Even if the transmitter theory were certain and a connectionbetween transmitters and psychoactive drugs proved, there wouldbe the problem of understanding the mechanisms by which the drugsaffect the transmitters. This problem relates to the more generalpharmacological question of the manner in which drugs affectcells and to the basic pharmacological concept of receptor sites: . . . most drugs are thought to produce their effects bycombining with enzymes, cell membranes, or other specializedfunctional components of cells. Drug-cell interaction is presumedto alter the function of the cell component and thereby initiatethe series of biochemical and physiological changes that arecharacteristic of the drug.... The cell component directly involved in the initial action ofthe drug is usually termed ... its receptor., In its simplest form, the receptor-site theory is that, at thebasic site of action of any drug, there are cells or cellsurfaces that form molecular bonds with the drug molecules.Current theory is that these sites are stereospecific-it is notonly the chemical composition of the drug that determines whetherthe receptor can bond with it but its three-dimensional geometricshape as well. A cell surface might have, for example, three orfour different points of contact where different molecular bondscould be formed. A drug molecule must have a geometric shape thatallows proper subgroups of the molecule to come in contact withthese points for the formation of a firm bond. This theory of stereospecificity explains why drugs that arediverse in chemical structure may have similar effects (e.g.,morphine, methadone, and meperidine). Even though chemicalstructures are different, geometric structures can be similar. Incontrast, variations of the same substance with similar chemicalstructures but different geometric structures may not havesimilar effects.' The classic assumptions of receptor-site theory are: (1) Onemolecule of drug combines with one receptor site, (2) anegligible fraction of the total drug is combined, and (3) theresponse of the body to the drug is directly related to theproportion of available receptor sites that are occupied. The interaction between drugs and cells is governed by the lawof mass action. The molecules of a drug are constantlyassociating with and dissociating from receptor sites. At somepoint, for any given drug concentration, an equilibrium isreached where association and dissociation balance. Thedrug-receptor interaction, therefore, is dynamic, not static.Since most drug-toreceptor bonds are thought to be relativelyweak ionic bonds that are readily reversible, this concept ofdynamic interaction becomes important in understanding theprocess of antagonistic effects, blockade, and reversibility ofdrug action. All are based on theories about differences in thestrength of bonds formed by different drugs and on competitionfor receptor sites. Since these basic assumptions do not, however, explain all theobserved phenomena of drug action in many cases, including theaction of narcotic analgesics, various departures from the basicoccupancy assumption have been suggested. The most important are(1) that not only occupation of the receptor sites matters butalso the intrinsic "efficacy" of the drug; (2) that itis not the occupancy of the site that matters but the act ofoccupying, and that drug effect depends on the relative rates ofassociation and dissociation, and (3) that there are sparereceptors that may be occupied, although at a lower level ofefficiency, when the primary receptors are already occupied.These explain some of the otherwise unexplained phenomena, butthey leave other, different mysteries of their own.' Nor arethese questions likely to be settled soon. There are two ways to gain information about a receptor. Thefirst and only really satisfactory approach is to identify andisolate it. Then the investigation can follow establishedbiochemical and physicochemical procedures. Sequence analysis canestablish the primary structure of the macromolecules. Techniqueslike x-ray crystallography, high-resolution electron micrography,spectrophotometry, and analytical ultracentrifugation can yielddata from which the secondary and tertiary structure may bededuced. In the case of proteins, recent years have seen theelucidation of complete primary structures at an ever-increasingrate.... The second way of obtaining information about receptors isindirect. It has dominated pharmacologic research in the past.The approach is to draw inferences about a receptor from thebiologic end results caused by drugs. A powerful tool employedtoward this end has been the study of structure-activityrelationships (abbreviated SAR). A suitable biologic effect of adrug is chosen for study. A prototype drug, which elicits thecharacteristic effect, is then modified systematically in itsmolecular structure. Substituents are added or subtracted atvarious positions and in different steric configurations. Aseries of such chemically related drugs is known as congenericseries. By testing the members of a series and observing howbiologic potency is affected by each molecular modification, onemay ultimately draw conclusions about the precise mode ofcombination of a drug with its receptor surface.10 Unfortunately, the study of psychoactive drugs belongs in thesecond category. No one has found the receptor sites or knowswhich cells might be involved. Concerning narcotic analgesics,Goldstein says, "It must be remembered . . . that thereceptor, whose structural features are inferred from the SARstudies . . . is entirely hypothetical."11 Finally, theories of action at the receptor site say nothingabout the biochemical events in the CNS that constitute theeventual product of the interaction of the drug and the receptorsite. "Investigations of the mechanism of tolerance and ofthe mechanism of narcotic action have been hampered by the samedifficulty-that the biochemical alterations produced by the drugin the whole brain are unlikely to have much to do with thespecific biochemical changes that are responsible for the drugeffects at the sites of drug action."12 Jaffe makes a similar point. After reviewing the varioustheories and experiments on the effect of opiates on cerebralneural action, cerebral metabolism, and neurotransmitters, hesays: ... Unfortunately, knowledge of the functional role of theseveral postulated neurobumoral transmitter agents in the CNS isstill so limited and controversial that the demonstration of aneffect of morphine on them has not yet contributed significantlyto an understanding of either the neurophysiological andbehavioral effects of the drug or its mechanism of action .13 DRUGS OF ABUSE OPIATES The Drugs." Opium is a natural substance derived from onevariety of the poppy plant. It contains over twenty differentalkaloids with varying properties, constituting 25 per cent ofopium by weight. A few of these-primarily morphine and codeineare medically useful. In discussing opiate abuse, the specific drugs of concern arethe following: Morphine is a natural alkaloid constituting 10 per centby weight of the raw opium. Heroin. Because heroin is produced by chemicaltreatment of morphine with acetic acid, the technical name for itis diacetylmorphine. In terms of analgesic effect, heroin is alittle over three times as potent as morphine-for example, ittakes three milligrams of heroin to produce the same analgesiceffect as 10 milligrams of morphine. Although heroin is the principal opiate of abuse in the UnitedStates, most research has been done with the more readilyavailable morphine. In the opinion of experts, such research isapplicable to heroin if the dosage difference is considered,because heroin rapidly breaks down into morphine in the body.Thus, its subsequent pharmacological action is the same. Methadone is a synthetic opiate of approximately thesame strength as morphine. Meperidine is another synthetic opiate that is about 10to 20 per cent as potent as morphine. It is better known underits trade name, Demerol. While all four drugs are analgesic, euphorigenic, and in manyways fungible, there are some differences among them,particularly in maximal effect and duration of action. Throughoutthis paper, morphine is the primary subject. Importantdifferences in the characteristics of the other opiates arediscussed where relevant. Because of lack of information, two topics are not discussed.First, it should not be assumed that the effects andcharacteristics of raw opium are the same as those of morphine.It has been suggested that the mixture of many differentalkaloids in opium may have substantially modifying effects onthe action of any individual alkaloid, such as morphine.15 Thisis unproved; but-since the medical use of crude opium ended inthe Western world soon after 1850-there are no data either way.Secondly, it is possible to produce drugs from crude opium thatare stronger than morphine. For example, some derivatives ofthebaine, a nonanalgesic opium alkaloid, may be one thousandtimes more potent.16 The effects of such superpotent opiates havenot been studied and might differ qualitatively from those ofmorphine. Medical Uses. In the late nineteenth century, opium andmorphine were sometimes referred to by physicians as"GOM," "God's Own Medicine." They were usedfor asthma, dysentery, alcoholism, and a wide variety of otherdiseases-including the simple cough." In fact, the opiatesare effective cough suppressants, constipants, and tranquilizers,and, in an era lacking other drugs, their heavy use was natural. Today, however, since there are drugs without the addictivepotential of opiates that are equally, or nearly as, effectivefor most of these purposes, the medical use of opiates has becomeless common. Yet, the opiates are still the most effectivepain-killing drugs known to medicine, and large quantities ofmorphine and meperidine are used as such every year. Althoughthere is a continuing search for equally effective nonaddictivepain relievers, none has been found, and it may be that none willbe. For a time, some of the narcotic antagonists were believed tohave the desired properties; more recently, pentazocine wasthought promising. But the latest evidence indicates that theanalgesic qualities of these drugs are due to properties thatalso cause addiction. Physical Effects and Toxicity. The exact method bywhich morphine blocks pain is unclear. It does not appear toblock the transmission of the pain impulse through the nerves (asdo local anesthetics), because sensation and feeling are notaffected. For example, someone heavily dosed with morphine willstill be able to feel a touch or other relatively slightsensations. In addition, experiments have shown that a patient,even after being given morphine as a pain reliever, canaccurately determine the amount of pain he would be sufferingwithout the drug. What seems to change is the relationship of thesubject to the pain. Although he feels the pain and can tell howgreat it would be without the drug, he is not"bothered" by it. For these reasons, it is thought thatthe drug acts in the part of the brain that interprets the nervemessage." For a nontolerant individual, morphine is highly toxic. A doseof 100 to 200 mg. would be sufficient to cause a fatalrespiratory depression. This, like the analgesic effect, is aconsequence of the effects of the drug on the CNS rather than onother parts of the nervous system-morphine reduces theresponsiveness of brainstem respiratory centers to concentrationsof carbon dioxide." Tolerance to the respiratory effect increases rapidly, and noresearcher has yet found an absolute limit to the quantity ofmorphine that can be taken by a tolerant individual withoutcausing death. Some persons have been known to take as much asfour grams of morphine without adverse effect." No one has discovered long-term organic damage caused bymorphine. In autopsy, neither gross nor microscopic examinationof tissues shows evidence of such effects." Various studieshave followed the medical history of addicts over a substantialperiod of time, and, according to one of the studies, "whilethere is ample evidence that the aberrant way of life followed bymost heroin abusers has both acute and chronic medicalconsequences . . . there is insufficient scientific basis formaintaining that long-term use of opiates-in and of itself-isrelated to any major medical condition."" Addicts do, however, suffer from a variety of conditionsancillary to their general life-style and frequently die of viralhepatitis, bacterial infections, or other diseases. The deathrate of the addict population is not known, but it is usuallyestimated as about 1.5 per cent to 2 per cent per year."Malaria used to be common among addicts, until dope sellers beganusing quinine to cut heroin. Other deaths are often attributed toan overdose of heroin sufficient to cause respiratory depression.The possibility of an overdose is always present, because thequality of street heroin so varies that an addict may not knowhow much pure heroin he is getting in any purchase or even howmuch he is used to taking. Nevertheless, several experts have stated that overdose anddisease do not explain all addict deaths." In many cases,the dead addict did not receive more heroin than he was used toor should have been able to take, given his pre-existing level oftolerance. It is possible that some people have a specialsensitivity to heroin that takes the form of an idiosyncraticresponse to a single dose or that is analogous to an allergicreaction triggered by repeated use. However, there are no reportsin medical annals of persons having this reaction after receivingmorphine in a medical setting. Since morphine is used extensivelyin medicine, it would be expected that such a serious effectwould have been observed by this time. But there are also somereports of an unusually high death rate in England, where addictsreceive pure heroin. The English data on this are incomplete,however, and the causative factors have not been adequatelyanalyzed. Morphine does cause some physical effects, of uncertainsignificance. There are changes in excretion of epinephrine andnorepinephrine. Rapid-eye-movement (REM) sleep is depressed.Stabilized addicts become hypochondriacal, apathetic, and boredwith other people and have fitful sleep." Whether theseresponses signify permanent change or damage, however, is notclear. In all animal species, including man, morphine has anexcitatory effect as well as an analgesic one. This pattern isnot unique to morphine; it is also true, for example, ofbarbiturates and alcohol. The reasons are not well understood.The effect could be due to be a difference in the speed withwhich the drug affects different CNS centers, with certaininhibiting centers being affected first. Or some CNS centersexcited by the drug may react first, with the responsesubsequently suppressed by later-reacting centers. Various animalspecies, however, react to morphine in different fashions. Thepredominant effects in monkeys, dogs, rabbits, and rats, as wellas in man, are sedative, while in horses, cats, and mice they areexcitatory. Man is considerably more sensitive to the effects of morphinethan are most other animals. For example, the effective analgesicdose for a man is about 0.2 mg. of morphine per kilogramof body weight. In a dog it is at least ten times as high."This raises a number of questions about the meaning of animalexperimentsspecifically, about the relative importance of directphysical (as opposed to psychological or psychoactive)consequences of taking the drug. The opiates vary in several ways affecting consumerpreferences, abuse potential, and the ability of an addict tostabilize his dosage and lead a relatively normal existence. Themajor elements of variance are as follows: Peak effect. This is usually calculated as the maximumanalgesic effect that can be obtained from a given dose of thedrug as measured by the ability to relieve pain. Sometimeseuphoric effect is measured directly through the observation ofphysical correlates of drug taking or through verbal responses totests designed to determine the degree of euphoria. It isgenerally assumed, although not indisputably proved, that thepeak of analgesic effect and the peak of euphoric effect are thesame. Duration of action. This is a more diffuse concept,because it could mean the duration of relief of a given amount ofpain or the duration of the peak effect. Generally, as used inthe sources, it seems to mean the length of time afteradministration before the drug user begins to feel withdrawalsymptoms. Sometimes, however, the phrase "duration ofanalgesic action" is used. The exact meaning of this term isnot clear, since it would seem to depend on the level of pain tobe relieved. Empirically, it seems to be about the same as thegenerally accepted "duration of action" to withdrawal. Method of administration. All opiates can be takenorally, subcutaneously (by injection under the skin),intravenously (by injection into the vein), intramuscularly (byinjection into the muscle), or through the nasal passages. Theeffects will differ somewhat, depending on the method used. Inaddition, the effect of different methods of administrationvaries with the drugs. For example, when taken orally, methadoneretains its efficacy more than morphine. Potency and power. The power of a drug is defined bythe upper limit of the absolute effects it can produce. Thepotency of a drug relates to the dosage that is necessary toproduce a given effect. Thus, heroin is not more powerful thanmorphine, because both can produce the same effects; but it ismore potent, because it produces equivalent effects at lowerdoses. Viewed narrowly, potency might seem of little significancemedically, because one could always give more of the less potentdrug. Few drugs, however, are so specific that they have only oneeffect, and the differences in potency may not be uniform for alleffects. For example, morphine is an analgesic producing a sideeffect of nausea. Heroin is a more potent analgesic, but thisdoes not mean, necessarily, that it would be more potent incausing nausea. As stated above, potency of an opiate is measured in terms ofanalgesic effects, and this is thought-and only thought to equaleuphoric effect. But, given the lack of knowledge about themechanisms by which opiates work, it is not impossible that thevarious drugs affect different CNS centers in various ways, andthat therefore qualitative variations occur in psychoactiveexperiences. Also, superpotent opiates, such as the thebainederivatives, might have distinct effects that have not shown upin comparisons of existing drugs. Although the basic facts about the opiates are not entirelyclear, the following facts are known: " Morphine, taken subcutaneously, has its peak effect inone half to one hour. Its duration of analgesic action is four tosix hours, and the decline from the peak is rapid. When it istaken intravenously, the peak effect is reached sooner and issomewhat greater. Morphine is effective when taken orally, butthe peak effect is much lower-perhaps only 20 per cent to 30 percent of the subcutaneous peak. The duration of action of oralmorphine is at least twelve hours and may be as long astwenty-four. Heroin is generally thought to act about the same asmorphine. Some animal experiments, however, indicate that heroincrosses the blood-brain barrier more quickly than morphine. Ifthis is true for humans, its peak would come more rapidly thanthe morphine peak. Addicts sometimes cannot distinguish betweenheroin and morphine when they are injected subcutaneously; mostare able to do so, however, when the drugs are takenintravenously. Methadone, taken subcutaneously, has a peak effect inthree hours and a duration of analgesic action of about twelvehours. When methadone is taken orally, the peak is about 70 percent as great and occurs after four hours. Duration of actionafter oral administration is around twenty-four hours, and thedecline from the peak is slow. Intravenously injected methadonepeaks almost immediately, and the duration of action is lessenedaccordingly. Subcutaneous meperidine has a duration of analgesicaction of only two to four hours, and the peak is reached in lessthan an hour. With oral administration, the peak is about 50 percent as high. Intravenous administration lessens the time neededto reach the peak effect. Addicted medical personnel, who haveready access to meperidine, tend to prefer that drug to the otheropiates, possibly because of its fast action and relatively highpotency when taken orally. The dosages of the different drugsrequired to produce the same peak effect when administeredsubcutaneously are: morphine-10 mg.; heroin-3 mg.; methadone-10mg.; and meperidine-80 to 100 mg. Addiction. Three aspects of opiate use are particularlyimportant to an understanding of addiction and its consequences:(1) the nature of the euphoric psychoactive effect; (2) thedevelopment of tolerance to the drugs; and (3) the development ofphysical dependence, with physical withdrawal symptoms, when thedrug is removed. Psychoactive Eflects. Opiates cause a mental cloudingcharacterized by drowsiness, an inability to concentrate,lethargy, and reduced visual acuity. As was mentioned before,stabilized addicts may be hypochondriacal, withdrawn, bored withother people, and less motivated. Opiates, however, do not causeslurred speech or significant motor incoordination." In somepersons, they produce a very pleasant euphoria, but this reactionis not universal. Many people find that dysphoria, consisting ofmild anxiety and fear, results instead and may be accompanied bysuch unpleasant effects as nausea and vomiting. Dysphoria isextremely common at first use, even among those who eventuallybecome addicted; indeed, to attain euphoric effects at first maybe an atypical response. In some subjects, the initial responseis a desire to engage in increased activity." Goldstein states: It is well known . . . that most people react with extreme displeasure to an initial dose of an opiate narcotic, both nausea and dysphoria being common responses. It was once supposed that administration of opiates in legitimate medical practice might "create" addicts. There is no valid evidence of this claim, although it is true that the incidence of addiction is high in the health professions, where there is easy access to addicting drugs. It is quite obvious, however, that of the many millions of patients who receive morphine, an insignificantly small fraction ever seek to take the drug again. Likewise, in the population as a whole, very few of those who could obtain morphine or heroin illegally, if they wished, become addicts.30 Despite this, people start taking opiates because they like orexpect to like the effect. It is not known whether those whobecome addicts have a different response to the initial use,experiencing some atypical internal metabolic change, or whetherthey simply have more persistence. For those who find that they have an affinity for the drug,the euphoric effect is very powerful, although its exact natureis almost indescribable. This effect can be divided into twoparts. The first part is the "rush"-the initial impactof the drug on the nervous system. This appears to occur onlywhen the drug is taken intravenously, and not when it is takenorally or subcutaneously. Sexual images are frequently used todescribe this effect: "It was like a huge orgasm";"It was like coming from every pore." The second partis the follow-up sensation of being "high." Describingthis is more difficult, however, for there is no commonexperience from which a pattern can be drawn. Basically, theeffect appears to be that of an emotional analgesic, suppressinganxiety and care, although the analgesia is not a mere deadeningof emotion. On the contrary, it can be a profoundly heightenedsense of well-being. Whether everyone who persisted in opiate usewould attain this euphoric state, or whether such a state is aselective reaction based on psychological factors, remains anunanswered question. There is no model of the addict personalityas such that satisfactorily distinguishes between users andnonusers; nor is the psychic explanation the only one available.Some researchers believe that opiate addiction has aphysiological basis, and that the attempt to find psychologicalvariables is therefore pointless. The varying theories on thissubject are discussed in the last part of this section. Tolerance. A person can become accustomed to a drug'seffects and thus require steadily larger doses to produce aconstant effect. This phenomenon is common with many drugs inpharmacology, not just drugs of abuse. Tolerance is not the sameas physical dependence and often occurs without it. It is animportant aspect of opiate addiction, because the addict's needto take steadily larger doses to achieve a euphoric effectelevates the cost of his habit, causing increased criminalactivity and presumably increasing any long-term toxic effectsthat may exist. Tolerance does not always develop uniformly to all aspects ofa drug's action. For example, while tolerance in time develops tothe sedative effects of barbiturates, the amount needed for alethal dose remains constant. On the other hand, tolerance seemsto develop to all the major effects of narcotics. It "ischaracterized by a shortened duration and decreased intensity ofthe analgesic, sedative, and other CNS depressant effects as wellas by a marked elevation in the average lethal dose.""As observed in the section on toxicity, limits on tolerance havenot yet been determined. Tolerance takes two forms. First, the body to some extent mayincrease its ability to metabolize or excrete the drug. Whilethis has not been shown to be directly the case for the opiates,it has been shown that brain morphine levels become lower intolerant than in nontolerant animals eight hours after drugadministration. Secondly, constant brain levels of morphine willproduce less effect in tolerant than in nontolerant animals,indicating that there must be some form of adaptation within theCNS at the cellular level. These two forms of tolerance arecalled "drug disposition" and "metabolictolerance," respectively. Several theories have beendeveloped to explain them-they are too complex to discusshere-only to come to the same conclusion, namely, that "theprecise mechanisms underlying these two forms of tolerance tonarcotics are not known."" In a study of drug addiction as a social problem, an importantissue is the speed with which tolerance develops. If, forexample, tolerance develops rapidly, then whenever an addictincreases his dose for a few days-or possibly even for a day-hewill become tolerant to the increased dose and must thereforemaintain at least that level of habit from then on to avoidwithdrawal symptoms. Experimental evidence indicates thattolerance does develop rapidly. Human subjects have been broughtto a level of 500 mg. of morphine within ten days. Tolerance tomorphine begins with the first dose administered and buildsrapidly; tolerance to heroin lags for a few days, then followsthe same course. In animal experiments, it has been found that adog, when given morphine continuously for eight hours, will beginto recover from behavioral depression by the end of that time,indicating a rapid development of tolerance to a givenconcentration of morphine in the body." It is not clear whether tolerance increases arithmetically orgeometrically. For example, although a nonaddict might find 100mg. of morphine fatal, none of the sources indicates whether adose of 200 mg. would be fatal to an addict who was alreadytaking 100 mg. per day, or whether a dose of 600 mg. would befatal to an addict on 500 mg. Another important question is how long tolerance lasts afteran individual has been abstinent for a time. Generally, it isbelieved that tolerance disappears when the drug taking stops.There are numerous street stories to the effect that addicts willvoluntarily detoxify themselves to the point where their habitbecomes such as to be economically supportable. Yet, in oneclassic experiment rats were found to retain substantialtolerance to morphine for almost a year after the lastadministration of the drug." The final important aspect of tolerance is the phenomenon ofcross@tolerance between drugs. Morphine, heroin, methadone, andmeperidine are at least partial substitutes for one another, andtolerance to one confers tolerance to equipotent doses of theothers. Physical Dependence and Withdrawal. The term"physical dependence" or "physical addiction"means that an organism requires a drug for "normal"physical functioning. Abstinence will result in physical symptomsof varying types and severity until the body adapts to the newstate. The term "addiction," however, is eschewed byexperts in the drug-abuse field. Since drug abuse is dependent onan intermixture of physical and psychic variables, and sincedrugs of abuse are often used in such low doses that the degreeof actual physical addiction is questionable, experts feel thatit is more correct to use the terminology "drug dependenceof the morphine type" or "drug dependence of thebarbiturate type."" Even the withdrawal symptomsdeveloped by abstinent users may be psychogenic in origin. Inaddition, users of drugs that are not powerfully addictivephysically (e.g., tobacco) sometimes have a more difficult timein abstaining from use than do users of addictive drugs. Forthese reasons, it makes some sense to blur the distinctionbetween physical and psychological dependence when discussingdrug abuse as a social problem. This should not induce the belief, however, that there is nosuch thing as physical addiction or physical dependence. Clearly,an opiate user becomes physically dependent in the sense thatabstinence will cause severe and well-documented physicalsymptoms. These include restlessness and drug craving, followedby yawning, lacrimation, runny nose, perspiration, fever, chills,vomiting, panting respiration, loss of appetite, insomnia,hypertension, general aches and pains, and loss of weight. Theintensity can be "nearly unbearable" if the dosage ishigh enough." Several researchers have commented that withdrawal fromopiates-as well as from barbiturates and other hypnotics-ischaracterized by rebound hyperexcitability; that is,during withdrawal, the physiological systems that were depressedby the drug are in a state of increased excitability. It is notclear, however, whether all withdrawal symptoms are reboundeffects, or whether this is a general,rule applicable to otherdrugs as well." Withdrawal from the various opiates has been studiedscientifically. As a general rule, the intensity and duration ofthe withdrawal symptoms are related to the intensity and durationof the drug's action. Thus, morphine withdrawal starts within afew hours (four to ten, depending on the user's tolerance level),peaks rapidly (around the second day of abstinence), thendeclines sharply. Most of the obvious symptoms disappear withinseven to ten days. Meperidine withdrawal reaches its peak inabout twelve hours and lasts only four or five days. In someways, however, its peak intensity is greater than that ofmorphine withdrawal. Withdrawal from methadone follows a slowercourse. No symptoms appear until about the third day. After this,they increase steadily until between the sixth and the ninth day,when they peak at a level less than two-thirds as intense as thepeak for morphine withdrawal. Thereafter, they decline slowly,not disappearing until after about two weeks. The maximumintensity of methadone withdrawal is always tolerable, but itsduration may be the factor that causes some addicts to regard thewithdrawal from methadone as nastier than the withdrawal frommorphine." The disappearance of the gross symptoms does not mean,however, that the withdrawal is complete. Increasingly,researchers are finding some effects that persist for many weekslonger, and empirical observations show that the relapsevulnerability is greatest immediately after withdrawal. Dr.William Martin divides the abstinence syndrome into early andprotracted abstinence. In human experiments, subjects werestabilized on 240 mg. of morphine, then withdrawn slowly over aperiod of three weeks. They showed the general withdrawalsymptoms discussed above, although in milder degree than occursafter sudden withdrawal. The symptoms persisted to some extentfor six to nine weeks. After this, the protracted abstinencesyndrome emerged, characterized by minor physical differencesthat persisted through the twenty-sixth week of withdrawal. Theclinical significance of this is not clear, for it has not beenproved that protracted abstinence contributes to readdiction. Butcareful experiments with rats have shown that postaddict ratshave a greater liking for narcotics than do rats that have neverbeen addicted. This preference lasts four to six months afterwithdrawal." While no limit on the development of tolerance to opiates hasbeen found, there does seem to be a limit on the degree ofphysical dependence that can be developed, as measured by theintensity of the withdrawal symptoms. For morphine, this maximumis reached at dosages of around 400-500 mg. per day; higher dosesdo not result in more intense withdrawal symptoms." This points up the fact that tolerance to, and physicaldependence on, a drug are not the same thing. The body can evendevelop a tolerance to drugs on which it does not becomephysically dependent. But tolerance is always present whenphysical dependence develops. In the case of the opiates, the speed with which physicaldependence develops seems to lag only slightly behind the speedof the development of tolerance. A patient receiving therapeuticdoses of morphine for a week or two will not have recognizablewithdrawal symptoms spontaneously after discontinuance, but thesecan be precipitated by an antagonist after only two or three dayson morphine. By similar means, withdrawal has been caused in adog after an eight-hour infusion of morphine. Goldstein believesthat physical dependence is probably initiated with the firstdose of the drug." At that stage, of course, withdrawalwould be so mild as to be unnoticeable, but it seems possiblethat a single dose could create a craving for the drug, eventhough the physical genesis of this feeling would be unknown tothe user. As might be expected, there are no definitive explanations forthe phenomenon of physical dependence. Its existence is simplydefined by the presence or absence of withdrawal symptoms. Jaffestates: At present no single model is able to account for all the complex phenomena that are seen with the many classes of drugs producing tolerance and physical dependence. It is likely that multiple mechanisms are involved, and that each model may reflect a facet of the truth. For the present the most heuristic models are the best ones .42 Goldstein also observes that, although "the mechanism ofthe development of tolerance and physical dependence is stillunknown.... there has been no dearth of theoreticalspeculation."" It appears that dependence is due to"drug-induced alterations at the cellular level, with themost prominent changes occurring in the CNS . . . these changesare not limited to any one part of the CNS but occur throughoutthe entire neuraxis."" The sources are silent, however, on two important questionsabout physical dependence and tolerance. The first of theseconcerns stabilization dosages. It is well known, for example,that an addict can be stabilized on a drug, since taking a givenamount will result in neither withdrawal nor euphoria. But thereis little information on how much latitude there is in thestabilization dose. That is, if a morphine addict is used to 100mg., can he take anywhere between 90 and 100 mg. without becomingaware of the difference; or is his tolerance of deviation fromhis normal dose less than this? Also, are there variationsbetween the opiates, depending on peak intensity and duration ofaction? Generally, experts believe that it is harder to stabilizeon such short-acting drugs as morphine and heroin than onmethadone. The short, sharp peak and rapid decay characteristicof the morphine effect may mean that a dose insufficient toproduce euphoria soon results in bodily concentrations too low toprevent withdrawal. Another important question is whether the euphoric effectdisappears at high levels of opiate tolerance. That is, will anaddict who is used to 500 mg. of morphine achieve euphoria if hetakes 550 or 600 mg.? The fact that the severity of withdrawallevels off at around this dose might indicate an upper limit onthe ability to obtain a euphoric effect. None of the sourcesfound, however, presents evidence to support either possibility. Finally, it is well known that physical dependence on a givenopiate can be satisfied by any other opiate. This is thepbenomenon of cross-dependence, described by Jaffe as follows: Cross-dependence may be partial or complete, and the degree is more closely related to pharmacological effects than to chemical similarities. A broad-spectrum drug such as methadone, which depresses the entire range of functions that are similarly affected by morphine, can completely substitute for morphine or meperidine. However, meperidine, which has a narrower spectrum with less autonomic and sedative effects, does not entirely prevent the autonomic manifestations of withdrawal from morphine. In general, any potent narcotic analgesic, regardless of chemical class, will show cross-dependence with other narcotic analgesics . . . . 45 METHADONE MAINTENANCE A successful method of treating heroin addicts is to maintainthem on daily doses of methadone. More detail about the programsusing this technique is contained in Staff Paper 3. The pharmacological basis of methadone maintenance has beencovered in preceding sections, albeit implicitly. The significantcharacteristics are as follows: Methadone is a synthetic opiate. Its administration to a heroin addict will either prevent the withdrawal symptoms caused by abstinence from heroin or end them if they have already developed. Methadone and the other opiates exhibit cross-tolerance. A person tolerant to one of them is tolerant to equipotent doses of another. The action of oral methadone lasts about twenty-four hours. A methadone program can administer the drug once a day, rather than three or four times, as would be necessary if morphine or heroin were used. High doses of methadone (e.g., about 80 mg. or more) will prevent withdrawal, block the euphoric effect from an injection of heroin, and prevent the "drug hunger" (defined by Dr. Jerome Jaffe as "a felt sense of physical abnormality") felt by addicts who have become abstinent. Lower doses of methadone (e.g., 50 mg.) will prevent withdrawal and the drug hunger. They will not block the euphoric effect of an injection of heroin, although presumably some minimum quantity of heroin is required. The success rate for programs using low doses is approximately the same as the rate for those using high doses for addicts in treatment six months. Experts believe that blocking the euphoria is not so important as preventing the drug hunger. No significantly harmful side effects of methadone have been discovered. The effects of methadone on the heroin addict have beendescribed diagrammatically by Dr. Vincent Dole."' Fig. 1. Diagrammatic summary of the functional state of atypical "mainline" heroin user. Arrow shows therepetitive injection of heroin in uncertain dose, usually 10 to30 mg but sometimes much more. Note that the addict is hardlyever in a state of normal function ("straight"). Fig. 2. Stabilization of the patient in a state of normalfunction by blockade treatment. A single, daily, oral dose ofmethadone prevents him from feeling symptoms of abstinence("sick") or euphoria ("high"), even if hetakes a shot of heroin. Dotted line indicates the course ifmethadone is omitted. Fig. 3. The induction of narcotic tolerance by the gradualincrease of methadone dosage. Two typical patients are shown: onestarting with tolerance (from previous use of heroin) and theother with little or no tolerance (e.g., recently in hospital orjail). The right-hand ordinate shows the total daily dose ofmethadone (given in divided portions during the first months);the left-hand ordinate indicates the degree of narcotic blockadeon an arbitrary scale (O to ****). Some important questions about the nature of methadonetreatment remain unanswered. Because methadone and heroin can besubstituted for each other in so many ways, it would seem logicalthat their effects would be cumulative, and that the addict onmethadone would be able to achieve the euphoric state with asmaller dose of heroin than he normally used. Certainly, otherdrugs, such as alcohol and the barbiturates, have cumulativeeffects. Yet, many of the discussions about methadone treatmentevidently assume, with actually saying so, that their effects arenot cumulative. The explanation may lie in the pharmacological principle thatthe body's response to many drugs is logarithmic, not linear.That is, as the dosage is increased, steadily larger incrementaldoses are required to produce a constant increment of response.Heroin and methadone may be cumulative in their effects, but theadministration of methadone elevates the recipient to a point onthe dose-response curve where only very large additional amountsof heroin have discernible impact." In this context, it is important to remember the suggestionmade earlier that there may be a limit of 120-150 mg. per day ofheroin (the equivalent of 400-500 mg. of morphine) above whichadditional amounts of the drug have no euphoric effect. If thislimit is roughly true, even with substantial individualvariations, then many methadone programs may simply boost theaddict to the point where he cannot attain euphoria. Either hereaches this limit, which would be true at about 180 mg. per dayof methadone, or he reaches a dosage that leaves too small amargin between his tolerance level and this limit for a euphoricdose. Lower doses (e.g., 50 mg.) would not approach the euphoriclimit, but they might shift an addict to a point on thedoseresponse curve where the heroin dose he is used to takingwould not have any euphoric effect. Physiological Factors Underlying Addiction. It iscommonly assumed that the causes of addiction are psychological,and that there is no inherent physical predisposition toaddiction. There is, however, no experimental evidence that wouldrule out the possibility that drug addiction, or at leastvulnerability to drug addiction, has a physiological basis. AsGoldstein says: Certainly socioenvironmental reasons can be found, ex postfacto, to explain each case of addiction to heroin, thebarbiturates, or alcohol, or of habituation to lysergic aciddiethylamide [LSD], marijuana, nicotine, or amphetamine. But mostpeople afflicted by the same adverse environmental circumstancesdo not seek escape through drug abuse. Despite the presentpaucity of evidence, therefore, the possibility should beentertained that the characteristic effects of psychotropic drugsupon mood, which underlie the development of drug abuse, may beat least in part genetically determined. Investigation in this field has not yet transcended thedifficulties of designing experiments free of self-selection orother kinds of bias, and of working out methods suitable forquantitation of subjective responses. It has been found, forexample, that housewives who drink large amounts of coffeeresponded entirely differently to a test dose of caffeine in aplacebo-controlled experiment than did housewives who never drinkcoffee. The coffee drinkers felt more alert and had a sense ofwell-being after caffeine, as compared with placebo. Thenon-drinkers obtained significantly fewer effects of this kind;on the other hand, caffeine made them feel nervous and"jittery." But it is not known if the group habituatedto coffee would have reacted in the same way at an earlier age,before their first exposure to caffeine. Large individualdifferences are observed in the sensitivity of people to thesleep-disturbing actions of caffeine, but again it is not clearwhether or not these are innate differences, independent of anyprior exposure to caffeine. One investigation on the coffeedrinking and smoking habits of monozygotic and dizygotic twinssuggests that these two kinds of drug-seeking behavior aresubject to genetic influences.411 Dole has suggested that an addict may have an underlyingneurological vulnerability to addiction that is triggered byopiate use." More recently, he has indicated that opiate usemay induce a metabolic change that will cause the body to craveopiates thereafter." But he is not optimistic about thepotential of research on the question, given the present lack oftestable hypotheses that might explain it." Another theory concerning physiological propensity toaddiction is more complex. Martin has suggested that an addicthas a particular physiological vulnerability to stress eitherbefore he takes his first narcotic drug or after he starts takingit. In Martin's view, this vulnerability is not lost afterwithdrawal from the drug, and stress situations will trigger aphysiological reaction that results in a craving for the drug.Martin believes that there is some experimental evidence for thisview and is more optimistic than Dole about possibleresearch." THE HALLUCINOGENS The Drugs." LSD (lysergic acid diethylamide) is a synthetic drugdiscovered in 1938. It is closely related to the ergot family,and ergotamine tartate, used in treatment of migraine headaches,can be used as raw material in the manufacture of LSD. Mescaline, an alkaloid of the peyote cactus, wasisolated in 1896. It is about .025 per cent as potent as LSD inproducing an altered state of consciousness. But it is probablyjust as powerful. Psilocybin and psilocin are the active alkaloidsof the Mexican magic mushroom and are about 1 per cent as potentas LSD. DOM (also called STP) and MDA are other hallucinogenschemically related to both mescaline and amphetamine. DMT (dimethyl tryptamine) is a short-acting hallucinogen. Medical Uses." Although there are no recognizedmedical uses for the hallucinogens at present, some of them havebeen, and are being, used experimentally for a variety ofresearch and therapeutic purposes. LSD and mescaline, forinstance, have been used for research on mental illness and inpsychotherapy. Since certain effects of these drugs mimic thesymptoms of schizophrenia in some ways, it has long been thoughtthat study of these effects will yield insights into the natureand causes of psychotic states. A few experiments have beenconducted in which terminal-cancer patients are given LSD inorder to make the "waiting for death" period moremeaningful. Through the LSD experience, the patient learns tolive in the "here and now," taking each day as it comesrather than dwelling on his past. Alcoholics and drug addictshave also been given LSD as part of more comprehensive courses oftreatment. Physical Eflects and Toxicity. LSD is effective whentaken orally, which is the usual method of administration. Someusers claim to have taken it nasally or by injection and statethat injected LSD produces a powerful rush. It produces somesomatic effects that are sympathomimetic, such as pupillarydilation, increased blood pressure, tremor, nausea, muscularweakness, and increased body temperature, but these effects areusually minor. The major effects are almost entirely on theCNS." The effective dosage is quite small. Perceptual changes, themost dramatic result, can be produced by as little as 251 mcg.(micrograms). (I gram = 1,000 milligrams = 1,000,000micrograms.)" The standard dose taken by LSD users isprobably around 200 mcg., although the variability of streetdrugs makes it difficult to be accurate. Although no human deaths as a result of the pharmacologicalaction of LSD have been reported, animal deaths due torespiratory failure have occurred in response to massive doses.At present, it is not clear whether there is a fatal dose forhumans, but it is clear that the ratio of the lethal dose (ifthere is one) to the therapeutic dose is very high. It isdifficult to determine the significance of animal experiments forhumans, because different species have markedly differentreactions. Some animals, for example, have been found to beresistant to LSD; mice, in particular, detoxify the drug quickly,and the half-life (the period within which half the drug ismetabolized) in a mouse is only seven minutes. In a human, thehalf-life is approximately three to three-and-a-half hours; thetotal duration of action of the drug is about twelve hours .57 Despite claims to the contrary, there is no reliable evidencethat LSD causes birth defects. The early studies on this havebeen discredited, and no definitive work has been donesince." One exhaustive study concluded that pure LSD, inmoderate doses, "does not produce chromosome damagedetectable by available methods."" This problem isdifficult to study, because that part of the population that usesLSD heavily is also likely to be malnourished, careless abouthygiene and prenatal care, and prone to a variety of physicalproblems. Since LSD seems to be a relatively specific drug, inthat it acts primarily on the CNS and has few peripheral effects,it is not particularly logical to expect that it will producebirth defects. It would be more sensible to study the largenumber of legal drugs that have massive effects on various bodysystems, because they would be more likely to affect thereproductive system as well. The stress on birth defects as apossible result of LSD appears to be motivated more by the desireto prevent its use than by the desire to prevent birth defects. Psychoactive Eflects." The hallucinogens do notproduce hallucinations in the classic sense-it is rare for a userto see things that are not there. Rather, perception is altered:Afterimages are prolonged and overlap with present perceptions;objects seem to move in a wavelike fashion or melt; and sensoryimpressions become overwhelming. Synesthesia-a state where colorsare "heard" and sound is "seen"-is common. Perhaps more important to the user than these perceptualeffects are the subjective effects. Time may seem to pass veryslowly; self-boundaries appear to disintegrate; and the user sooncomes to feel a sense of oneness with the universe. There mayalso be a sense of unusual clarity, and one's thoughts may beginto assume extraordinary importance. Moods may change radically,from gaiety to depression, from elation to fear, or vice versa. Many users attach great meaning to their experiences. Someregard the use of LSD as a form of psychotherapy, since theybelieve it increases one's self-knowledge andself-awareness, largely through the recall of old and hithertoburied memories. Others may go further and emphasize the mysticaland religious aspects of their drug-induced feelings. Some of the possible, long-term psychological reactions wereexamined in an experiment in which LSD was administered topreviously naive subjects. The subjects were given a number ofpsychological tests-before taking LSD, immediately after theexperience, and six months later." All changes were quitesmall; the main findings indicated a negative correlation betweenthe use of LSD, on the one hand, and aggression, competition, andpreference for structure and conformity, on the other. Rather, apositive correlation with an increase in aesthetic appreciationwas found. One result of the experiment was proved particularlyilluminating: Fifty-nine per cent of the subjects who had beengiven 200 mg. of LSD thought that the drug had had lastingeffects on their personality, even though the tests"provided only minimal supportive evidence."" Inthe control groups, none of those given 25 mg. of LSD, and 13 percent of those given 20 mg. of amphetamine, had similar feelingsabout the experience. While other researchers have found anegative correlation between chronic LSD use and aggression andcompetition," there is a self selected quality to thevoluntary chronic user that did not exist in the aboveexperiment. The major short-term risk of taking LSD is the "badtrip," a term used to describe several different types ofadverse experiences. A mild adverse reaction can mean only thatthe images and feelings during the experience were unpleasant. Atthe other extreme, a serious panic reaction, accompanied byimmense anxiety and fear, may occur. Bad trips are probablycommon, but most of them do not reach the severe level. Under clinical conditions, serious adverse reactions appear tobe rare. In one study, for instance, it was found that 25,000administrations of LSD to 5,000 people in clinical settings hadresulted in only 0.08 per cent serious reactions in experimentalsubjects and 0.34 per cent in subjects undergoing therapy."Serious" was defined as causing either suicide or asuicide attempt or a psychotic break lasting more thanforty-eight hours. 14 Of course, most LSD use does not take place under clinicalconditions; some observers believe that such use may thereforeresult in higher percentages of adverse effects, for severalreasons. To begin with, putative LSD may be heavily adulteratedwith substances ranging from strychnine to methamphetamine. Also,use of LSD has been an illegal and deviant activity; this maymake users anxious and more susceptible to bad reactions. It isalso possible that a higher proportion of street users havepsychological factors impelling them toward deviant behavior thanwould be true of an experimental population. Age differences mayalso be an important factor in adverse reactions (a theory in thefield is that young users are more likely to lack the experienceand identity that enable a more mature person to handle thepowerful impact of the drug) . One could, of course, argue the precise opposite on almostevery point made in the last paragraph. For example, street usersmay seek out warm and supportive settings that reduce theincidence of bad reactions as compared with the clinical setting.LSD use may be deviant in the context of the larger culture butnot in the subculture within which most users live. Older people,generally more rigid in their attitudes, may resist the drugeffect and panic, while younger people, being more flexible, mayaccept -the drug experience more easily. Contact with asubculture in which LSD is common may reduce fear of the drug,regardless of age, more than will clinical reassurances. At present, there is no rational way to choose between thesearguments. It should be emphasized that reports of large numbersof serious adverse reactions among street users have not beendocumented. What evidence there is consists mostly of anecdotes. Chlorpromazine, a powerful tranquilizer used in the treatmentof psychiatric illness, will counter the physical effects of LSDalmost immediately. If, however, the LSD user is having apanic reaction, it may continue in spite of the chlorpromazine.Physicians familiar with this phenomenon believe thatchemotherapy may prolong panic because of the anxiety itsadministration arouses in the patient. "Talking the patientdown" in a calm manner is the preferred treatment .115 There are some long-term risks associated with LSD use. Insome individuals, prolonged negative effects are associated withuse of hallucinogens; cases of serious depression, paranoidbehavior, and prolonged psychotic episodes have been documented.Whether the hallucinogens cause these effects is not clear. LSDmay serve only to precipitate them in someone who is about tohave such a problem anyway. The frequency of such effects is notknown. Another possible long-term effect of the hallucinogens is theflashbacks recurrence of some aspect of the drug experience vhenthe subject is nor under the influence of the drug. The flash)ackencompasses a wide range of possible LSD-like perceptual orsubjective effects of varying degrees of severity and duration,lasting from a few minutes to several hours and occurring withindeterminate frequency. The user is not affected betweenexperiences. Causation has not been definitely proved, however,and it could be that a controlled experiment would find similarexperiences in a non-LSD-using populations" The most common type of flashback recorded is the recurrenceof perceptual distortion; the rarest is the recurrence of alteredphysical sensation; and the most dangerous is the recurrence ofdisturbing emotion and panic. (This may be hard to distinguishfrom the depressive reaction or schizophrenic episodes discussedabove.) The last two types of flashbacks are more likely to occurafter a bad trip than after a good one. Assuming that flashbacks are caused by LSD, the mechanismresponsible is a mystery. The theory that LSD persists in thenervous system is not compatible with its known short life, andthe theory of a persistent, undiscovered metabolite isincompatible with the wide variations in onset and duration.Nevertheless, there is no lack of other theories, ranging fromsemipermanent changes in the optic pathways, to learned responsesto stress, to dissociative reactions. Generally, it is probablypsychological rather than chemical, but, given the lack ofknowledge about the relationship between psychological andchemical events, this conclusion does not tell very much." There is no information on the incidence of flashbacks, theextent to which they occur after only one LSD experience, or therelative frequency of the different types. The effects of the other hallucinogens are similar to those ofLSD. Mescaline, which lasts as long and has about the sameeffects, although it is less potent, seems to be the usergs drugof choice. It is unclear whether this preference is due to thepublicity regarding possible birth defects caused by LSD or tosome subtle difference in effect. It may just as well be due tothe belief of many users that natural substances are superior tosynthetics, a factor that may also account for the preference forthe mushroom hallucinogens. This question has not been studiedclinically, and it is difficult to know the effects of naturalhallucinogens, since they are rarely available. Most streetmescaline is either LSD or LSD plus speed or some otheradulterant. DOM (STP), MDA, and some other drugs are a cross betweenhallucinogens and amphetamines. The duration of action of DOM issixteen to twenty-four hours, and rough observations indicatethat the incidence of panic reactions and flashbacks has beenhigher than that associated with LSD. The physiological effects(rapid heart rate, dry mouth, dilated pupils) are also morepronounced. It is possible that, when the drug first appeared,users were more prone to panic, because they were not preparedfor the long duration and greater physical reaction." Jaffestates that low doses of DOM give some of the subjective effectsof LSD without the perceptual or hallucinogenic effects, althoughthe drug has typical psychedelic action at higher doses." According to some sources, MDA causes an LSD-type reaction forthe first six to eight hours, but it also has amphetaminelikeeffects that persist for a longer time. Other reports are thatMDA is sui generis, with LSD-like subjective feelings butwithout the perceptual distortion of LSD ordepersonalization." DMT is a hallucinogen whose effects last only forty-fiveminutes to an hour. It is sometimes called "thebusinessman's lunch." Tolerance. Tolerance to the hallucinogens developsrapidly. If taken daily for three or four days, LSD will cease tohave any substantial effect." The tolerance does not appearto be so closely tied to the dosage as in the case with otherdrugs to which tolerance develops-that is, it seems that onecannot achieve the desired effect simply by increasing the dose.The sources, however, are ambivalent on this. Sensitivity returnsafter a few days of abstinence. There is cross-tolerance among LSD, mescaline, and psilocybinbut not between any of these and the amphetamines." There isno information on DOM, MDA, or DMT on this point. Physical Dependence and Withdrawal. Hallucinogens suchas LSD and mescaline do not produce physical dependence, andthere are no withdrawal symptoms after discontinuation."Again, there appears to be little information on DOM, MDA, orDMT; at least, there are no reports of dependence or withdrawal.They are likely to be about the same as LSD. Mechanisms of Action. A number of CNS effects of LSDare known; the manner in which LSD causes these effects, however,is still not known. LSD and the other hallucinogens interferewith the production and action of serotonin (also called 5-HT or5-hydroxytryptamine) in the brain. This is an important bodysubstance with significant effects on many organ systems. But,since the functions of serotonin in the CNS are not known, thisdoes not represent substantial progress in understandingLSD." CANNABIS" The Drugs. Cannabis sativa, the hemp plant, growsalmost everywhere in the world. It flourishes in hot, dryclimates, and it is generally believed that plants produced insuch regions have the most pronounced psychoactive effects. Marijuanaconsists of the chopped leaves and stems of the cannabisplant. It is usually smoked, but it can be taken orally. Hashishis formed of resin scraped from the flowering top of thecannabis plant. It, too, can be smoked or eaten, and it isthought to be about five to eight times as potent as marijuana.Some experts believe there are qualitative differences in effectas well as simple differences in potency. Kil, bhang, andgania are other preparations of cannabis used in variousparts of the world. Their potency lies between that of marijuanaand that of hashish. The most important psychoactive ingredient of cannabis isknown to be delta-9-tetrahydrocannabinol (THC), but thepossibility of additional ingredients exercising some effect hasnot been precluded. Cannabis is a difficult drug to classify. Although itis often referred to as a mild hallucinogen, it does not havemany of the effects associated with hallucinogens, and probablyhas a different mechanism of action altogether. It also has somesedative effects but lacks many of the other characteristics ofthe sedative hypnotics. With good reason, therefore, it isusually classified as unique." Medical Uses. There is no accepted medical use for cannabisin the United States. In the past, especially during the latenineteenth century, it was quite popular among European andAmerican doctors, who prescribed it for a variety of ailmentsranging from menstrual cramps to migraine headaches. It was thusused generally as a mild anodyne (pain killer) ortranquilizer-but it may have more specific effects as well." By the early twentieth century, the use of cannabis formedical purposes had declined, largely because of inconsistencyin the potency of the drug. Since cannabis was cultivatedin many places with wide variations in climatic and soilconditions, no physician could be sure of potency of any givenbatch. This made it difficult to predict results. It alsoinhibited research, since nonreplication of scientific findingsmight invariably have been due to differences in the drugs used. Another problem was that there was no satisfactory way toadminister the drug for medical purposes. Smoking is not amedically acceptable method, because the doctor cannot know howmuch of the drug is being inhaled and absorbed. Oraladministration is possible, but effects are delayed. Moreover,since neither the plant material nor the resin is soluble inwater, injection is difficult. Thus, as other drugs becameavailable-particularly the barbiturate sedative hypnotics, whichbegan appearing on the market in 1903-cannabis wasreplaced. Almost no research has been done on the drug since the latenineteenth century, and government policies made such researchimpossible from 1937 to about 1968. Whether cannabis hasunique medical uses or is in some ways superior to commontranquilizers now in use is therefore an open question. A revivalof interest is now taking place, however, in the medicalcommunity. For example, several doctors are using cannabis totreat migraine headaches, and some research is being done intoits effectiveness as a treatment for epilepsy. Certain variantsof THC may lower the blood pressure of hypertensive people." The isolation and synthesis of THC-achieved in the early1960's-has promoted such research by making consistency in dosageconceivable for the first time. In addition, NIMH has a projectunder way to cultivate cannabis in Mississippi, with theobjective of providing drugs of constant quality to researchers.But there are still problems: For example, there is some evidencethat THC is subject to oxidation, and that the potency of cannabismay therefore change over a period of time that varies withstorage methods. Also, THC is expensive to synthesize and remainsin short supply. Recent work has developed at least one watersoluble derivative of THC with a pharmacological profile similarto that of the original drugs. This should aid research further. Physical Effects and Toxicity. The immediate physicaleffects of cannabis on man are mild. Heart rate isincreased moderately. There is a dilation of the conjunctivalblood vessels (i.e., a reddening of the eyes) and sometimes anincrease in heart rate. There appear to be no changes inrespiratory rate, pupil size, or blood-sugar level. After asingle inhaled dose, measurable physical effects reach a maximumwithin half an hour and diminish three to five hours later."When cannabis is eaten, the effects are delayed forseveral hours, and symptoms may persist for up to twenty-fourhours. As discussed in the next section, subjective effects of highdoses of the cannabinols may be similar to those of LSD. This hasled some to classify them as mild hallucinogens. Physical effectsare not the same, however, because cannabis does not havethe stimulating effects of LSD and has sedative properties thatLSD lacks. There is no cross-tolerance between the cannabinolsand the hallucinogens." At present, there is no reliable evidence of organic damage,and the most that can be said against cannabis is that theeffects of long-term or heavy use have not been ascertained. Tobe sure, heavy, long-term smokers of cannabis developbronchial disorders, but these seem no different from thedifficulties experienced by heavy smokers of tobacco. Reports oflong-term brain damage are suspect, at best. For one thing, theyderive from studies of cannabis users in underdevelopedcountries, such as India and Morocco. These studies, furthermore,are skewed by the fact that they used inmates of mentalinstitutions as subjects and assumed a causative relation if theyfound that the inmates had been users of cannabis. Scientificprotective devices, such as control groups and blind studies,were lacking. The recent crash program of federal research hasnot filled this gap, and many experts do not expect that it willdo so. In this view, gross organic damage would have been foundbefore now, and long term subtle damage is difficult to studyretrospectively. The lethal dose of THC for humans has not been determined, butit is known that the cannabinols are not very toxic: There hasyet to be a report of a human death due to an overdose of THC.Animal experiments have found that the 16thal dose for rats isbetween 800 and 1,400 milligrams of drug per kilogram of bodyweight for oral administration. Extrapolating from studies inmice, the ratio of the lethal dose to the effective dose forhumans would be about 40,000 to 1. (The effective dose is thatamount necessary to produce clinically desired effects. For THCin humans, it is about 50 micrograms per kilogram.) By way ofcomparison, the ratio for barbiturates is about 10 to 1" Recent research has found that injected THC has a half-life inthe body of fifty-six hours, and that traces can be found in theurine for up to eight days. There is also a possibility that itmay accumulate in lung or fat tissue." The clinicalimplications of these facts, however, are not known. Psychoactive Effects. The general effect of cannabisis "a subtle mood change not easily perceived by thenovice."" The most common mood encouraged by the drugis a sense of increased well-being, but this is heavily dependenton the setting and expectations of the user. The nervousness thatmay accompany first use, for example, can negate any reaction tothe drug. Set and setting help to produce a wide range ofreactions and may be more crucial determinants of the effects of cannabisuse than those of most other drugs." The effectsdescribed below are those observed in clinical trials andobtained from interviews with users. One important effect is the enhancement of the senses.Sensitivity to colors, sounds, patterns, textures, and taste isgreatly increased. Perception of space and time is distorted inways that can be either pleasing or disconcerting. In particular,time passes very slowly. Inhibitions may be relaxed in a mannerreminiscent of the effects of low doses of alcohol. The subjectmay develop a sense of being in a fantasy or dreamlike state (aneffect achieved also by sedatives and anesthetics). In clinical experiments, large doses of THC have producedLSD-type experiences, but this requires quantities of THC far inexcess of the concentrations found in organic cannabis. Real hallucinationsdo not occur. The dose-response curve of THC has not yet been established;nor have systematic comparisons of THC and LSD been made. Significant adverse reactions to cannabis are rare, butthey do occur. They are more common when strong forms, such ashashish, are used. There are four types that may result: (1) simple depression, (2) a panic state, (3) toxic psychosis,and (4) psychotic break. Of the four, the simple depression reaction is the mildest andmost common. Its genesis is not known. People may be respondingidiosyncratically to pharmacological effects of the drug; or thecannabis may intensify pre-existing but suppressedpsychological states or traits. It is likely, also, that thedifferent explanations might each account for some of thedepressions seen. In any event, the reaction ends spontaneously. The panic reaction occurs when a user interprets the use oreffects of cannabis as a threat to life or sanity. It ismost likely to occur in subjects with no prior drug experiencewho are ambivalent toward drug use and possibly fearful of policearrest. Verbal and personal support by peers is the mosteffective therapy; hospitalization and the use of tranquilizersare usually contraindicated unless the person is highlyagitated." Many panic reactions have been misdiagnosed as examples oftoxic psychosis-a condition in which the presence of toxins inthe body causes organic malfunction in the cerebral cortex and aresultant psychotic state. This reaction is even rarer than thepanic reaction and ends when the toxins are flushed from thesystem. A user is vulnerable to such a reaction when consuming cannabisin concentrated forms, especially if the drug is mixed withfood and drink. The effects are delayed while the drug is beingabsorbed, and the user cannot use the effects of the drug as ameasure of when he has had enough. In the view of some experts,smoking cannabis allows the user to regulate consumptionin reaction to the immediate effects of the drug's passing intothe blood stream via the lungs. The view that differences in reaction to the two methods ofadministration are due to control of dosage can be questioned,however. Dr. Andrew Weil states: This theory of autotitration sounds nice, but I do not see it happen much. Most marijuana smokers I know smoke as much as they are handed. What is interesting is that one reaches some sort of ceiling in smoking: beyond a certain point, one does not get any higher, only more sedated. With oral ingestion, on the other hand, one can easily get into the toxic range. These observations suggest pharmacological differences between the two routes of administration.86 The use of cannabis may also trigger a psychotic breakin individuals who have normal psychological histories. Althoughevidence is scarce, the degree of risk is probably very small. Arecent study reviewed twelve cases of cannabis-related psychoticbreaks arising over a ten-month period among soldiers stationedin Vietnam. Only two of the twelve had "significantpsychiatric histories and diagnosis of personalitydisorder." In all cases, the reaction occurred after thefirst use of cannabis and was self limiting, in that thecondition cleared spontaneously." Since about 30 per cent ofthe 500,000 American soldiers in Vietnam at the time had probablyconsumed cannabis at least once, often in potent form, theincidence seems low. Other data support this conclusion. During a fifteen-monthperiod, approximately 30,000 persons were treated at the HaightAshbury Clinic for a variety of medical and psychiatric problems.An estimated 95 per cent had used cannabis. No case of apsychotic break was recorded." The risk of a psychotic break may be higher for users who havea history of mental disorder. There is some evidence to supportthis, but there are no statistical data on the degree to whichsuch population is at greater risk than "normals." Tolerance. Cannabis appears to have the unusualproperty of "reverse tolerance," in that regular usersare more sensitive to the drug than novices. This characteristichas been conventional wisdom within the drug culture for sometime; it is supported by a recent scientific study that usedradioactive isotope tagging to detect THC in body tissues severaldays after the drug had been injected. The conclusion was thatTHC may accumulate in the body, so that a regular user mayalready have a "basic dose" and require only a small,additional amount to obtain a psychoactive effect." It is not known whether pharmacological tolerance to cannabisdevelops. Because of the "reverse tolerance"effect, experts have assumed that there was no such tolerance;but, if the effects are cumulative, then "reversetolerance" in users could be accompanied by pharmacologicaltolerance. For example, when synhexyl, a potent synthetic cannabisderivative, is administered, tolerance develops in four tosix days." Physical Dependence. There is little evidence thatphysical dependence develops with the consumption of cannabis,and no significant withdrawal symptoms accompany cessation ofuse. If dependence of any kind develops, it is probablypsychological, but even this appears to be minimal." Mechanisms of Action. The way in which cannabiscauses CNS effects is not known. Additional Sources. A number of comprehensive reviewsof marijuana have recently been published, taking up many of theabove issues in greater depth. Some of these are U.S. Government, Secretary of Department of Health, Educationand Welfare, Marihuana and Health: A Report to Congress, January31, 1971 (GPO, 1971) Federation of American Societies for Experimental Biology, AReview of the Biomedical Effects of Marijuana on Men in theMilitary Environment (Bethesda, Maryland, December, 1970) Lester Grinspoon, Marihuana Reconsidered (HarvardUniversity Press, 1971) Leo E. Hollister, "Marihuana in Man: Three YearsLater," Science, CLXXII, No. 21 (April, 1971) THE MAJOR STIMULANTS The Drugs." This category of drugs includes thosethat have the effect of stimulating physical and mental activityand of providing a feeling of such stimulation to the user: Amphetamines are synthetic drugs that are part of thegeneral category of sympathomirnetic agents-a group of drugswhose effects resemble the response to stimulation of certainnerves of the sympathetic nerve system (hence"sympathomimetic"). They are CNS stimulants. Methamphetamine is a close relative of theamphetamines. The major distinction is that it has a differentratio between central effects and peripheral actions than do thebasic amphetamines. Small doses of methamphetamine produceprominent central stimulant reactions without significantperipheral effects. Cocaine is an alkaloid of the coca plant. In generaleffects, it is quite similar to the amphetamines. Methylphenidate (Ritalin) is a mild CNS stimulant,between caffeine and the amphetamines in its effects. Phenmetrazine (Preludin) is also a sympathomimeticagent. Its effects are almost indistinguishable from those ofamphetamines. This section discusses amphetamines primarily, as theprototype. Significant differences are noted as relevant. Medical Uses." The amphetamines are used to treata rare condition called narcolepsy-the inability to stay awake.They are also used in the treatment of obesity because of theircharacteristic of depressing the appetite centers, but theresults in this area are unimpressive. Amphetamines are useful inthe treatment of children with hyperkinesis. This condition,which is also called minimal brain dysfunction, is one in which achild shows an inability to concentrate, a deficiency in motorskills, a low frustration level, and often an abnormal EEGpattern. Quasimedical uses are very common. Amphetamines increaseshort-term physical and mental performance and are widely used bypeople who desire this effect, such as students and athletes.They are also used by people who have become dependent on orhabituated to them to maintain their normal level of functioning. Cocaine is not used medically for any of the above purposes,but it is used as a local anesthetic. Ritalin is effective in treating hyperkinesis and, because itis milder than the amphetamines, may be the drug of choice." Physical Effects and Toxicity. In different relativedegrees, sympathomimetic agents have the following majoractions:" A peripheral excitatory action on such smooth muscles as thosein blood vessels supplying the skin and on salivary and somesweat glands; A peripheral inhibitory effect on other types of smoothmuscles, such as those in the wall of the gut, on the bronchialtree, and on the blood vessels supplying the skeletal muscle; Acardiac excitatory action that increases heart rate and force ofcontraction; Certain metabolic actions; CNS excitatory actions, such as respiratory stimulation andothers. Amphetamines follow this scheme. Blood pressure is increased,and the smooth muscle responses, while somewhat unpredictable,are as indicated. The amphetamines are more potent in their CNSeffects than other drugs in the group, and it is through theeffects on the CNS that they stimulate respiration, depress theappetite, and reverse fatigue. The results of an oral dose of 10to 30 mg. of amphetamine (the standard therapeutic dose is 10mg.) are wakefulness, alertness, decreased sense of fatigue,elevation of mood with increased initiative, confidence, andability to concentrate, elation and euphoria, and an increase inmotor and speech activity. Prolonged use or heavy dosage isfollowed by mental depression and fatigue. Cocaine has the same effects as the amphetamines. The majordifference is that the effects of the amphetamines last severalhours, while those of cocaine seem to last only minutes."Ritalin has less motor effect on motor and mental activities thando the amphetamines. Some CNS effect is produced by doses thathave little effect on respiration and blood pressure." The amphetamines can be quite toxic. Severe reactions haveoccurred with only 30 mg., and death has resulted from 120 mg. ofinjected amphetamine. The range is wide, however, and doses of400 to 500 mg. have been survived by nontolerant individuals.Death from overdose is quite rare, possibly because the ratio oflethal to effective psychoactive dose is high for a tolerantuser." Cocaine is toxic because the central stimulation that is theimmediate effect of the drug is followed by depression of thehigher nervous centers. Death from respiratory depression occurswhen the vital medullary centers are sufficiently depressed. Thefatal dose of cocaine has been estimated to be about 1.2 gramstaken at one time, but severe toxic effects have been reported ondoses as low as 20 mg." The basic symptoms of amphetamine poisoning are extensions ofits normal therapeutic effects on the CNS, the cardiovascularsystem, and the gastrointestinal system. A fatal dose ends inconvulsions and coma. Cerebral hemorrhage is a common autopsyfinding, but it is rarely massive. "Pathological findings inboth man and animals are generally nonspecific and show pulmonarycongestion and often congestion of other organs including thebrain.""' Amphetamines are usually taken orally, but they can beinjected. Cocaine is not effective when taken orally, but it canbe snorted and absorbed through the mucous membrane or takenintravenously. Medically, cocaine is only applied to bodysurfaces as a local anesthetic; it is not injected or usedinternally. The major, long-term toxic effect of amphetamine use is aparanoid psychosis that is often indistinguishable from aschizophrenic reaction. This can occur after continued use oreven after an extremely heavy single dose. It usually disappearswithin a week if the individual stops using the drug. Cocaine cancause the same condition even more rapidly. Whether these drugs cause long-term organic damage to the bodyis at present unknown. Some experts who have worked withamphetamine users believe that there is a long-term deteriorationthat is explicable only in terms of organic damage. At present,however, this has not been definitely established. In animalexperiments, death often results from continued administration ofmethampbetamine, but the reason appears to be that the animal'sdisinterest in food, combined with its hyperactivity, results ina malnourished conditi6n that leaves it vulnerable to infection.There have been some preliminary reports attributing arterialdisease to methamphetarnine use, but these have not yet beensubstantiated and should not be accepted until further evidencedevelops. Hepatitis is very common among amphetamine users. This is tobe expected when hypodermic needles are used without propersterilization, but its incidence goes even beyond the levellogically attributable to this cause alone. Some consideration isnow being given to the possibility that amphetamine is itselfdirectly toxic to the liver. No clinical evidence on thispossibility has been developed, however, and it remains only apossibility."' Psychoactive Effects. When taken orally, amphetaminesproduce an elevation of mood and feeling of power and intensitythat many persons find quite pleasurable. The drugs increaseconcentration and physical and mental performance and reducefatigue. Some users claim that orgasms are delayed and made moreintense when they occur, but no objective experiments have beendone. The drugs produce the same effect even when takenintravenously. In addition, the user obtains a "rush"that is reputed to be different from, although related to, theeffect obtained from opiate injection. Again, sexual analogiesare often made by users. It is difficult to know whether the rushis a product of the drug itself or of the process of intravenousinjection. Some users actually prefer impure methamphetaminebecause of the belief that the impurities cause a faster, moreintense rush."' As the dosage increases, the experience seems to become morefragmented. Increased ability to concentrate turns either into acompulsion to do repetitive tasks over and over or into a totalfocusing of attention on some object or toy. Heavy users have acompulsion to take mechanical objects apart and a similarcompulsion to try (unsuccessfully) to put them together again.Such repetitive behavior occurs in animals as well as inhumans."' Eventually-and fairly predictably-heavy amphetamine use duringa limited period of time will result in paranoid ideation and thetoxic psychosis discussed above. To some extent, users are awareof this aspect of amphetamine use and can make allowances for itduring the experience. They will not act on moderate ideas ofpersecution or visual illusions. If the run continues longenough, this control will be lost. Some heavy users may become chronically psychotic, in thatthey exhibit psychotic symptoms even when not taking the drug.The California experience is that normal functioning returns overa period of six to twelve months, although the user himself mayfeel some residual disablement .104 Cocaine has roughly the same effects as amphetamines in termsof creating feelings of well-being, euphoria, and power.According to the accounts of users, these feelings are evenstronger with cocaine than with the amphetamines, but reliableevidence is unobtainable. Tolerance." Tolerance to most effects of the amphetaminesdevelops rapidly, and very high dosage levels can be reached. Aspeed user on a run may inject as much as a gram of the drugevery two or three hours around the clock for several days.Whether this is drug disposition or cellular tolerance is notknown. The development of tolerance is not uniform, however, andthe ability to withstand what would otherwise be a fatal dosedoes not confer tolerance to the toxic psychosis. It is not certain that tolerance to cocaine develops. Thereare reports of very large doses-such as 10 grams per day-butindividuals seem able to tolerate the same doses after a periodof abstinence as before. it is known that the liver is extremelyeffective at detoxifying cocaine and can process a lethal doseevery hour. There are no reports of cross-tolerance between cocaine andthe amphetamines, but cross-tolerance between amphetamine and theother stimulants has been reported clinically. Physical Dependence. For a long time, it was believedthat there were no withdrawal symptoms from amphetamines andtherefore no physical dependence. At present, it is thought thatthe prolonged sleep, lassitude, and depression that followdiscontinuation of the drug are greater than would beattributable to the preceding loss of sleep and weight. These maybe withdrawal symptoms. In addition, the percentage of REM sleepincreases after discontinuance of amphetamine, returns to normalwhen amphetamine is given, and rises again when amphetamine iswithheld. This meets the criteria for a withdrawalsymptom."' The sources are silent, however, on the extent towhich these symptoms are dose-related. Some experts in the field believe that amphetamines are farmore dangerous than the opiates. This is related not only to thetypicality of the euphoric effect but also to the problems oftolerance and stabilization. Dr. Weil elaborates: In fact, amphetamine dependence is more serious than narcotic dependence because it is inherently less stable. When a person begins using a tolerance-producing drug, he must soon face the problem of trying to stabilize his use in order to keep his life from being disrupted. More than any other class of drugs, the amphetamines foil the user's attempt to reach equilibrium with his habit because they produce such powerful and unrelenting tolerance. Consequently, users develop erratic patterns of use such as "spree shooting," alternation with barbiturates and, eventually, with heroin. The high correlation of amphetamine use with impulsive and violent behavior is consistent with this pharmacological instability.107 Because intensive use of amphetamines is a relatively recentphenomenon, there is little information on such problems asreaddiction vulnerability, physiological bases of abuse, orcomparative success of different methods of treatment. There isno treatment comparable to methadone, but neither is there anyparticular evidence that such treatment is needed. The pattern ofheavy amphetamine use is probably too hard to sustain for anextended period of time anyway, and there is increasingindication that heavy amphetamine users eventually turn to"down" drugs, such as heroin or barbiturates."' Mechanisms of Action. There are several theories aboutthe mechanisms of the CNS effects of the amphetamines, most basedon analogies to their peripheral effects, but none isdefinitive."' While the effects of all the drugs aresimilar, the mechanisms may be different; for example, there areprobably significant differences between the amphetamines andcocaine."' BARBITURATES AND TRANQUILIZERS The Drugs."' Barbiturates and tranquilizers aresedatives (calming agents), hypnotics (sleep-inducing agents),and depressants. The category encompasses a wide range of drugsof different families. For example, over 2,500 barbiturates havebeen synthesized, and at least twelve are in common clinical use.In the area of nonbarbiturate hypnotics, Sharpless liststwenty-three commonly used drugs belonging to ten differentfamilies. In addition to these two groups, there are a number ofmajor tranquilizers that are used in the treatment of psychiatricdisorders. More is known about these drugs than about those discussed inprevious sections. This is in part because they have been in wideuse for a long time, and in part because most of them have moregeneral effects than do other drugs of abuse. Drugs of thiscategory act on a number of bodily systems besides the CNS, andthese other systems are more easily studied. This sectiondiscusses the effects of the drugs only insofar as these arerelevant to their abuse potential. The major drugs involved are as follows: Barbiturates are derivatives of barbituric acid; theywere first used medically in 1903. The major abused drugs in theseries are secobarbital and pentobarbital. Meprobamate (Equinil, Miltown), glutethimide (Doriden),chlordiazepoxide (Librium), and diazepam (Valium) are CNSdepressants belonging to several different families. Medically,they are regarded as anti-anxiety agents-not hypnotics-and theyand similar drugs are called the minor tranquilizers. One group of powerful tranquilizers, the phenothiazines(Chlorpromazine), are not covered. While they are in commonuse, especially for the treatment of serious mental illness, thisclass of drugs does not appear to be abused."' There is nosatisfactory explanation of why they are not attractive to drugabusers. Obviously, their psychoactive effects must differsignificantly from those of barbiturates or the minortranquilizers, but the nature of these differences is unexplored. The discussion here centers on barbiturates-the most powerfuland often abused drugs-and brings in others as relevant. Medical Uses."' The barbiturates are used ascalming agents and as sleeping pills. Some of them are also usedas anticonvulsants in the treatment of certain types of poisoningor epilepsy. The tranquilizers are used in any situation wherethe patient will benefit from an anti-anxiety drug. They are notsleep-inducing, except insofar as insomnia may be caused byanxiety. Both are widely used in the practice of medicine. Physical Effects and Toxicity."' The barbituratesare general depressants of a wide range of cellular functions inmany organ systems. They are not general anesthetics oranalgesics, however, and will not prevent or relieve pain. (Someof the ultra-shortacting barbiturates are anesthetics wheninjected, but this is a minor exception.) They are respiratorydepressants, and in high concentrations they have direct effectson the cardiovascular system. Most of the peripheral effects-theeffects directly on the organs themselves-occur only atconcentrations of the drug that exceed those necessary to affectthe CNS and are thus relatively rare. "The CNS isexquisitely sensitive to the barbiturates, so that, when thedrugs are given in sedative or hypnotic doses, direct actions onperipheral structures are absent or negligible.""' Theeffect on the CNS can range from coma to mild sedation, dependingon the particular drug, the method of administration, and thedose. In some individuals, and in some circumstances, low doseswill act as a stimulant rather than a sedative. It is not clearwhether this depends on the mental set of the user or on thepharmacological phenomenon that the first effect of a drug issometimes on brain centers that regulate and inhibit excitatorybodily functions. For short- and intermediate-acting barbiturates, the hypnoticdose is 100-200 mg., which will give six or seven hours of sleepin the proper environment. The sleep is like physiological sleep,except that the proportion of REM phase is reduced. (Theamphetamines also reduce REM.) The usual sedative dose is 30-50mg., given two or three times daily. The duration of action varies with the particular barbiturate.Some will last only ten or fifteen minutes, some for more than aday. Performance degradation, however, may last longer than overteffects. A 200-mg. dose of secobarbital (which is known asintermediate in its duration) may cause decreased performance tento twenty-two hours later. The aftereffect of the drug may behyperexcitability, even though functioning is, in fact, stillimpaired. Taken in large quantities, barbiturates can cause death. Thelethal dose varies, but it can generally be assumed that anythingover ten times the normal hypnotic dose administered at one timewill cause severe poisoning. Moderate poisoning is strikinglysimilar to alcoholic intoxication, with slurred speech, poorreflexes, and the rest of the well-known syndrome. Severepoisoning is characterized by a deep coma, with respiratorydepression, falling blood pressure, shock syndrome, kidneyfailure, and other complications. The long-term effects of barbiturate use seem to be in somedoubt. The pharmacology books mention only the results of severeintoxication, not the effects of chronic use. At the same time,it is known that alcohol and the barbiturates have manycharacteristics in common and are to some extent substitutes foreach other. Barbiturates will suppress the withdrawal symptoms ofalcohol and vice versa; the intoxications are similar, and so arethe withdrawal symptoms. In the formal literature, abuse of thetwo kinds of drugs is linked as "drug dependence of thebarbiturate-alcohol type.""' The destructive effects oflong-term heavy alcohol use are familiar, and some authoritiesbelieve that barbiturates may have very similar effects on thecells of the liver and brain. Presumably, our knowledge of thetoxicity resulting from long-term but moderate use ofbarbiturates is in the same limbo as our knowledge of comparableuse of alcohol. Psychoactive Effects. The literature contains numerousdescriptions of the effects of barbiturates on outward behavior.Intoxication may cause sluggishness, slowness of speech andcomprehension, bad judgment, exaggeration of basic personalitytraits, moroseness, or irritability."' The sources do not contain a description of the subjectiveeffects, however, and the nature of the "high" involvedin heavy use is less discussed than is the case for any of theother drugs of abuse. The general effect seems to be one oftranquility and peace. How this compares with an opiate high isnot clear. At doses only slightly in excess of the therapeutic dose, theeffect may be one of excitation and mood elevation rather than oftranquilization. A combination of barbiturates and amphetamines produces moreelevation of mood than either taken separately. The reason forthis is not known. Nor is it known whether this is the reason forthe common drug abusers' practice of taking the two incombination. The other depressants in this category are abusable and havemuch the same effects and symptoms as abused barbiturates. Abusein the sense of self-administration does not seem to be terriblycommon, however; some of them, such as Librium, have ratherminimal euphoriant effects. In general, from the standpoint ofthe abuser, barbiturates-particularly short-acting ones-are asuperior good, with others acceptable as substitutes only ifbarbiturates are unavailable. Tolerance. Both drug disposition and pharmacodynamictolerance to the barbiturates develop with repeatedadministration. The first is caused by the activation ofdrug-metabolizing enzymes in the liver and consequent increase inthe speed of detoxation of the drug. A higher dose is thenrequired to maintain a given tissue concentration. The secondinvolves the adaptation of nervous tissue to the presence of thedrug. Tolerance develops quickly, and the CNS probably becomesresistant to the effects of the drug during the action of asingle administration."' The tolerance, however, is largely limited to the sedative andintoxicating effects of the drug. The lethal dose is not muchgreater for addicts than for nonaddicts. In addition, the rangeof tolerance is narrow. An individual tolerant to 1.2 grams of aparticular drug may show acute intoxication if the dose is raisedas little as 0.1 gram per day. The other drugs of this class develop tolerance in the sameway and with the same limitations as do the barbiturates. Physical Dependence and Withdrawal. Severe physicaldependence on the barbiturates develops, but, unlike thesituation for the opiates, the dosages required for this effectare higher than the therapeutic dose. With pentobarbital, forexample, 200 mg. per day can be taken for months withoutproducing withdrawal, and 400 mg. per day for three months willproduce EEG changes in only 30 per cent of the cases. The other70 per cent apparently show no effects. After 600 mg. per day forone to two months, half the subjects will have minor withdrawalsymptoms, and 10 per cent may have a seizure. After continuous,intoxication with doses of 900 mg. to 2.2 grams, 75 per cent ofthe subjects may have seizures, and 60 per cent delirium; allexperience lesser symptoms."' Defining "major" withdrawal symptoms as seizures orpsychoses, the time and dosage necessary to produce severephysical dependence for different sedative hypnotics have beencalculated as follows: ... TABLE 1-1 ADDICTING DOSES OF COMMON SEDATIVE-HYPNOTICS* Drug Dependence- producing dosage (mg. daily) Time necessary to produce dependence (days) Drug dosage equivalent to 30 mg. of phenobarbital (mg.) Secobarbital Pentobarbital 800-2,200 35-37 100 Diazepam (Valium) 80-120 42 10 Chlordiazepoxide hydrochloride (Librium) 300-600 60-180 25 Meprobamate (Equanil) 2,400 270 400 * Dosages sufficient to produce "major" withdrawalsigns in humans. As Table 1-1 indicates, the other sedative hypnotics arethought to produce dependence similar to that caused bybarbiturates. They have not been as carefully studied. We have found no study that divides opiate withdrawal intomajor" and "minor" symptoms. Thus, it is notpossible to compare the development of barbiturate dependencewith that of opiate dependence. Once physical dependence develops, withdrawal frombarbiturates is severe, and-unlike opiate withdrawal-may be lifethreatening. For one of the short-acting drugs, for the firsttwelve hours or so the patient seems to improve as theintoxication clears. He then becomes restless, anxious,tremulous, and weak, and sometimes has nausea or cramps. Withintwenty-four hours, he may be too weak to get out of bed,experience severe tremors in the hands, and have hyperactive deepreflexes. The peak is reached on the second or third day, andconvulsions may occur. Half the patients who have convulsiveseizures go on to delirium, which occurs between the fourth andseventh days. This consists of high anxiety, hallucinations, anddisorientation. Once delirium occurs, it may not be suppressedeven by large doses of barbiturates. This is contrary to thenormal course of withdrawal symptoms, which are quicklysuppressed by the drug of addiction. The reason for this anomalyis not known. During the delirium, exhaustion and cardiovascularcollapse may occur. The withdrawal syndrome usually clears byabout the eighth day, if untreated. For longer-acting drugs,seizures may not occur until the seventh or eighth day, and thegeneral course is slowed down accordingly."' Hallucinations sometimes persist for months, but "this isfelt by most investigators to be a manifestation of an underlyingpsychosis.""' The sources do not discuss whetherbarbiturates, like the opiates, have early and protractedabstinence syndromes. Meprobomate (Equanil, Miltown) follows the short-actingcourse. Libriurn follows that of the long-acting barbiturates. Mechanisms of Action. More is known about the fate ofbarbiturates in the body than is known about the other drugs ofabuse. It is known, for example, that they are transformed by theliver into a number of inactive metabolites that are in turnexcreted. This lessens the concentration of the drug and causesthe withdrawal from its site of action in the CNS. The generalstate of knowledge concerning metabolism, physicalredistribution, and excretion is discussed in the sources, as arethe general theories of sites of action in the CNS. These are tootechnical to discuss here. The mechanisms by which barbituratesoperate to cause CNS effects are not well understood."' A WORD ON ALCOHOL Problems of alcohol and alcoholism were not within the mandateof the Drug Abuse Survey Project, and they have not been includedin the report or in any of the supporting papers. In the contextof this chapter, however, one comment should be made: Alcohol isa drug and could easily be analyzed in the same terms as thedrugs that are covered. It has a potent psychoactive effect andis, like most of the drugs with which we are concerned, highlyspecific to the CNS. Both tolerance and physical dependencedevelop, and withdrawal can be a very serious clinical condition.The drug causes organic damage. The interplay of physiologicalfactors and psychological factors involves as many uncertaintiesfor alcohol as for the opiates. In short, the common distinction between alcohol and"drugs of abuse" is based on the fact that alcohol isknown and accepted in the culture, not on any pharmacologicalconsiderations. It is entirely possible that alcohol isinherently more dangerous than most of the other drugs discussed. In his listing of the hazards of different drugs, Dr. SamuelIrwin makes the following rankings, starting with the mostdangerous: ... 1. Glue sniffing 2. Methamphetamine 3. Alcohol 4. Cigarettes 5. Barbiturates and hypnotics 6. Heroin and related narcotics 7. LSD and other hallucinogens 8. Marijuana NOTES Because the same authors are cited continually in this staffpaper, footnotes give only the author, date of publication whennecessary, and page number. The complete references are asfollows: Baden, M. Interview by Project Staff. Ball, I., and 1. Urbaitis. "Absence of Major MedicalComplications Among Chronic Opiate Addicts," in 1. Ball andC. Chambers (eds.), The Epidemiology of Opiate Addiction inthe United States (Springfield, Ill.: Charles C. Thomas, 1970), p. 301. Blacker, K. "Aggression and the Chronic Use of LSD,"journal of Psychedelic Drugs, 111, No. I (September, 1970), 32. Brazeau, P. "Oxytocics," in L. Goodman and A.Gilman, The Pharmacological Basis of Therapeutics (4thed.; New York: Macmillan, 1970), p. 893. (This book is hereafterreferred to as Goodman and Gilman.) Brotman, R., and A. Friedman."Perspectives on Marijuana Research" (Center for Studies in Substance Use; mimeograph, undated). Chopra, C. "Man and Marijuana," The Internationaljournal of the Addictions, IV, No. 2 (June, 1969), 219-33, Cohen, S. "Lysergic Acid DiethyIamide: Side Effects andComplications," journal of Nervous and Mental Disease CXXX(1969), 30. Cooper, J., F. Bloom, and R. Roth. The BiochemicalBasis of Neuropharmacology (Oxford: Oxford University Press,1970). Dishotsky, N., W. Loughman, R. Mogar, and W. Lipscomb."LSD and Genetic Damage," Science, CLXXII (April 30, 1971),431. Dole, V. "Narcotic Blockade," Archives ofInternal Medicine, CXVIII (October, 1966), 304, 305. ... "Research on Methadone Maintenance Treatment," TheInternational journal of the Addictions, V, No. 3 (September,1970), 359. Dole, V., and M. Nyswander. "Methadone Maintenance andIts Implications for Theories of Narcotic Addiction," in A.Wikler (ed.), The Addictive States (Baltimore, Md.:Williams and Wilkins, Inc., 1968), p. 359. Douglas, W."Histamine and Antihistamines: 5-Hydroxytryptamine andAntagonists," in Goodman and Gilman, p. 620. Eddy, N. Interview by Project Staff. Eddy, N., et al. "Drug Dependence: ItsSignificance and Characteristics," Bulletin of the World Health Organization, XXXII(1965), 721. Egozcue, J., and S. Irwin. "LSD-25 Effects onChromosomes: A Review," journal of Psychedelic Drugs, 111, No. 1 (September,1970), 10. Esplin, D., and B. Zablocka-Esplin. "Central NervousSystem Stimulants," in Goodman and Gilman, p. 348. Fingl, E., and D. Woodbury. "General Principles," inGoodman and Gilman, P. 1. Goldstein, A. Interview by Project Staff. Goldstein, A., L. Aronow, and S. Kalman. Principles of DrugAction (New York: Harper & Row, 1968). Grinspoon, L. Marihuana Reconsidered (Cambridge, Mass.:Harvard University Press, 1971). Health, Education and Welfare, Secretary of, Marihuana andHealth: A Report to Congress, January 31, 1971 (GPO, March,1971). Innes, 1. R., and M. Nickerson. "Drugs Acting onPostganglionic Adrenic Nerve Endings and Structures Innervated byThem (Sympathomimetic Drugs)," in Goodman and Gilman, p.478. Irwin, S. Drugs of Abuse: An Introduction to Their Actionsand Potential Hazards (Student Association for the Study ofthe Hallucinogens, 1970). Jaffe, J. "Narcotic Analgesics" and "DrugAddiction and Drug Abuse," in Goodman and Gilman, pp. 237 and 276. Jarvik, M. "Drugs Used in the Treatment of PsychiatricDisorders," in Goodman and Gilman, p. 15 1. Koelle, G. "Neurohumoral Transmission and the AutonomicNervous System," in Goodman and Gilman, p. 402. Kramer, J. "An Introduction to Amphetamine Abuse," journalof Psychedelic Drugs, 11, No. 2 (1969), 1. Lemberger, L., et al. "Marijuana: Studies on theDisposition and Metabolism 23. This estimate is based on interviews with several experts. 24. We found no studies on deaths by overdose. 25. Martin, 1970, p. 4. 26. Goldstein et al., p. 592. 27. Based primarily on Jaffe, pp. 239-60. 28. Martin, 1970, p. 4. 29. Jaffe, p. 240; Irwin, p. 5. 30. Goldstein et al., p. 474. 31. jaffe,p.279. 32. Ibid., pp. 279-80. 33. Ibid., p. 279; Goldstein et al., pp. 593-94. 34. Goldstein et al., pp. 597-99. 35. Eddy, 1965, p. 721. 36. Goldstein et al., pp. 600, 603. 37. jaffe,p.280. 38. Ibid., p. 288; Goldstein et al., pp. 602-3. 39. Martin, 1970, pp. 2-3. 40. Goldstein et al., p. 603; Jaffe, p. 281. 41. Goldstein et al., p. 605. 42. jaffe,p.283. 43. Goldstein, p. 605. 44. Jaffe, pp. 281-82. 45. Ibid., p. 282. 46. Dole, 1966, p. 305. 47. Goldstein, interview. 48. Goldstein et al., pp. 474-75. 49. Dole, 1968, p. 364. 50. Dole, 1970, p. 373. 51. Dole, interview. 52. Martin, 1970, pp. 8-9. 53. See Jaffe, pp. 296-97, and Brazeau, pp. 899-900. 54. This section is summarized from the Journal ofPsychedelic Drug September, 1970. 55. Jarvik, p. 196. 56. Ibid., p. 197. 57. Ibid.; laff e, p. 296; Shiek and Smith, p. 16. 58. Egozcue and Irwin, pp. 1 0-1 1. 59. Dishotsky et al., p. 439. 60. See Irwin, p. 8; Jaff e, p. 296. 61. McGlothlin et al., pp. 20-31. 62. Ibid., pp. 30-31. 63. Blacker, pp. 32-37. 64. Cohen, p.30. 65. Irwin, p. 9. 66. Shick and Smith, pp. 13-19. 67. Ibid. 68. D. Smith, 1969, p. 75. 69. jaffe,p.297. 70. D. Smith, 1969, p. 82; STASH, 1970. 71. Irwin, p. 8; Jaffe, pp. 297-98. 72. jarvik, p. 197. 73. Irwin, p. 9; Jaffe, p. 298. 74. Jarvik, p. 196; Cooper et al., pp. 157-59; Douglas,p. 656. 75. This section was written with the assistance of PeterWilson. 76. Jaffe, p. 300; Meyers, p. 32. 77. Snyder, pp. 121-25. 78. Ibid. 79. Irwin, p. 7; Weil et al., p. 1242. 80. jaffe,p.300. 81. HEW, p. 68; Grinspoon, pp. 227-28. 82. Lemberger et al., p. 1322. 83. jaffe,p.299. 84. Tart, pp. 701-4. 85. Weil, p. 999. 86. Weil, letter. 87. Talbot and Teague. 88. D. Smith, 1968, p. 41. 89. Lemberger et al., p. 1322. 90. jaffe,p.300. 91. Brotman and Friedman, p. 20; Jaffe, p. 300; Irwin, p. 7. 92. See Innes and Nickerson, Jaffe, and Ritchie et al. 93. Innes and Nickerson, except as otherwise noted. 94. Esplin and Zablocka-Esplin, pp. 354-55. 95. Innes and Nickerson, p. 478. 96. Ritchie et al., pp. 379-82; Jaffe, p. 293. 97. Esplin anl Zablocka-Esplin, p. 354. 98. Kramer, p. 10; Jaffe, p. 295. 99. Ritchie et al., p. 381. 100. Kramer, p. 1 1. 101. Ibid., p. 12. 102. Jaffe, pp. 293-94; R. Smith, p. 35. 103. Jaffe, p. 294; Kramer, p. 9. 104. Kramer, p. 7. 105. Jaffe, pp. 294-95; Ritchie et al., p. 381. 106. jaffe,p.295. 107. Weil, Staff Paper 6. 108. R. Smith, p. 184. 109. Innes and Nickerson, pp. 503-4. 110. Jaffe,p.293. 111. Sharpless, pp. 98-134. 112. Irwin, p. 9; Weil, interview. 113. Sharpless, pp. 98-120. 114. Ibid. 115. Ibid., p. 100. 116. Eddy, p. 725. 117. Jaffe, pp. 289-90. 118. Sharpless, pp. 107-8. 119. laffe,p.290. 120. Ibid. 121. D. Smith and Wesson, pp. 294-95. 122. laffe,p.290. 123. Ibid. 124. Sharpless, pp. 101-2, 1 1 0-1 1. 125. Irwin, pp. 3-4. CliffSchaffer's Home Page Contents | Feedback | Search DRCNet Library | Schaffer Library | Major Studies | DealingWith Drug AbuseWT02-B02-30IA086-000614-B045-182http://206.61.184.43:80/schaffer/Library/studies/dwda/staff2.htm 206.61.184.43 19970122021753 text/html 116196HTTP/1.0 200 OKDate: Wednesday, 22-Jan-97 02:17:41 GMTServer: WebSitePro/1.1f (S/N wpo-0deb)Allow-ranges: bytesContent-type: text/htmlLast-modified: Saturday, 28-Dec-96 07:09:07 GMTContent-length: 115977 Dealing With Drug Abuse - Drug Education Contents | Feedback | Search DRCNet Library | Schaffer Library | Major Studies | DealingWith Drug Abuse Dealing with Drug Abuse A Report to the Ford Foundation THE DRUG ABUSE SURVEY PROJECT STAFF PAPER 2 Drug Education by Patricia M. Wald and Annette Abrams Goals of Drug Education * Techniques of Drug Education forStudents a Total School Involvement * Out-of SchoolDrug-Education Programs * The National Media * Films and AudioVisuals & School Curricula * Education for Nonstudents *Sponsors of Current Efforts GOALS OF DRUG EDUCATION "Prevention through education" has become the newestpanacea of the drug-abuse field. Law enforcement has failed tostem the supply of illegal drugs, and rehabilitation efforts havethus far failed to reclaim many abusers. Everyone now talks ofpouring money into education to stop the problem before itbegins. As of any educational undertaking, the first task of a drugabuse-prevention program is to define the goals sought. Ifobjectives are not understood, developing the educational effortand the techniques to be used is difficult. At present, this is amajor problem of drug education. No one is sure what goals arerealistic or desirable, and proponents of massive efforts cannotagree on what they hope to accomplish. The most that can be saidis that there are a number of possible objectives foryouth-oriented, drugeducation programs: Stopping all experimentation with foreign substances Keeping experimentation at the minimum and limiting it torelatively safe substances Preventing casual experimenters from becoming habitual users Preventing addiction or severe dependence Reinforcing the anti-experimentation tendencies of those whohave not yet tried drugs Presenting information for students to use in making drugdecisions for themselves Increasing student understanding of the complex factorsrelated to drug use, social attitudes, and policies For adult audiences, the goals may be somewhat different- forparents, to give them the best information available, to heightentheir concern about the effects of drugs, to make them lesslikely to panic if they find one of their children using drugs,to encourage them to lobby for more education, treatment, or lawreform, or to teach them to communicate more openly with theirchildren on the subject. For teachers, counselors, and other"gatekeepers" the object might be to train them tocreate an atmosphere of communication in their classrooms or torecognize student drug experimenters and abusers, deal with themsympathetically, and channel them into treatment if necessary.Teachers might also be equipped with the tools to stimulateobjective discussion of the subject with their students. The traditional goal of most parents, educators, communityleaders, congressmen, and government officials has been todiscourage young people from experimenting with illegal drugs atall. In the past, government and privately sponsored educationefforts have tried to do this by emphasizing the horrors ofaddiction and lumping all drugs together as leading to the sameultimate doom. Virtually all experts now agree that such tacticshave not proved effective. Indeed, in many cases, they have beencounterproductive, causing disrespect, skepticism, and resistanceto all advice on drugs. Despite the widespread implementation ofthis technique, youthful addiction and experimentation withillegal drugs have increased. Consequently, within the past fewyears there has been a change in emphasis, with more and moreprograms concentrating on an honest presentation of accurate,factual knowledge about the effects of drugs (insofar as suchknowledge is available). The assumption is that drugs areobviously bad, and that telling the facts will be enough toconvince young people not to experiment. Although the approach may have changed, the aim of most publicand private antidrug literature remains the same-to discourageyoung people from trying marijuana, psychedelics, amphetamines,barbiturates, and, above all, heroin. The theme of a nationwidegovernment advertising campaign reflects the traditionalbroadside approach: "Why Do You Think They Call ItDope?" Many of the recent NIMH posters and television spotsare along the same lines: "Will It Turn You On, or Will ItTurn on You?" Most "model" curricula forelementary, junior, and senior high schools, even when theypresent the known facts about drugs fairly, push a stronglynegative attitude toward all commonly abused drugs. The measureof success of such programs-although few try to measure successby any formula-is almost always assumed to be total cessation ofdrug experimentation and use. In the late 1960's, however, this viewpoint ran into anembarrassing problem: no one was able to develop a factualscientific argument proving that marijuana was harmful. Thisdevelopment had its greatest impact on programs using the scaretechnique, but it also undermined programs based on the premisethat telling the truth was an effective way of discouragingexperimentation. This has put education in a difficult position.Most drug-education programs are ambivalent. They profess anhonest desire to tell the truth-but only up to a point. Whenknown facts run out or become controversial, as they almostcertainly do when the subject comes up, the approach reverts toimposed value judgments, half-truths, or presumptions that thelaw is right-devices easily seen through by the skeptical young. Increasingly, drug experts are coming to the conclusion thatit is the goal that needs to be changed more than the technique,and that total cessation of all drug experimentation, howeverdesirable in the abstract, is not a realistic goal for aneducation program. Some experts feel strongly that an educationprogram aimed at stopping drug experimentation of every kind isbound to fail and so alienate students in the process that theywill not listen to any of it. Drs. Thomas Ungerleider, NormanZinberg, and Helen Nowlis, as well as Professor KennethKeniston-to name a few experts-appear to define a different goalfor drug education: to teach youths to make informed decisionsabout drugs and indeed about every other kind of chemicalsubtance they might ingest. This must include a concentration onteaching elementary students a fundamental respect for the human.body and the effects of chemical substances. Teaching young people to make informed decisions on their ownabout illegal drugs is admittedly a more controversial goal thanmechanically urging them to avoid all such drugs. A wholly honest"tell it like it is" approach may cause a decline inthe use of heroin, amphetamines, and barbiturates, but it willalmost certainly increase the likelihood that youthful listenerswill feel more comfortable about trying marijuana and possiblysome of the milder hallucinogens. Professor Zinberg reports on acandid talk about drugs to a Massachusetts high school. Beforethe lecture, 60 per cent of the students said they would not trymarijuana; after the lecture, the figure dropped to 35 per cent.'This is not a universal occurrence, of course. For example, abefore-and-after evaluation at a Temple University educationalconference, presenting all points of view, found that attitudestoward marijuana shifted from favoring legalization to a neutralposition, especially among undergraduates. A truly factual drug-education program might also influenceattitudes toward commercially advertised and even medicallyprescribed drugs. When, for example, people discover that somelegitimate drugs directly cause more deaths annually than do mostabused drugs, they may lose faith in the argument that theyshould avoid illegal drugs because there is no official qualitycontrol or pretesting for safety. Another problem with thefactual method involves the source material to be used.Contradictory statements of "facts" could catalyze a"your guess is as good as mine" attitude, and this isan area in which contradictions are common.' Nor are the opinionsof either laymen or experts always based on scientific fact.Often the opinion comes first and the facts are chosen to fitit.' An impartial factual approach assumes that an individualchoice will be made on the basis of medical or scientificevidence regardless of what is forbidden by law. This is adifficult concept for many to accept, even though some youngpeople from time immemorial have refused to obey a given lawpartly because it is the 'Law or have engaged in -risk-takingbehavior -that appalls adults. Today's climate of individualityintensifies the likelihood that they will make their own choicesabout drugs as well. In some cases, it is precisely the fact thatdrugs are illegal and risky that constitutes part of theirattraction. It may be, therefore, that the most usefuleducational approach is to give young people the facts upon whichto make that choice, so that they will at least keep theirrisk-taking behavior within bounds. Regardless of the educator'sviews of what their attitudes should be, effective communicationrequires that they be dealt with as they are. One survey ofelementary, junior, and senior high school students in Californiaconcluded that "students feel quite strongly about anindividual's right to make decisions concerning his own use ofdrugs." In the senior high school sampling, 84 per cent ofthe users and 76 per cent of the nonusers surveyed respondedpositively to the statement "Decision to Use Drugs Is aPersonal Decision."' Even if one is willing to accept increased experimentationwith some drugs as the price of decreased damage from otherdrugs, there are more serious problems. How, for example, can ayoung child be expected to assimilate all the facts aboutindividual drugs and their effects upon the body and make areasonable choice about using them? Experimentation withingestion or inhalation of foreign substances is occurring fromage seven on with increasing frequency. How can so young a childmake an informed decision? Might he not lean too heavily on hisemotions, impulses, and peer-group pressure? Clearly, the"responsible decision" model has its limitations, too. Other goals for an education program may be identified whenthose who are to be educated are involved in the selectionprocess. It is highly recommended by the U.S. Office ofEducation's Drug Education Branch, for example, that young peopleshare more of the responsibility for specifying objectives. Sucha partnership arrangement tends to enhance the credibility of aprogram by "plugging it into" the representative needsof its target audience. The unfortunate fact is that we do not know whether anexclusively factual approach works with the very young, even tothe extent of mitigating the most dangerous kinds ofexperimentations. Conversely, we do not know whether a concertedattempt by schools and media to control the behavior of thechildren by propagandizing against drugs and punishing their useworks, either, even if it is justified on the basis that thechild is not old enough to make a rational choice of his own inso potentially harmful an area. Because of all the problems andunknowns of the "rational choice" approach, relativelyfew programs have adopted it explicitly, even when they concedethe problems of other methods. In general, drug-educationprograms at the national, college, high school, and elementarylevels have not faced the difficult issues involved in decidingamong these goals. They have been neither realistic nor frankwith the students or themselves. In most situations, settling onthe goals that are most realistic under the circumstances andacknowledging those goals to the target group would enhance thecredibility of the drug education program. But even moreimportantly, it is necessary to articulate the precise objectivesof any education campaign before it is implemented because theyaffect the way in which drug education is taught as well as thecriteria by which its success or failure is evaluated. Until theprecise aims of a program are clear to the sponsor and to thetarget population, the methodology cannot be sensitively selectedand the program's effects cannot be accurately assessed. Such apractice would also allow us to begin to determine whichtechniques help to accomplish the objectives and which do not. TECHNIQUES OF DRUG EDUCATION FOR STUDENTS At present, we know almost nothing about how best to reachstudents on the drug issue; nor, until recently, have we triedvery hard to find out. Only within the last few years have therebeen even rudimentary attempts to evaluate some of the schoolprograms. Most of the pioneer efforts are very rough, and theoutcomes rarely determine, or even significantly influence, theplanning and allocation of resources. Although there is now consensus that evaluation is needed, ourlack of knowledge about the effects of existing educationprograms is not easily remediable. It is difficult to developreliable evaluation techniques for the programs, although manymethods are being tried. In some cases, students are testedbefore and after a drug course to see how much of the newinformation has been retained. Other surveys use attitudinalquestions about whether participants are more or less willing toexperiment with particular drugs after the program; in stillother cases, selected students are interviewed intensively in aneffort to probe deeply into their attitudes and reactions. Recentevaluative studies test the effectiveness of several factorssimultaneously by administering varied instruments.Unfortunately, as Dr. Marvin I. Rosen suggests, existing"methodologies [are] inadequate for the questions beingasked, and the designs of evaluation studies are inappropriatefor the answers being sought."' Evaluations are often posthoc, rather desperate attempts to get information out of aprogram that was set up without regard to the need for it. Evenwhen evaluation is designed into a program, it rarely includeslong-range follow-up to determine the program's effects a year ormore after its termination. There are other problems. Little of the scant material thatexists on evaluation has been pulled together and published, oreven collected in one place. Valid and interesting work may existunknown to almost everyone. In addition, only infrequent use hasbeen made of the findings of educational-psychology research indesigning learning programs on drug abuse for children of varyingages, although other areas have attempted to do so. For example,it is reported that $8 million was spent doing preliminaryresearch on the psychology of learning before airing the SesameStreet program, which teaches reading concepts to preschoolchildren. Finally, there are institutional obstacles, and dedication toevaluation is often more froth than reality. The primary concernof many evaluators is that something be done, and they take asubjective view of the quality of the effort. Program staffs fearthat objective study of their efforts will place futureactivities in jeopardy or believe that they are performing aservice that cannot be measured. Some educators feel thatevaluation produces only statistical data, which they equate withantihumanism. Program personnel often fail to specify their goalsand the means utilized to attain them. Dr. Helen Nowlis pointed out in 1967 that "at the presenttime there is no standard or widely accepted model for planningan effective drug-education program. This is an area thaturgently needs research, development and demonstration."'This statement is still appropriate several years later. Theunderpinnings for a rational drug-education approach do not existat the present time. Pronouncements abound on the kinds ofprograms that should be undertaken, and model curricula are easyto find, but hard data on the effect such programs have onstudents are virtually nonexistent. Given this situation, the twomajor priorities in this field are: (1) Well-designed and testedevaluation techniques to measure the attainment of specific goals(once they have been defined) in any school drug-educationprogram. Different evaluative models would measure differentgoals-e.g., decreasing drug use, more information disseminationamong the student body, substitution of less harmful drugs,rational drug use, less use in school, fewer acute health crises,more referrals of students to treatment, more use made of schoolpersonnel by students for advice. (2) A formal 'compilation ofwhat evaluation data exist, which programs have been evaluated,what criteria have been used, and what results have beenobtained. This information should be widely disseminated tomembers of the educational community as well as to those involvedin drug programming (treatment, rehabilitation, intervention). In the absence of this kind of information, we can only turnto the opinions of recognized "experts" in the field,without any real assurance, however, that they are right. Yet,there appears to be consensus (at least for the present) on thefollowing points: The common pattern of having physical education or healthteachers set aside one unit in the curriculum to lecture on thedangers of drugs is virtually useless. See, e.g., the Report ofthe Mayor's Task Force on Drug Abuse Education in Washington,D.C.: "To this date, most current crisis-oriented programscater to the biases of adults, and depend on the faulty theory ofemphasizing information or lecture techniques." A program must be ongoing, with the opportunity for recurrentdiscussions throughout the year. Even some of the new,well-motivated programs suffer from a "crisis"approach. An evaluation of programs conducted in four high schoolclasses showed that "short-term programs, even though verysophisticated and intensive, may have little impact on theattitudes of students regarding the abuse of drugs." Thestudy concludes that "the primary value of [the] project isthat it adds a note of caution to those who would set aside asingle day for drug education and be satisfied with theresults."' Although countless "one-shot" programsare sponsored nationally, there is little evidence that suchprograms have any lasting effect. Different approaches have to be taken for students ofdifferent ages, cultural backgrounds, and levels of drugsophistication. The subtle variations among particularsubcultures must be recognized. Drug education of some generalkind needs to begin in kindergarten, or even earlier, and shouldfocus on the specific drugs of abuse by fourth or fifth grade.The program for teenage suburban experimenters with marijuanamust be different from the program for ghetto heroin users. Eachtarget group must be studied to determine what kind of messagewill reach it. The information must then be structured so that itrelates closely to the students' sophistication and willingnessto identify with the subject matter. There must be open and free dialogue between students and theteacher or discussion leader in an atmosphere of tolerance forall points of view, free of moralizing and shock reactions. Use should be made of the comments and experiences ofyoungsters who have actually used drugs, with confidentialityassured. From junior high school on, students should be involved inplanning and implementing the drug-education program to assureits relevance to the specific situation in that school. Again,the students' level of sophistication must be accuratelyassessed. Predetermined curricula are to be avoided unless theyare clearly relevant. Factual material must be absolutely accurate and honest. Whereresearch does not yet provide clear answers, this must beadmitted. Tobacco and alcohol abuse should be treated along withillicit drugs as part of the same over-all problem. The dangersas well as the benefits of legitimate drug use must be franklyacknowledged where they exist. The curriculum should not be a passive one, relying solely onpamphlets, lectures, or films. There should be an emphasis onactual experimental data that let the students see the underlyingmethodology of drug research and the way conclusions are reached.Where possible, students should view actual experimentation withthe effects of drugs on animals and, at higher grade levels,conduct these experiments themselves. In Dr. Louise Richards'view: "The expectation is that deeper understanding of theCNS [central nervous system] and effects of psychoactive drugswill result in more profound respect for the hazards ofunsupervised use."' Emphasis should be placed on the motivational aspects of druguse-why people use drugs, what they hope to accomplish and whatthey hope to escape, and how they can fulfill these needs inother ways. Interviews with high school students in Californiareveal a strong dislike for repetitive programs focusing oninformation alone. The students greatly preferred continuingdiscussions on the reasons for drug use." Again, this is away of actively involving the student in the learning process andmaking it a two-way engagement. Equal emphasis should be given tothe reasons people do not want to take drugs. Dr. Helen Nowlispoints out that college students often seem less interested inthe legal and medical facts about drugs than in a personal,philosophical discussion about the limits on an individual'sright to self-discovery and expression." Education of any kind will have little or no impact on ayoungster who is already deeply involved with drugs. A survey ofstudents in nine high schools concluded that "students whohave used drugs are not likely to be favorably impressed or to bechanged by viewing ... drug abuse films. In all nine schools thepattern was the same: the students, after viewing the films, saidthey were likely to continue their behavior as users or nonusersof drugs."" Alternative behavior patterns should be provided, for manyusers frequently give up drugs for something else. The"something else" varies but frequently takes the formof intense personal experiences, often of a religious nature,deep interpersonal experiences through the use of transcendentalmeditation or yoga, participation in sensitivity groups, orfree-school activities. (See Staff Paper 6, below.) Suchalternative programs, in order to be effective, should beattractive, easily available on a continuing basis, and organizedwith advice from the student body. Given this consensus, however, a fundamental dispute stillexists over whether the purely factual approach to drugs is moreharmful than helpful to young "risk takers." Someexperts believe that giving specific factual knowledge reinforcesthe antidrug propensities of persons not likely to abuse drugsanyway but actually contributes to the "seduction" ofvulnerable high-risk groups by romanticizing the negativism thatmotivates their conduct." Movies, media advertising, rockmusic, underground newspapers, and commercial films that exciteinterest in specific drug use transmit the nonverbal message thatusers get attention and sympathy. Dr. Paul Blachley espouses adifferent kind of education, focusing on underlying behavioralresponses and on why people consciously hurt themselves and thosearound them. He would convey the over-all image of thedrug-abuser as a boring, weak-minded, easily "conned"individual, not as a daring and reckless adventurer. But thestudent survey quoted above concluded that none of the six drugfilms examined lured anyone into trying drugs who had not alreadydone so. Other studies highlight the need for additional investigationinto the effects of drug education." Studies by Gilbert Geis(1969) and the California Department of Education (1970)determined that short-term programs (four weeks or less)significantly increased student knowledge about drugs and causedmore cautious attitudes toward drug use. However, several studiesconducted at the Pennsylvania State University in 1970-71"showed consistent relationships between better knowledgeabout drugs and pro-drug attitudes; better knowledge and the useof marijuana; and pro-drug attitudes and the use ofmarijuana."" A still unsettled question is whether drug education should beintegrated into a "life-problem" course that includessuch other subjects as sex and relations with parents and peers.Dr. Norman Zinberg, for one, espouses the integrated model. Therealso appears to be pressure toward this broader model from manystudents. Even courses labeled "drug education" veryoften take a motivational approach that examines underlyingvalues and behavioral problems. A comparison of eighth- andeleventh graders in California revealed that users know lessabout drugs and drug-related information than nonusers at thesame grade level. The study concluded: "While the continuedteaching of factual drug information might somewhat lessenstudent drug use, it could not do the job by itself, but whencombined with an affective or attitudinal approach could be ofreal effect."" The Coronado Unified School Districtconsequently led other schools in stressing the need for acomprehensive program covering values, valuing processes(decision-making), value orientations, and their possible effectson human behavior. Advocates of this approach recommend its usewith parents, teachers, and students to increase mutualunderstanding and the ability to cope with the problems ofeveryday life. Another fundamental question, especially for schools, is whoshould do the drug educating. Are regular teachers orknowledgeable outsiders more effective? All experts stress thatit must be someone the students like and trust, someone who knowsand will present the facts accurately and who feels comfortableand free in open discussion. Few teachers in any school fit thatdescription. It has been observed by some outside speakers thatstudents' questions dramatically increased in sophistication whenthe teacher left the room. In Washington, D.C., the mayor's taskforce suggested selecting teachers for drug education on thebasis of a "sociogram" asking students to stateanonymously to whom they would go for consultation or advice onpersonal problems. On the other side, several reports andinterviews have warned about the possibly insidious effect ofteachers who themselves actually promote drug use, wittingly orunwittingly. Perhaps because of the more personal level of communicationencouraged in primary grades, elementary students stand alone inpreferring the teacher as a source of information. When surveyed,high school students usually prefer ex-addicts and medicaldoctors as resource people. Ex-users were considered qualifiedbecause of their firsthand experience with drugs. Conversely,doctors were seen as authorities on drug effects but lostcredibility when discussing the "feelings" drugsproduce. Dr. Thomas Ungerleider, of UCLA, reports that, in hisexperience, the most successful approach for a medical lecturerbegins with an assurance to the students that he is not there forthe purpose of persuading them to stay off drugs and does notrepresent law enforcement, parents, or school authorities, but isthere only to tell them the known facts about drugs and the humanbody and to answer their questions. Any discussion leader must be able to validate his credentialsby showing the students that he knows the facts he states aretrue. Many schools have drug-education and rehabilitation centersrun by, or with the help of, former drug users who presentprograms consisting of small student group discussions. These areoften supplemented by discussions with faculty and parent groupsas well. PLACE, in Boston, is an example of a drug-informationand service center for hippies, runaways, and drug users, staffedby graduate students and run by the youthful clients withprofessional supervision. They conduct programs for localschools. The role of the ex-addict in school programs deserves specialconsideration. He is the current fad of drug education, on thetheory that only one who has been there can tell about itconvincingly. There is some truth to this, but apparentlydifferent children receive different messages. The ex-addict isperceived by some as a self-promoter capitalizing on his drugexperience for admiration or profit. Others get the idea that itis as easy to get off drugs as it is to get addicted, so thatthere is little risk in trying them. A ghetto youth might wellsurmise that, if the ex-addict had never become addicted toheroin in the first place, he would be worse off, probablyjobless, and without the attention and respect he is nowreceiving. To some, the ex-addict is a glamorous"anti-hero" somewhat like a rock singer. In oneCalifornia high school, ex-addict visitors were the recipients ofphone calls from girl students seeking after school dates.Several schools have had unfortunate experiences with ex-addictswho are not really "ex" and are either pushing or usingdrugs. Others are akin to religious converts, uttering rigidopinions about all drugs, including marijuana, and denigratingall treatment modalities other than their own. Still others turnout never to have been serious users at all but are merelywell-versed in the jargon of the users. Reportedly, someout-of-work rock musicians earn extra money making the schoolcircuit. And, disturbingly, large numbers of ex-addicts reminisceabout the actual "high" with an exquisite affection notlost on their young audiences. Some ex-addicts, although offdrugs, are currently abusing alcohol. Others are prey to the samemyths about drugs as nonusers and pass misinformation on tostudents. All this gives the negative side of using ex-addicts, apractice that is sometimes accepted too uncritically. But this isnot the only side. Ex-addicts can be excellent teachers, able tospeak with credibility and to relate to youngsters, although themere fact that they are ex-addicts does not ensure rapport. Oneof the very few carefully evaluated school programs showed, forexample, that, while students liked to hear ex-addicts tell oftheir experiences, they did not give them so much credence whenthey lectured about drugs generally." Ex-addicts withnatural talent in relating to the young and with some training insensitivity and substance may make very good drug-educationteachers, indeed, and their experience may give them extraeffectiveness. A good educator who happens to be an ex-addict mayhave a special and valuable feeling for the factors that leadyouths to try drugs. In ghetto schools, antidrug black-militant organizations oftenhave a special appeal. The ghetto youngster's need for a rolemodel may focus on such a symbol of racial pride. Organizationssuch as Blackman's Development Center and PRIDE, Inc., inWashington, D.C., have recently entered the drug education fieldand vigorously propagandize against drugs in schools, sometimeswith homemade slides of addiction horrors and appeals to racialunity against a "white man's" scourge. How successfulthey will be remains to be seen. The difficulty with most school education programs run by"outsiders" is that they lack continuity in the schoolitself. The ex-addicts, the graduate students, and visitingdoctors come and go, while the students' need for information orhelp may continue for months. One of the more promisingapproaches is that used by a San lose high school, which releaseda popular young teacher for several months to learn the drugscene intimately by going on "buys" with local police,attending court trials, working with doctors in drug clinics,interviewing patients at treatment centers, and spending time onthe streets and in criminology labs. On his return, he took on(apparently successfully) the combined duties of teacher andcounselor to students with drug problems." Dissatisfied with past results, many school systems this yearare trying a variety of new preventive-education methods todiscourage drug abuse, involving more direction by the studentsthemselves. The New York City Board of Education has announced atrial program in sixteen high schools in which pupils will designand run their own antidrug programs. In Philadelphia last year,selected students from seven high schools (accompanied by ateacher) learned basic drug facts from doctors, treatmentexperts, and law-enforcement officials and went on field trips.They then went back to their own schools to initiate and runprograms of their own choice. Most of them opened counselingservices. With regard to peer involvement, there are indicationsthat students should be given a voice in basic approach,curriculum content, and choice of teachers but should not besaddled with administrative chores, which they abhor and oftenperform poorly. Nevertheless, tapping the enthusiasm ofwell-selected students can be beneficial in motivating thestudent body to seek creative antidrug activities. The notion that young people relate to their peers better thanto adults has validity but also limits. They relate only to someof their peers. Rigid social groups exist in many schools, andstudents chosen by teachers and school officials may not be theones to lead the group that the antidrug program hopes most toreach. Whenever possible, some student participation in planningand operating programs should come from the group the program istrying to reach, whether nonusers, experimenters, or borderlinecases. The student council in an Oregon high school sought thecooperation of ex-users and faculty in creating a youthful"Mod Squad." Teams of experienced students providedsuccessful peer counseling, assistance in crisis situations, andreferrals to local treatment facilities and otherwise contributedpositively to the school's educational programming. There is also the "role model" theory that youngerchildren, between the ages of seven and twelve, will learn fromand relate better to older youth than to children their own ageor adults. "Dope Stop" in Arizona uses high schoolstudents, trained by physicians, psychiatrists, or ex-addicts, tocounsel grades five to eight. One proposal suggests subsidizingteenaged youth with a reputation for being "in" and"cool" to work with younger boys against druginvolvement. NIMH drug-information officials say they are alsoconsidering having students of different age groups prepareeducation programs for the next-youngest age level. A study of a junior high school drug-education program thatfeatured teachers and ex-addicts produced some illuminatingresults. The program lasted an entire semester in two junior highschools in the high narcotics area of the inner city, andquestionnaires were administered before and after the program aswell as in a control school using the traditional lecture method.The results showed that teachers and ex-addicts were hostiletoward one another, resenting each other's prerogatives androles. Teachers resented the time spent on testing forevaluation, and ex-addicts needed feedback on how the studentsreacted toward them. The students in the experimental schools didbetter on factual knowledge than those in the control schools.Parent education efforts failed. The students thought the filmswere "no good" and exaggerated the behavior of drugusers, and that the reading material was "cut anddried." They wanted more talking and less reading; also, tohear the ex-addicts relate personal experiences but not tolecture. The students did not like the personal questions on thetests and were suspicious that their answers would not be keptconfidential. They wanted more concentration on the drugs used intheir own schools; they wanted to see samples of the drugs inorder to recognize them. Discouragingly, however, there is no evidence that most of thenew programs being undertaken will be evaluated any moresystematically than the older ones have been. Until that happens,therefore, we will not know the best way to educate about drugabuse. TOTAL SCHOOL INVOLVEMENT Once again, as has happened so often with complex socialdilemmas, the schools have inherited America's number-one"Problem cbild'-the drug-abuse crisis. At present, educatorsare joining with related disciplines in defining approaches tothe problem for use in classrooms, libraries, and counselingoffices. Educational institutions have become the testing groundfor diverse preventive alternatives. It has become clear that thefundamental areas of school involvement must be to providerelevant educational programs from kindergarten through collegeand to serve as an avenue for community action involvingstudents, parents, faculty, and other local elements. According to the Bureau of Narcotics and Dangerous Drugs: The schools cannot by themselves be expected to rehabilitateyouth and their neighborhood environments. Sociologists andothers who have worked in the drug abuse prevention field havepointed out that drug education is not a problem for the schoolsalone. It is a community problem and requires total communityeffort for its solution. The schools cannot assume the roles ofparents, clergymen, enforcement officers, physicians orpsychiatrists. But they can exercise leadership in facing aproblem that the total community, working together, can try toremedy. This is education in its broadest and most importantsense. It is making schools relevant to their communities. An initial effort must be made to formulate school policiesthat are sensitive to the needs of all elements of the schoolcommunity. There is no point, for example, in expecting"free" class discussions or adult cooperation whenstudent informers are widely used throughout the school andteachers are required to report all suspected users to thepolice. If the school intends to act as an extension of civilauthority-to investigate and turn users over to the police-itmust come to terms with the fact that its effectiveness as aneducational force will be substantially reduced. On the otherhand, no school administrator can be expected to sit idly bywhile drug traffic flourishes within the school. Therefore, amajor responsibility of school authorities is to give carefulconsideration to alternative choices in defining the school'saction policy toward drug use. Once established, the policyshould be clearly explained to students and their parents, aswell as to the school staff. The failure of school administratorsto communicate with students about policies that they will beexpected to obey inevitably creates mistrust of all officialadvice and information. By seeking and accepting inputs fromyoung people and their parents in the formulation of schoolpolicies, school officials not only open up valuable channels ofcommunication but make it possible to develop policies that arerelevant to the needs, interests, and aspirations of each memberof the school community. Until recently, schools could do little to deter student useof drugs, because most of them had no announced policy. More andmore, administrators are moving to establish such guidelines, fora very good reason: Lacking established policy guidelines, aschool has no standard procedure for providing help or disciplinewhen a student is found with drugs. A variety of policies ispossible, and it is difficult to say in advance how mucheffectiveness in one area should be traded for gains in another.Some colleges say that what the student does with his own body ishis own business, unless it results in active disruption ofclasses, threatens the safety of others, or prevents satisfactoryacademic functioning. This laissez-faire policy, however, is lesslikely to be acceptable at the high school level. Some schoolshave opted for the policy that selling or distributing drugs isforbidden, and that distributors will be punished while userswill be treated more leniently or ignored. Other schools refuseto initiate disciplinary action for anything that happens offschool grounds. More cautious institutions have adopted thetheory that drug use spreads in epidemic fashion, and that it isnecessary to quarantine and isolate the carrier. Theyaggressively seek out drug users through urinalysis or lockersearches and either expel the users or report them tolaw-enforcement officials. Some recent court decisions have madeit difficult for school personnel to conduct searches of astudent's personal belongings, thus imposing limitations on whata school can do to investigate possible drug dealing. The optimal relationship between school policy and the lawenforcement system is difficult to determine. Some schools haveworked out cooperative agreements with law-enforcement agenciesin seeking feasible alternatives to arrest (which is viewed as alast resort). Unfortunately, however, most school officials havegiven little thought to methods of diverting student drugpossessors who need help out of the criminal process and intotreatment, as witness a booklet published by the NationalAssociation of Secondary School Principals in 1969: There is a distorted notion gaining widespread acceptance thata school or college is a sanctuary. These institutions are a partof society and are subject to the same laws as the rest ofsociety. Accordingly, the school authorities have the sameresponsibility as every other citizen to report violations oflaw. Students possessing or using on school premises drugsprohibited by law should be reported to the appropriate lawenforcement officials .20 John Langer, of the Bureau of Narcotics and Dangerous Drugs,advises principals to use discretion and judgment in situationsthat may involve the violation of federal, state, or local laws.He emphasizes that teachers and administrators are notlaw-enforcement officers but school officials with aresponsibility to carry out school board policy." Continuing lines of communication between law-enforcementagencies and schools (such as the involvement of policemen inteacher-training and community educational efforts, speakers'bureaus, and community-relations programs) are often mutuallybeneficial in dealing with drug issues. In several metropolitanareas, these efforts have led to the establishment of counselingsessions that must be attended by first offenders and theirparents in lieu of a jail sentence. A Hudson Institute study hassuggested specially supervised "drug-free" schools forall students found to be using drugs. Opponents of this approach,however, argue that isolation and expulsion will only confirm theoccasional user's alienation and result in his furtheridentification with deviant behavior. Students frequently cited the need for a designated person inthe schools to whom they can go for information or help, assuredthat their confidence will be kept. Helen Nowlis states,"Within any institution it should be made clear who will andcan guarantee confidentiality and such guarantees should berespected."" Such a person would be anombudsman-counselor, able to work with parents as well asstudents to solve drug problems. He must be the kind of personstudents normally seek out for sympathetic but sound advice. Inaddition, he should have thorough familiarity with the drug-abusefield as well as access to treatment and intervention programs,so that he can provide referrals in acute situations. (There isreason to believe that this type of counseling resource can bemore important for schools than traditional educationalprograms.) Such a person could also advise the school on generalpolicies and provide drug-usage information. His expertise wouldbe invaluable in conducting drug-abuse education classes. The ombudsman concept must be carefully considered by theschools. Their wholehearted commitment must be assured, fornothing could be so damaging as to invite confidences and thennot to be able to honor them. The legal problems raised when aschool official acts in the counselor's role must also beresolved and cooperation obtained from the authorities to preventpressure on individuals who may not enjoy a technical legalprivilege. Because school policies frequently forbid teachers tohonor student confidences, many are hesitant to encouragepersonal involvement, which may place the student in jeopardy. Many believe that the ombudsman-counselor should provide hisservices for other kinds of adolescent problems in addition tothose related to drugs-family, sex, alcohol, and so on."Classroom teachers often have tremendous influence on students,especially on those who lack parental understanding. They occupya more neutral position than parents and sometimes are betterable to identify behavior requiring special counseling orreferral. Until now, schools have relied almost entirely on classroomteachers to assist student drug abusers in finding help. Publicfunds earmarked for "teacher training courses" haverarely included guidance-counseling personnel. It is unfortunatethat schools have failed to take advantage of the position ofthose guidance counselors who enjoy the trust and respect ofyoung people. Recently, the American Personnel and GuidanceAssociation began developing a national effort to train guidanceworkers to deal with the complexities of drug abuse. The programis being held in abeyance until adequate seed money can beprocured. Information alone cannot always help a youthful user. The headof a Mexican-American outreach program in Los Angeles testifiedbefore Congress that a large proportion of youth in his area wereheavily addicted to barbiturates, but that education could nothelp when there was no place in the area they could go formedical aid in withdrawal. Teacher and guidance counselors shouldprovide the link between the school and treatment resources thatis now lacking in many places. If it is to reach users orexperimenters, a school education program not only must supplyinformation on where to go for help but also must have aneffective system for getting them there. Teachers or counselorsmust know, for example, whether the student-user can receivetreatment on his own (as in California and Connecticut) or musthave parental permission before anyone can treat him (as in mostother states). School counselors should be willing to take theinitiative in getting the student to the treatment service and inrunning bureaucratic interference for him. They may even have tohelp make parents more sensitive to their children's drug problemin an effort to prevent them from acting destructively. On the other hand, treatment facilities in many areas faroutnumber institutions that focus on prevention. Young people whodo not use drugs have legitimate questions but find few places towhich they can turn for answers. The school counselor can act asan effective source of information. Any well-balanced school program should harness the supportand cooperation of outside community elements in providing helpto young abusers. The Office of Education's national teachertraining program challenged schools to consider communitymotivation as their ultimate long-range goal. OE staff membersreport that teachers were often unsuccessful in gaining thenecessary support of politicians, school board members,principals, and parents in accomplishing this final phase oftheir program. As a rule, the attitudes of the communitiesprecluded the exploration of innovative ways to prevent drugabuse. What is needed, therefore, is widespread local awarenessof the need for unity in making progress-a recognition thateducational institutions are merely conduits through whichcommunal efforts must pass. OUT-OF-SCHOOL DRUG-EDUCATION PROGRAMS Education does not take place only in school. As Helen Nowlisstated before Congress: It is learning about drugs that should concern us today,rather than the formal mechanisms for presenting druginformation. Information by itself is not education, education byitself is not learning. How do people, particularly young people, learn about drugsand form their drug-related attitudes? We believe that a seriesof influences help shape these attitudes: the atmosphere of theschool, as well as the factual information presented there; thelife-style at home, and the attitude of parents; peer-grouppressures; popular culture, including music, films, magazines andnationally publicized events; personal experiences with drugs ordrug-related substances; the availability of alternativemechanisms for carrying out certain kinds of behavior-risktaking, wish fulfillment, etc .24 Most of a youth's initial information about a subject comesfrom his peers. A survey of Maryland high school students showedthat they got most of their drug information and attitudes frompeers and underground newspapers. In addition, the students mostprone to serious drug abuse are often those who are mostantagonistic to the school climate. There is general agreementthat more out-of-school programs are needed to reach those whomthe schools cannot reach. Unfortunately, antidrug programs run byprivate and public organizations outside the school are ofvarying quality and totally lacking in evaluation. Nevertheless,the New York Addiction Control Commission alone spent $1 millionin 1970 on such "preventive education." Most prevention programs, besides lacking evaluation, are notgrounded on any hypotheses based on field observations. Dr.Irving Lukoff, of the Columbia University School of Social Work,believes that effective prevention programs await basic researchto discover what influences young people in heavily addictedareas not to take drugs, why some do use drugs, and how drug usespreads. The most that can be done at this point is to categorize fivebasic kinds of nonschool prevention programs: PEER-GROUP PROGRAMS Many types of teenage peer-group, antidrug programs haveemerged. The following are illustrative: The members of one national group-the Smarteens-pledge not touse drugs, wear buttons deriding drug use, and distribute postersscorning the drug culture. The psychology is to provide supportand reinforcement for youngsters who choose not to use drugs.Such a technique, however, merely widens the gap between the"squares" and the drug users and alienates the latterstill further. Those familiar with the group admit it has itsgreatest impact in middle-class suburban areas. Members of Project DARE (Drug Abuse Research and Evaluation),in the Los Angeles area, do not use drugs, but participate in therest of the psychedelic scene-rock music, flashy dress, crafts-soas to show that one can be "cool" without beingdrugged. Other activities include evaluating drug educationfilms, lecturing to encourage an understanding of today's drugculture, and stimulating the involvement of youth in the solutionof community problems. Two New York City ghetto high schools have experimented with aprogram in which members of a black youth organization visit theschools, assess the drug situation, and then"penetrate" by mixing at the ball courts and otherstudent gathering places, seeking to identify student pushers anddeal with them, either through persuasion or by reporting them tothe authorities. Identified users are urged to seek treatment.The organization itself reports a reduction in selling and usageof drugs, but no official evaluation is obtainable. Teen Challenge is a private, religion-oriented agency withcenters across the country that offer treatment to anyone overeighteen. Its premise is that a drug user should be given anopportunity to undergo a religious experience that can give himthe strength to overcome his destructive desires and habits. Private businesses often fund programs offering alternativesto youth. One recently financed a project involving youth groupsfrom Harlem and Nassau County, utilizing peer-group dynamics asan alternative to drug abuse. Films, magazines, and educationalmaterials created by the students are disseminated to schools andcommunity organizations. Several treatment and rehabilitation facilities have openedtheir doors to youngsters for whom they organize extracurricularactivities. Patients in a Detroit methadone facility have"hit the streets" to provide speakers, peer and familycounseling, and neighborhood projects to stimulate politicalawareness and consumer education. RAP, Inc., a Washington, D.C.,therapeutic community, encourages neighborhood children to join a"block club" designed to channel energiesconstructively. Tutoring services, speakers, and libraryprivileges are extended to members of the group. Some of the more creative programs involve both drugexperimenters and nonusers in activities that seek to exploreways youth can pursue inward and outward experiences that willmake drug use less desirable. Dr. William Soskin's ProjectCommunity in Berkeley has such a program for 140 youths betweenthe ages of fourteen and eighteen. Acting on the hypothesis thathome and school have not provided sufficiently satisfyinginfluences in their lives, the Center seeks to create a"third force" consisting of a group of peers, undersupervision, who engage in mutual activities a few hours a day.These activities include inward meditation, body language,poetry, and even active practical jokes for the more aggressivemembers. Rap sessions and encounter groups as well as activecommunity projects and recreation outings complete the program.Sympathetic counselors are always available to talk to anindividual about his problems. FREE CLINICS AND CRISIS CENTERS There are a number of free medical clinics for "streetpeople" providing a range of services on a twenty-four-hourbasis-not only emergency medical or psychological help for drugcrises (bad trips and severe reactions), but also up-to-dateinformation on the quality and effects of drugs currently beingsold in the immediate area, long-term treatment, and referral.Their basic purpose is not to proselytize against drugs but toprovide help when people need it most and to disseminate accurateanalyses of the risks of street drugs. In some cases, forexample, there followed a dramatic decrease in the use ofparticular drugs or batches of drugs after the clinic staffspread the word that a particular product was having bad effects.2' Free medical clinics reach those in or on the edge of thedrug culture, and they enjoy a high degree of credibility. Mostcrisis centers cater to a variety of needs, including draft,abortion, and family counseling. These facilities sometimes offertemporary residence for runaways and intervention with parents.Usually, they give medical help to those with drug problems andprovide speakers and materials as well as information to othercommunity organizations, including schools. Some even provideemployment in crafts and work with delinquent youngsters in thecommunity. Most clinics and crisis centers are run by the youthsthemselves with professional and medical guidance. Young peopleare attracted by their neutral attitude toward drug use. Whatpreventive effects, if any, the centers have on continued druguse is extremely speculative, but they fill acute needs for helpin immediate health crises and for accurate information. "HOT-LINE" TELEPHONE SERVICES Anyone can call such a telephone service anonymously withquestions about drug reactions as well as a score of otherproblems. Not infrequently, hot-line staffers are asked to locatelost pets, give advice on domestic squabbles, and make referrals.It is inherent in the nature of such a service that there is noway of telling what happens to callers, or whether they make useof the advice and information given about drugs and treatmentservices, or whether, indeed, calls are legitimate. Anonymityconstitutes the service's main attraction. Ex-users often findpositive reinforcement and satisfaction in serving as hot-lineoperators. Yet, there are cases where constantly talking aboutdrug effects has led these people back to drug use. As a rule,however, their past drug experiences enhance their ability todeal effectively with crisis situations. In cases of extremeemergency, trained professionals are consulted. AFTERSCHOOL AND INSTEAD-OF-SCHOOL PREVENTION PROGRAMS As of 1970, New York City's Addiction Services Agency ransixteen youth centers in poverty areas to discourage drug use bynonusers or early experimenters aged nine to nineteen andreferred by parents, schools, police, or courts. Ten centers werefunded by OEO, four by NIMH, but all were to be shifted to localand state funding. ASA was asking for money to open four morecenters in middle-class neighborhoods. ASA has estimated that 80 per cent of New York City youthsover twelve have experimented with at least one drug. Themajority, however, reportedly have no deep-seated mental problemsrequiring a residential therapeutic community setting. During1970, about 500 youths were in such afterschool centers at anyone time and some 5,440 in all were served. The focus is on group therapy and counseling to help the youthmake basic decisions about his values and life goals."Disrupters," seriously disturbed youth, and heavyopiate users are not eligible. Parent groups also operate out ofthe centers, which try to work with the schools, so that teacherstoo can play a supportive role. Centers are open five days a week, each handling 50 youths ata time. Youths, if attending school, come to the center in theafternoons, generally for a period of three to six months. Ifthey are not in school, center activities are scheduled duringthe day. Peer-group sessions, role-playing and psychodrama,individual counseling, recreation, workshops, and seminars areall used. An attempt is made to establish role-modelidentification with staff members. These centers have not, to our knowledge, been evaluatedsystematically. Their aim is to create pressure against the useof drugs. The agency's own assessment is that the centers havehad difficulty because the youths referred to them need moresupportive services than can be offered. There have been recurrent proposals for outdoor work or summercamps for drug-using youngsters. ASA would like to create one for150-180 youths aged twelve to nineteen, modeled on Outward Bound.(This is a program that gets youth into the country, where theyincrease their wilderness skills in challenging situations, thusincreasing their sense of confidence and selfworth.)Group-encounter sessions would be combined with regular camplife. Dr. Gordon Heistad, of the University of Minnesota, hasexperimented (successfully, he believes) with a camp modelcombining drug education and regular camp life for high schoolleaders. DRUGMOBILES These vehicles, which follow street youth into their naturalhaunts, to ball games and rock concerts, have been tried inseveral cities. Generally, they feature informational exhibitsand ex-addict staffers. Counselors answer inquiries on anindividual basis and ensure anonymity. Credible staff is quite difficult to retain, since trainedcounselors prefer working with more stable programs. In mostcases, these mobile units end up having middle-aged discussionleaders with good intentions but little facility incommunicating. Many young people suggest that more emphasisshould be put on honest discussions and less on"clever" exhibits. THE NATIONAL MEDIA A perpetual dispute in the drug-education field involves theinfluence of the national media on drug-abuse-prevention efforts.What effect do they have? What effect should they have? Some whowork with young drug users believe that television is more likelyto influence them than school programs, because they relate moresympathetically to the medium; others fear that a high poweredtelevision campaign stressing "risks, thrills, scares,fantasies, high tragedy and antiheroism" will increase drugexperimentation." Dr. Norman Zinberg points out thattelevision may bend growing children in the direction of seekingexperiences that transcend tangible boundaries, such asmind-altering drugs." The role played by the mass media in any comprehensive drugeducation effort depends on the specific objectives of thateffort and the methods used to attain them. The current lack ofagreement on these matters, however, makes it difficult toconceive of the ideal media program and virtually impossible topredict the benefits to be derived from it. Nevertheless, as thefollowing review of present efforts will show, everybody is doingsomething. Between 1968 and 1970, the National Institute of Mental Healthconducted a national television campaign against drugs, featuringspots created by the Grey Advertising Company with famous"name personalities," such as Rod Serling and theEverly Brothers. Air time was donated on a public-service basis,and eighteen different films were supplied to every major networkstation and most independents. Radio stations also aired antidrugmessages, twelve in all. Some fourteen posters and pamphlets weremailed out to supplement the campaign. No one knows what thetotal effect was, aside from generating 22 million requests forinformation. Gerald Kurtz, Director of the Office ofCommunication at NIMH, has been quoted as saying that the effort,which was specifically youth-oriented, was not expected to turnyoung people away from drugs. Its real purpose, rather, was toheighten the concern of laymen and private organizations andcreate national awareness of the problem of drug abuse. In 1970, a new national media campaign was begun under WhiteHouse sponsorship, based on the same untested assumption thattelevision can "unsell" drug usage. According to theprevailing theory, peer pressure against drugs can be created toreinforce those who have not yet tried drugs or are only veryoccasional users. The approach still lumps all drugs togetherunder the slogan "Why Do You Think They Call It Dope?"Some black reporters have criticized it as obviously a product ofthe white advertising world, both in its content and in its styleof presentation. It was put together by the Compton Agency, whichworked through the Advertising Council. The new campaign startedby directing its programs to the preteen group, then moved tohigh school and college audiences, then to blacks, parents, andthe military. While medical hazards are mentioned, the emphasisis on inculcating the attitude that taking drugs is"stupid" rather than on presenting factual information. Other groups have entered the media fight against drug abuse.In February, 1971, the Corporation for Public Broadcasting beganairing eight one-hour programs entitled "The Turned-OnCrisis." The series, intended for general audiences,includes programs on several facets of the drug problem. Forthose more involved in the drug problem, CPB can also provide anin-service training program of six thirty-minute segments forteachers and school administrators and an in-class series ofeight twenty-minute programs for junior high school youth. There are many efforts to develop effective television andradio antidrug spot ads, but whether any such device cancounterbalance everyday pressures supporting drug use isdoubtful. It has been pointed out that most teenagers listenincessantly to the radio, while their television viewing issporadic, and that radio spots repeated between rock songs aremore likely to reach them than spots on television. But merelyreaching the audience is not enough; the ads must be effective.Some stations that carry antidrug spots have complained of a lackof good material but an abundance of poor, ineffective material.The National Institute of Mental Health has provided funds to theNational Coordinating Council on Drug Education to evaluate radioand television material; the results are included in a monthlynewsletter, Tune In, distributed to approximately 5,600 radio andtelevision stations. Included are reviews of spot announcements,factual programs, interviews, and public-service announcementsavailable to the media for broadcasting. A black-audience station in Woodside, New York-WWRL hasadopted a more direct approach: It asks listeners to call in thenames of pushers, which it then submits to the police; thecaller's anonymity is kept, and all tips are investigated. Thestation contends that thirty-two arrests have been made in sixmonths as a result of this campaign. It also broadcasts areferral telephone number for those who want help with their owndrug problems. Other radio stations are beginning to use the rock sound incommunicating antidrug messages. Disk jockeys, for example, playauthentic-sounding rock tunes with lyrics describing youthfuldeaths caused by overdoses or by the ingestion of poor-qualitystreet drugs, in the hope that the young will pay serious heed.But some teenagers resent this attempt to make the scare approachpleasing to the ear. The subject of rock music raises another question about therelation between national media and the drug problem. Someobservers believe that the media are better at aggravating theproblem than at solving it. Songs with so-called drug-relatedlyrics were banned from the airwaves by the FederalCommunications Commission because of their alleged potential toglamorize drug abuse. This action was vigorously opposed byunderground radio stations, record companies, and privateorganizations, which castigated the FCC for exercising censorshipand imposing an "establishment" interpretation of musicon the general public. A booklet put out by the JusticeDepartment's Bureau of Narcotics, entitled Drug Taking in Youth,declares that, "Numerous entertainers whose records areplayed frequently are drug advocates. Many popular songs havehidden or expressed drug allusions. Underground FM radio stationslate at night reach many young people with 'acid' rock and theirovert or disguised messages about drug use, sources, andavailability. Rock festivals are frequently advertised throughthis medium."" The effects of rock lyrics on anindividual's decision to use drugs still remain a mystery,however, clouded by the contradictory pronouncements ofgovernment spokesmen and rock-music enthusiasts. Television has also been charged with contributing negativelyto the drug problem because of its steady advertising of over-thecounter drugs. In 1969, drug manufacturers reportedly spent $13.7million for television promotion of seventeen brands of sedativesand stimulants alone. All types of advertising for allproprietary drugs involved expenditures of $282 million. Messagesthat are criticized for "pushing" over-the-countermedication promise to solve problems and alleviate everydaystresses. The manufacturer of a popular pain reliever supports asuccessful advertising package attributing love, success,tranquillity, self confidence, health, and so on, ad infinitum,to its product. Another commercial selling children's vitaminsshows two youngsters floating through the sky on a magic carpetafter chewing the tablets. Although manufacturers of proprietary (over-the-counter) drugsdeny the cause-and-effect relationship between advertising andabuse, many public groups are adamant about eliminating mood drugadvertisements. The National Association of Broadcasters, forexample, has proposed content restraints and criteria for thebroadcasting of such messages. Both the FTC and HEW have beenstudying the relationship between over-the-counter drug ads ontelevision and drug abuse. Members of Congress are also holdinghearings on advertising that urges mood alteration throughnonprescription drugs. An HEW-sponsored study concludes: By and large, advertising, per se, seems to have a relativelylow level of general influence upon students, when compared toother environmental factors such as home (parents) and school(peer groups) . This suggests that advertising is not, by itself,responsible for student behavior toward drugs and/or otherproducts, substances or activities. At most, advertising operates within the context of thestudent's total environment and cannot be uniquely responsiblefor student values, attitudes and beliefs. Even though advertising, per se, may not be considereduniquely responsible for attitudes towards legal and illegaldrugs, the students, nevertheless, feel that it is potentially aninfluencing agent, particularly on the youngest students.30 The study, based on interviews with 560 fifth-, seventh-, andeleventh-grade California students, covered drugs of all kinds,including Compoz, Contac, Alka-Seltzer, Bayer Aspirin, as well asSalem and Marlboro cigarettes. Students questioned after viewingthe ads expressed disbelief of the advertiser's claims, asfollows: Cornpoz-46 per cent; Salem-31 per cent; Contac-40 percent; Bayer Aspirin-19 per cent; Alka-Seltzer-12 per cent;Marlboro -11 per cent. The study also found that "users ofillegal drugs tend to be more receptive to proprietary drug adsthan non-users." Concluding that such ads may be a"cultural prop in the maintenance of favorable attitudestoward drug usage among the young, the study suggested that theindustry initiate an examination of" promotional programsand more government studies of children's receptivity. No formal report has been released on the FTC study.Nevertheless, it is the view of a number of FTC staff members, aswell as some scientists and some officials of BNDD, that such arelationship does exist in certain cases." In any event,many lawyers are convinced that the FTC has the power to attackmany of the suspicious ads without necessarily proving theexistence of such a relationship. A study by four physicians at the University of SouthernCalifornia pointed out that high-pressure advertising ofprescription drugs to physicians depends on a technique of"mystification."" The ads identify ordinary humanreactions and emotions as symptoms of physical illness and thenprescribe a drug as remedy. Tofranil, an antidepressant drug, iscited as one example. The ad suggests that parents agonizing overa runaway daughter might be treated with the drug. The sametechnique may be applied to television ads for proprietary drugsthat impel the listener to seek a drug remedy for the relief ofnormal tensions arising from interpersonal relations. Another example is the excessive use of over-the-counterdrugs. Richard Blum reports that those who use such drugs heavilyassert more frequently than others that medicines make adifference in the way one feels; also, they recall having moremedicines in their childhood homes than do light users. Notsurprisingly, therefore, they are more likely to use drugs toreduce fear, induce courage, or change mood in socialsituations." Similarly, many youths learn favorableattitudes about drugs through underground newspapers; yet, thesepapers often present accurate reports about specific drug dangersand effects. This source of information should not be ignored,even though its ideological slant may be quite different fromthat of official sources of drug education. If solid researchshows that a drug has severe toxic effects, an underground papermay be the quickest and surest way to communicate with those mostlikely to be damaged by it. For example, Washington, D.C.'sQuicksilver Times has printed the pharmacological analyses ofstreet samples provided by the Washington Free Clinic as awarning of the unreliability of certain varieties of drugs thenavailable. FILMS AND AUDIO VISUALS The recent emphasis on school drug-education programs hasproduced a receptive market for drug films and audiovisualmaterials; in the past few years, the number of these teachingdevices has reached approximately two hundred. The potentialvalue of visual teaching cannot be disputed-it makes learningsituations more realistic and more acceptable, especially totelevision-oriented youth. The problem, however, for any schoolor civic group is how to distinguish between effective materialand that which is inaccurate or counterproductive. Certainly,there ought to be readily accessible, up-to-date evaluations ofdrug films by both experienced adult and student viewers,indicating the content, level of sophistication, target audience,and goal orientation of the films. Different reviewers may wellcome to different conclusions, but the plethora of drug films nowbeing sold or given away makes a meaningful choice impossible inthe absence of some reasonably reliable guide. The Educational Products Information Exchange, which de spots and films created by young people tend to presentinformation that is honest and sensitive to the needs of theirpeers. Many evaluators criticize existing films for not conforming tothe life-styles of the viewer, for containing technicalinaccuracies, and for failing to use either black or Puerto Ricanactors or, at least, a Spanish soundtrack. It has been suggestedthat students do not identify with actors or even with realpeople in a strange setting, and that movies made in thestudents' own locale may have more effect. Several drug-treatmentprograms are planning homemade movies set against familiarbackgrounds. Such a series was made in Bedford-Stuyvesant bylocal talent, under the sponsorship of the Bedford-StuyvesantRestoration Corporation, and was shown on New York's Channel 13. Most problems, however, seem to occur once the film is in theteacher's hands, ready for use. Fortunately, most film reportsare accompanied by remarks on how to use the materialseffectively. Previewing is the essential first step, preferablywith students as well as with adult screeners. Films should notbe shown if they fail to meet the audience's level of knowledgeand sophistication. Next, creative interaction should take placebetween the audience, the educator, and the film. Students shouldbe allowed to give their own evaluation or to discuss theirfeelings about the film's message. A plethora of commercial films focusing on the youthful drugculture has flooded the market. As is to be expected, many suchmovies sensationalize and exploit the drug-abuse problem. A few,however, present the cruel realities of drug addiction in asensitive manner, thus meriting their use in student and adulteducational programs. The Bureau of Narcotics and Dangerous Drugsfeels that "recent films directed to youth ... initiate theminto the drug scene." The emphasis on student participation has prompted a newmethod-videotaping the students' own discussions on drugsthat isbeing tried in many classrooms. Educators are able to gaininsights from studying the dynamics of the situation, andstudents profit from observing themselves in peer-group settingsattempting to solve problems and make decisions collectively.Outside the schools, videotapes have been used successfully inadult training courses, especially those focusing on increasingthe participants' level of communication. For most, theexperience becomes a mirror reflecting strengths, weaknesses, andlimitations in dealing with others. Unlike the passive screeningof drug education films, live videotape replays often enhance theability of teachers and parents to relate to young people.Unfortunately, however, videotape apparatus is too costly formost schools and civic groups. SCHOOL CURRICULA Paralleling the proliferation of antidrug films has been theemergence of packaged curricula. Private businesses, statedepartments of education, local school systems, publishers,pharmaceutical manufacturers, professional associations,consulting firms, and universities have all jumped on thebandwagon in response to the growing demand for ready-made drugcourses. These vary tremendously in quality, content, andapproach. Some are very useful, while others are aimed merely atexploiting the commercial market, offering little more than thebasic facts about drugs with a few suggestions about researchprojects for students. The better material offers teachersthoughtful background information on specific drugs, suggestionsfor effective course presentation and teaching aids and flexiblelesson plans. Such publications as the NIMH Resource Book for Drug AbuseEducation and Teaching About Drugs: A Curriculum Guide, K-12,issued by the American School Health-Pharmaceutical ManufacturersAssociation, contain excellent background material on particulardrugs. The National Clearinghouse for Drug Abuse Information willsend, on request, eight model curricula from various schoolsystems, again without endorsement or evaluation of theirappropriateness for different target groups. As a total package,the booklets provide a valuable diversity of approaches as wellas supplemental resources. A few of the education packagesencourage self-examination by both teachers and students. The current emphasis on youthful self-evaluation has givenrise to techniques stressing the importance of student values inmaking decisions about drugs. Those who promulgate the valueapproach contend that behavior and personal values areinseparable. Richard E. Carney believes that drug abuse can beprevented, or at least explained, if it is viewed as anindividual's attempt to actualize his values. In one of hisstudies, drug users placed significantly less value on suchcategories as "power" as it related to participation instudent organizations, clubs, and "politics";"affection" and "respect" as they related totheir willingness to become involved in parental conferences onimportant personal subjects; and "skill" as it relatedto participation in sports and organized activities." But noone knows how students come to hold certain values, or why somevalues are more prevalent than others. This may explain theadamant refusal of many schools to consider adoption of thevalue-clarifying curriculum until more concrete data are madeavailable. Channels are opening up, however, and skepticaleducators are becoming more tolerant of "radical"approaches to education. Several counties in Maryland, forexample, recently adopted a value-oriented curriculum packagedeveloped by Drug Central, a division of Washington, D.C.'sCouncil of Governments. As is often the case with new methods,the Maryland teachers are in need of special training programs toassure positive results in the classroom. At present, increasingnumbers of schools are adopting this approach and reportfavorable responses from students and teachers alike. Other imaginative innovations in the field are receivingfavorable support from the educational community. The CreativeLearning Group in Cambridge, Massachusetts, has integratedmaterials available for elementary and junior high schoolsfocusing on problem solving and teaching younger children how tomake decisions about life and drugs. A vast array of uniqueteaching aids is offered for classes, and teachers are equippedwith a comprehensive manual containing drug-abuse information,sound medical information for use in emergencies, and suggestionsfor generating group discussions. The group's services will bebroadened to include short-term programs, guides for studentcounselors, preschool film strips, and materials for inner-city,Spanish-speaking youngsters. Macro Systems, Inc., has a complex package consisting of aself-discovery kit for use by the teacher in finding out his ownposition on drugs and exploring his own biases, before proceedingto lead an objective and probing discussion among his students.It also contains a consensus map for the classroom that enablesstudents to plot their own attitudes compared with those of theirpeers. It is encouraging to note that at least one group, NewDimensions Publishing Company, has responded to the scarcity ofmaterials for minorities. This New York City firm produces booksin Spanish and English for blacks, Puerto Ricans, and MexicanAmericans at the elementary level. There are undoubtedly other good materials that we did nothappen to find. As yet, no one can prove that any particularpackage or curriculum has an edge over others. There is nopresent basis of comparison, since distributors rarely makeprovisions for evaluation, student testing, periodicalre-evaluation, or updating of their materials, although theOffice of Education is funding efforts in the area. For any curriculum, it is essential that teachers besensitized to the philosophy, techniques, and goals of thematerials. If the instructors fear the subject and doubt theirability to teach it, the odds are that they will not succeed withyoung people, regardless of the caliber of the materials. EDUCATION FOR NONSTUDENTS Despite massive expenditures on public drug-abuse-educationprograms, there is still widespread ignorance of basic drug factsamong the population at large. For instance, a New York AddictionControl Commission survey of 6,000 persons aged thirteen and upfound that one out of every four regarded drug abuse as among thetop four problems facing the nation. Yet, 67 per cent had no ideawhat should be done about it; 60 per cent did not know what stateagencies were at work on the problem; and 50 per cent did notknow what effects heroin or amphetamines had on users." AGallup poll in December, 1970, showed that 64 per cent of theadults and 39 per cent of the students interviewed thought drugswere a serious problem in the public schools." In most cases, parents, teachers, and community leaders aremore in need of accurate information about drugs than studentsare. Parental responses to a student's involvement in drugs cancurb or accelerate further experimentation. It is thereforeunfortunate that most school drug-education programs have notprepared parents to deal with the complex drug issue. For parentsneed not only accurate information but also the ability todiscriminate between the effects of experimenting once withmarijuana and those of heavy involvement with drugs as well asthe ability to establish and maintain lines of honestcommunication with their children. Thus, to begin with,school-education programs should include a parent component.Several sessions could be designed to encourage adultparticipation and interaction with groups of young people.Community information and education programs sponsored by privateand public organizations could also serve to reach and informparents. Even more importantly parents need a place to go forspecific help when they find drug abuse in their own family. Asnoted in a newspaper article, "This is sheer panic thatsimply cannot wait. If advice is not quickly available, fear,anxiety, rage or protectivism takes over. If action is takenduring the panic and without advice, irrevocable damage may bedone to the sick victim as well as to the total family structureand relationships."" As a general rule, parent "help" programs shouldimpart sympathy and counseling together with facts. The guilt,fear, and anger parents are likely to feel when a family drugcrisis occurs should be channeled into constructive actionthrough effective self-help programs. Parents of drug-dependentchildren can also help each other. It is often beneficial to talkto someone else who has been through a family drug crisis intrying to approach the situation calmly and objectively. No oneis better prepared to provide this assistance than those parentswho have been forced to deal with their own children's abuse ofdrugs. Opinion varies concerning the value of involving parentsin group discussions with their own children. Some plannersinsist that direct family interaction is alwayscounterproductive, while others advocate the confrontation offamilial problems after the initial ice-breaking session. New York's ASA runs programs for parents and relatives ofserious drug-users and for community residents worried about theproblem in their neighborhood generally. Several school programs(as in Nassau County, New York, and in Los Angeles) also runspecial sessions for the parents of children enrolled in theschools. In some, parents participate with youngsters (not theirown) in group discussions on why young people use drugs. Thereare, of course, a multitude of drug-information programs run bycivic groups, eager to involve parents. (In Miami, for instance,about two dozen organizations have drug-abuse educationprograms.) Many parent-oriented programs focus too heavily on howto recognize the symptoms of drug usage and may provoke needlessconfrontation between parent and child. Many are not prepared tohelp in actual cases. Until very recently, most urban centers hadno place where parents could go for balanced personal adviceabout what to do when they suspected, or discovered, their childwas using drugs. Experts do not agree on how a parent should react whenconfronted with a drug-abuse crisis. They all begin by urging theparent not to panic but differ markedly on what should be done incoping with the crisis. Some suggest that the parent compel thechild to seek treatment, even by threatening to throw him out ofthe house. Others counsel the parent to be patient andunderstanding in an effort to get at the underlying problems. Dr.Paul Blachley suggests that relatives of a drug user be told that"bailing him out" encourages continuation of dependenceand drug use and advises that they not be accessory to theproblem." Sidney Cohen, former director of NIMH's drugprogram, advocates a middle course, urging parents to demonstratean attitude of "I love you and I will help you, but I won'tsupport you if you persist in behavior that I believe to bedetrimental to you."" He further advises that thesedecisions must be made on an individual basis, depending on thedrugs involved, the child's age, and his willingness to seek helpvoluntarily. Of course, other adults who come into contact with youth needaccurate information on drugs-especially teachers, counselors,policemen, and doctors. How much information is needed has yet tobe assessed. Nevertheless, NIMH recently funded the Bureau ofSocial Science Research to study the knowledge levels ofprofessionals who have contact with the drug scene in Baltimoreand San Francisco. The study will focus on eleven occupationalgroups, including policemen, probation officers, pediatricians,general practitioners, psychologists, social workers, teachers,school administrators, and counselors. Results should cast somelight on the level of knowledge in the various professions, aswell as on prevailing attitudes, and should indicate methods ofupgrading levels of education. The current emphasis is primarily on training teachers,especially through the Office of Education. But other youthworkers deserve attention as well. The National CoordinatingCouncil on Drug Education points out, with a note of lament,that, in 1971, half of the administration's funds for drug-abuseeducation were spent on teacher training. In contrast, New YorkCity's ASA would put primary emphasis on a training institute toprepare a "virtual army of skilled addictionspecialists" to interact with drug-prone youth within theframework of existing institutionsschools, churches, recreationprograms, settlement houses, block associations, and othergroups. To enhance the effectiveness of local efforts, the NationalCoordinating Council on Drug Education has put out a manual forcommunity action-Common Sense Lives Here-that sets out a processwhereby interested community people can define their communitydrug problem and work together to solve it. Not a "howto" manual, the pamphlet, together with an accompanyingfilm, encourage each community to mobilize its own resources andseek the local causes and cures for increasing drug use beforeattempting to formulate a plan of action. It advocates federalplanning grants for communities to finance this preparatoryprocess. (It is possible that such grants could be made underTitle I of the 1970 Drug Abuse Prevention and Control Act.) Also,it cautions against rushing into any major educational effortuntil the nature of the local problem is clearly perceived andadequate support has been gained. SPONSORS OF CURRENT EFFORTS THE FEDERAL GOVERMENT A number of federal agencies participate indrug-abuse-education programming, but only five have asubstantial involvement the National Institute of Mental Health,the Law Enforcement Assistance Administration, the Office ofEducation, the Department of Housing and Urban Development, andthe Bureau of Narcotics and Dangerous Drugs. Their expenditurelevels and basic activities are described in Staff Paper 5. There is general agreement among these primary agencies thattheir present system of program development and funding ispiecemeal, uncoordinated, and inefficient. It involves variousagencies independently supporting different drug-abuse programswithout regard for the resulting duplication of effort and wastedresources. Ongoing programs, too, are poorly evaluated or notevaluated at all. Consequently, the agencies have reached a deadend. They are finding it virtually impossible to judge thesuccess of programs or even to design cost-benefit analyseswithout comprehensive assessments. Only one fact is certain:Millions of dollars are being spent. just how effectively fundsare being used is still unknown. STATE AND LOCAL EFFORTS Virtually every sizable community in the country now has atleast one public or private drug-abuse prevention and educationprogram. The quality of these efforts varies from one area toanother, depending, for example, on the flow of fundinginformation from Washington, the attitudes and concerns of localcitizens, the fiscal condition of the locality, and the number ofagencies active in prevention programming. State educationadministrators agree that there are too many crash programsconcentrating on drug education in isolation; that there is notenough coordination of effort where many agencies are in the samefield; that there is too much attention to medical and legalfactors and not enough to social and psychological factors; andthat, finally, there is too little an attempt to relate specificdrug use to the "drug culture," and too much relianceon one-way education (i.e., handouts, lectures, films, andspeakers). States also suffer from a lack of support from schooladministrators and local political structures. The NationalLeague of Cities/U.S. Conference of Mayors and the NationalAssociation of Counties are responding by planning educationalprograms beamed at local office holders. This chaotic situation is further complicated by theinnumerable commercial firms entering the field, putting out anavalanche of gimmicks as well as legitimate drug-educationmaterials, along with model school curricula, films, and cartoonbooks. State planners have been inundated by the tide ofmass-produced course materials and usually have been unsuccessfulin sorting the good from the bad. Different agencies in different states provide drug educationfunds in response to the variety of laws. A 1970 compilation byHEW of drug-abuse education programs supported by state educationagencies shows that twenty-one states have legal requirements forschool drug (and alcohol) education and are "complying"with them. Four other states have programs in all educationaldistricts, despite a lack of legal requirements. In eleven statesand Puerto Rico, some, but not all, districts have schoolprograms. A parallel survey of drug programs supported by statehealth authorities, conducted by NIMH in 1970, found thattwenty-two states had such health-related programs, and sixteenmore had them in the planning stages. A major problem at the state level is lack of effectivecoordination. Most states are plagued by a lack of cooperationbetween existing programs, by unnecessary overlap and duplicationof effort, and by an insufficient flow of information from thegrassroots level to the legislature to stimulate effectivepolicies and leadership. A few states, such as Arizona,California, and now Florida, have statewide councils tocoordinate and give direction to public and private agencies inthe field. California alone has 300 community-based drug-abuseprograms, all of which have sprung up in the past two years. NewYork City has 47 identifiable drug-education programs, and NewYork State has Community Narcotics Education Centers in sixteenlocalities, manned by professionals, as well as 57 localnarcotics-guidance councils to coordinate local programs. To eliminate the fragmentation that exists among the states, aNational Association of State Drug Abuse Coordinators wasorganized recently. Since it is still in the organizationalstages, however, its impact remains uncertain. PRIVATE ORGANIZATIONS A plethora of professional organizations, social-welfareassociations, charitable volunteer organizations, and othergroups also conduct community education programs. Few, if any, ofthese programs have been evaluated with regard to their impact ona target population or their record of accomplishing specificgoals. They rarely assume an action-oriented role, preferringinstead simply to disseminate educational brochures andaudiovisuals. Their programs all look rational and successful onpaper, but no one has any real notion of their effectiveness,except, perhaps, for a pervasive feeling that nothing they havedone so far has made much difference. In fact, they are oftencriticized for jumping into the drug field without first askingfor experienced advice on what their role ought to be. Also, thehuge sums of money they expended on mediocre printed materialswould, according to people involved in delivery of serviceprograms, be better spent on the treatment and rehabilitation ofaddicts. On the other hand, some private groups do make successful useof low-key approaches in performing unique and valuable services.Several minority professional associations, for example, sponsorclinics that provide dental care for addicts and support halfwayhouses that offer counseling, job placement, and training tohard-core, youthful drug abusers. Undergraduate chapters of blackfraternal organizations educate members of their campuscommunities, while their graduate counterparts initiate theinvolvement of local groups in educational programs and"action" workshops. Another case involves studentprofessionals who spend their summer months working ininterdisciplinary teams, providing improved health-care delivery(including drug treatment and related legal services) toinner-city residents. Finally, several organizations whose mainfocus is drug abuse not only encourage research and conducttraining sessions for professionals but offer free consultationto people setting up treatment centers. Inherent in the structure of national groups is a widespreadnetwork for the dissemination of materials and information. Theseexpansive communication mechanisms are frequently used to supportlegislative reform efforts and to provide information to themedia and the public on the subject of drugs. Federal money is not being spent to evaluate ongoingeducational programs. As the National Coordinating Council onDrug Education has testified: There is a danger from continued massive education programmingwithout first taking the time to evaluate what has been done,what needs to be done, and what can be done. Unexamined andunevaluated information and education programs are certainly noanswer; and it is safe to say that in some instances they may beas harmful in the long run as no program at all .44 Most private efforts are limited, and many are local in scope.A few, however, are important forces nationally. With publicattention being focused on the drug-abuse problem, increasingnumbers of national drug organizations have begun to emerge, andmany of them project coordination as their main function. Themost inclusive of these is the National Coordinating Council onDrug Education, formed in 1968 as a coordinating group for publicagencies and private organizations involved in drug-abuseeducation. The Council's philosophy emphasizes rationalapproaches to drug-related issues. Any interdisciplinaryregional, state, or local organization whose purpose relates todrug education is eligible for membership. National organizationswishing to cooperate with NCCDE in achieving its goals may alsojoin. At present, most members are white, middle-classorganizations, although there are a few black groups, againprimarily middleclass. Federal agencies are assured of theCouncil's cooperation. The National Coordinating Council has beenfinanced by government contracts, private foundation funds,contributions from private industry, and donations from itsmembers. NCCDE has been quite independent despite its governmentfunding. It refused to join in National Drug Abuse PreventionWeek because it felt that such one-shot crash campaigns wereuseless; it criticized the national advertising campaign; and itfiled suit against the Federal Communications Commission,challenging its ban on rock music. Whether it will continue toreceive government support is doubtful. The Student Association for the Study of Hallucinogens (STASH)is an independent, nonprofit group run by the studentsthemselves. It publishes the Journal of Psychedelic Drugs,provides reprints, issues a bibliography on hallucinogens andother drugs, and holds regular conferences on drug abuse andrelated problems; it has a good (and computerized) librarycontaining 90 per cent of all the literature in English onmarijuana and hallucinogens and has compiled a directory ofdrug-information groups. STASH is objective and scientificallyoriented and, for the sake of credibility, will not accept anygovernment money. It expects, in time, to support itself totallyfrom membership and publication fees. BUSINESS AND INDUSTRY The increasing extent of drug use in industry began to berecognized during the last year by management and personnelofficials. Nationwide interviews with 6,000 workers in theautomobile industry recently compiled by the Alliance for LaborAction found that about 46 per cent of the workers interviewedwho were under thirty years of age had used drugs at leastonce." Of approximately 222 major businesses surveyed aboutdrug abuse among blue-collar workers and alcoholism amongexecutives, nearly two-thirds saw drug abuse as a majorindustrial problem, either now or in the immediate future, and 53per cent had already discovered some form of drug abuse in theirorganization." The existence of drug abuse in a business creates seriousproblems for an employer. It is legitimate for him to considerwhether the employee's behavior on the job endangers otherworkers or consumers, or even the image (or profits) of thebusiness. He can also be encouraged to understand the underlyingproblems that may have led to the drug use, to help the user findtreatment, and to allow him to continue to work undersupervision. Although most businesses still maintain a "findthem and fire them" policy, an increasing number ofexecutives realize that they cannot find and do not wish to fireall employees who use drugs. Such employers are institutingeducation programs in an effort to wean employees away from drugsand to teach management how to recognize serious drug problemsand channel workers to helping agencies when necessary." Business must also be involved in another urgent problemproviding employment opportunities for ex-addicts who are in orhave completed a treatment program. Long-term rehabilitationrequires that an ex-addict be able to find a job. Governmentaland social-service agencies can contribute greatly to this-theVera Institute and the City of New York are pioneering theemployment of patients who are in treatment in speciallysupervised work projects-but real progress will depend upon thetolerance and assistance of far-sighted employers. Moreexperimental work is needed, of course, to determine theproblems, possibilities, and legitimate expectations ofemployment programs. CONCLUSION This examination of current drug-education efforts indicatesthat additional money is not the most urgent requirement.Creative individuals are needed to act as catalysts for thegrowth, testing, and support of creative educational approaches.Evaluation is vital, as is a climate that encourages thetranslation of research findings into action. Educationalprogramming must respond to differences among addicts inethnicity, age, and mental set. Finally, concerted efforts toclarify goals, drug knowledge, and institutional responsibilitiesare essential. NOTES 1. Norman E. Zinberg. Personal communication. 2. John D. Swisher and Richard E. Horman, "Evaluation ofTemple University's Drug Abuse Prevention Program," ResearchReport Contract J-68-50 (U.S. Department of Justice, Washington,D.C., 1968). 3. See Lester Grinspoon, Marijuana Reconsidered (HarvardUniversity Press, 1971), for a discussion of different beliefsabout one drug. 4. See Norman Zinberg and John Robertson, Drugs and the Public(in press). 5. California State Department of Education, "A Study ofMore Effective Education Relative to Narcotics, Other HarmfulDrugs and Hallucinogenic Substances" (a progress reportsubmitted to the California Legislature as required by Chapter1437, Statutes of 1968), Sacramento, California, 1970, pp. 16-27. 6. Marvin J. Rosen, "An Evaluative Study Comparing theCognitive and Attitudinal Effects of Two Versions of anEducational Program About Mind-Affecting Drugs," SanFrancisco, California, Evaluation and Research Associates, July,1970, p. v. 7. Helen H. Nowlis, Drugs on the College Campus (Garden City,New York: Anchor Books, 1969), p. 60. 8. John D. Swisher and James L. Crawford, Jr., "AnEvaluation of a Short-Term Drug Education Program," TheSchool Counselor (March, 1971), p. 272. 9. Louise G. Richards, "Psychological Sophistication inCurrent Drug Abuse Education," Rutgers Symposium onCommunication and Drug Abuse (October 14, 1969), p. 15. 10. California State Department of Education, op. cit., note5, p. 26. 1 1. Helen H. Nowlis, op. cit., note 7. 12. "Ten Drug Abuse Films: What Students andProfessionals Think of Them," Educational Product Report,III, No. 7 (April, 1970), 16. 13. Paul Blachley, Seduction: A Conceptual Model of DrugDependencies and Other Contagious Social Evils (1970). 14. Swisher, Crawford, Goldstein, and Mura (1970); Swisher andWarner (1 97 1) ; Swisher, Warner, Upcraf t, and Spence (1 97 1). 15. Richard W. Warner, "Evaluation of Drug AbusePrograms" (unpublished article), Pennsylvania StateUniversity, State College, Pennsylvania, 1971, p. 6. 16. Herbert 0. Brayer, "A Comparative Analysis of DrugUse and Its Relationship to Certain Attitudes, Values andCognitive Knowledge on Drugs Between Eighth and Eleventh GradeStudents in the Coronado Unified School Districts,"Coronado, Calif., 1970, p. 53. 17. Gilbert Geis, "Impact of an Experimental NarcoticsEducation Program on Junior High School Pupils" (1967). 18. Thomas Ungerleider, "Drugs and the EducationalProcess," The American fournal of Psychiatry, XXV (June,1969). 19. Louise G. Richards and John H. Langer, Drug Taking inYouth (Bureau of Narcotics and Dangerous Drugs, Washington, D.C.,1971), p. 37. 20. The Reasonable Exercise of Authority, NationalAssociation of Secondary School Principals, Washington, D.C.,1969. 21. John H. Langer, "School-Law EnforcementCooperation," Guidelines for Drug Abuse Prevention Education(Bureau of Narcotics and Dangerous Drugs, Washington, D.C.,April, 1970), pp. 13-14. 22. Helen H. Nowlis, op. cit., note 7, p. 66. 23. Thomas Ungerleider and Haskell Bowen, "Drug Abuse andthe Schools," American journal of Psychiatry, XXV (June,1969). 24. U.S. Congress, Senate Committee on Labor and PublicWelfare, Special Subcommittee on Alcoholism and Narcotics,Hearings on S. 3562, 91st Cong., 2d sess., March, 1970, pp.176-77. 25. Montgomery County joint Advisory Committee on Drug Abuse,Final Report, March 10, 1970. 26. Frederic Meyers, "Incidents Involving theHaight-Ashbury Population and some Uncommonly Used Drugs,"journal of Psychedelic Drugs, 1, No. I (Fall, 1968). 27. Robin Nelson, "Dragon Slayers on an OminousCrusade," Marketing Communications (September, 1970), p. 20(quoting Dr. Nes Littner, Director of the Chicago Institute forPsychoanalysis). 28. Norman E. Zinberg, "Why Now?: Drug Use as a Responseto Social and Technological Change," lecture, Aspen,Colorado, August 29,1970. 29. Richards and Langer, op. cit., note 19, p. 29. 30. Donald L. Kanter, "Pharmaceutical Advertising inYouth: A Monograph Reporting upon a Quantitative PilotStudy" (mimeograph), December 30, 1970, p. 15. 31. Henry Lermard et al., "Hazards Implicit inPrescribing Psychoactive Drugs," 169, Science 438 (1970).The authors cite examples of such statements as follows: 1. "The epidemic of drug abuse is rapidly becoming anational emergency. Part of the responsibility for this must beborne by the drug industry, radio and television. just ascigarette commercials made smoking romantic, manly, relaxing,smart, and 'in,' drug advertising has helped'turn on' ourcivilization, especially our youth. We are constantly bombardedby people on television with an easy solution to any of ourtroubles, most of it half truth or lies. The continuous sellingof drugs on television and radio must be stopped. All drugadvertising should be prohibited from the mass media, a smallstep toward regaining our children." (Letter from Robert A.Levine, M.D., to the editor, 282 New England journal of Medicine,pp. 1378-79 [1970].) 2. "Our technology provides us with highly potentsynthetic materials and through the mass media means to informany person who can read, listen, or look about these dangeroussubstances. In this situation it is all too easy for anyone ofany age who does not like the way he lives to try a drug'high'insearch of a mystique of esoteric meaning, of euphoria, or ofoblivion." (Stanley F. Yolles, M.D., "The DrugPhenomenon," NS10 journal of American PharmaceuticalAssociation, p. 403 [1970].) 3. "Our culture and communications media teach childrenthat one solves almost all problems by 'turning on@-drugs forheadaches, constipation, sleeplessness, 'nerves,' and forwhatever other maladies beset us." (Allen Y. Cohen, Ph.D.,"Inside What's Happening: Sociological, Psychological, andSpiritual Perspectives on the Contemporary Drug Scene," 59American journal of Public Health, pp. 2090,2093 [1969].) 4. "The impact of mass media advertising . . . tends tocreate a psychological dependence upon drugs as a palliative forthe strains and stresses of contemporary society." (Dr.Donald C. Brodie, Drug Trade News, June 15, 1970, p. 8.) 32. Ibid. 33. Richard Blum et al., Society and Drugs, I (San Francisco,California: Jossey Bass, Inc., 1969), 262. 34. Educational Product Report, op. cit., note 12, p. 16. 35. "99 Films on Drugs +," University of CaliforniaExtension Media Center, Berkeley, California, 1970. 36. Drug Abuse Films, 2d ed., National Coordinating Council onDrug Education, Washington, D.C., 197 1, p. vii. 37. Richards and Langer, op. cit. 38. Herbert 0. Brayer, op. cit., note 16, pp. 54-55. 39. Glaser and Snow, "Public Knowledge and Attitudes onDrug Abuse," NACC (1969). 40. Washington Post, December 10, 1970. 41. New York Times, April 27, 1970. 42. Paul Blachley, op. cit., note 13. 43. Sidney Cohen, "The Drug Dilemma: A PartialSolution," Resource Book for Drug Abuse Education, NationalInstitute of Mental Health (October, 1969), p. 15. 44. U.S. Congress, op. cit., note 24, p. 176. 45. Alliance for Labor Action (ALA) is an organizationrepresenting the United Auto Workers and the Teamsters Unionwhose "Drugs in Industry" survey results will beavailable early in 1972. 46. Harold M. F. Rush and James K. Brown, "The Drug AbuseProblem in Business," Conference Board Record (March, 1971). 47. Carol Kurtis, Drug Abuse as a Business Problem: TheProblem Defined with Guidelines for Policy (New York: New YorkChamber of Commerce, January, 1971). CliffSchaffer's Home Page Contents | Feedback | Search DRCNet Library | Schaffer Library | Major Studies | DealingWith Drug AbuseWT02-B02-31IA086-000614-B045-222http://206.61.184.43:80/schaffer/Library/studies/dwda/staff3.htm 206.61.184.43 19970122021814 text/html 204579HTTP/1.0 200 OKDate: Wednesday, 22-Jan-97 02:17:59 GMTServer: WebSitePro/1.1f (S/N wpo-0deb)Allow-ranges: bytesContent-type: text/htmlLast-modified: Saturday, 28-Dec-96 07:08:42 GMTContent-length: 204360 Dealing With Drug Abuse -- Treatment and Rehabilitation Contents | Feedback | Search DRCNet Library | Schaffer Library | Major Studies | DealingWith Drug Abuse Dealing with Drug Abuse A Report to the Ford Foundation THE DRUG ABUSE SURVEY PROJECT STAFF PAPER 3 Treatment and Rehabilitation by James V. DeLong Introduction * Abstinence Programs * Methadone Maintenance *Antagonists * Multimodal Programs * Heroin Maintenance *Treatment of Users of Nonopiates INTRODUCTION HISTORY OF TREATMENT The beginnings of our current narcotics problem go back over acentury. As many authors have noted, the United States had alarge number of opiate addicts in the period between the CivilWar and the passage of the Harrison Act, which limited theavailability of drugs, in 1914. These addicts were primarilywhite, female, rural, lower to lower-middle class, andmiddle-aged.' They regularly injected morphine or took morphineor opiated patent medicine orally. Opiates were freely availablefrom the local pharmacy, so they were not criminals. Some of them did not even know that they were addicted tonarcotics. Patent medicines were not always labeled, and the usermay have known only that he felt sick when he did not take aparticular medicine, not realizing that the problem waswithdrawal from the medicine itself. Most were knowinglyaddicted, of course, and addiction was a matter of greatindividual concern. Physicians had developed many different"cures" between 1856 and 1914, and the effort continuedthereafter. In 1928, Dr. Charles Terry and Mildren Pellens, afterreviewing these efforts extensively, stated: . . . for the most part, the treatment of this condition has not emerged from the stage of empiricism. The various methods described in general indicate that the basis of the majority of them is merely the separation of the patient from the drug. Very few of those who have described the details of treatment have given a rationale for their procedures but rather have outlined dogmatically the adoption of certain measures whose primary object is the withdrawal of the drug and have stated or left the reader to infer that the completion of the procedure brings about cure .2 True to the spirit of the age, there were also numerous patentmedicine "cures" available, some of which werethemselves laden with opiates. It is difficult to recapture the dominant attitudes towardaddiction during this period. Terry and Pellens cite contemporarysources contending that addiction was a vice, a physical disease,a moral perversion, a product of neurotic inheritance, or aresult of morphine poisoning.' Much of the debate is cast interms of virtue and vice, and it is hard to tell what these termsmeant to the participants. On the whole, however, the argumentsare remarkably similar to those used in current debate aboutaddiction. While there was no consensus on the nature or causes ofaddicrecognized as a significant publiclegislative actiondeveloped. The Act in 1914 changed the problem opiates were to becontrolled and than freely available on the open market. It is not clear what response the lawmakers expected from themedical establishment. They may have expected doctors to keep onsupplying existing addicts while avoiding the creation of newones; they may have expected doctors to force addicts to give uptheir habit by refusing to prescribe narcotics; they may not havethought about it at all. In any event, at passage of the HarrisonAct, the country had at least 200,000 to 300,000 opiate addictswho were now cut off from their normal sources of supply andunable to receive drugs except through physicians. One result was predictable, although not necessarilypredicted: Physicians were deluged with addicts seeking drugs.' Asurvey conducted by a Treasury Department committee in 1918 thatreached 31 per cent of the physicians in the United States foundthat they had 73,150 addicts under treatment. Treatment, thecommittee believed, meant supplying drugs.' In addition to, andpartly in replacement of, private physicians, more than 40maintenance clinics were opened from about 1918. Most weresponsored by cities. Whatever the lawmakers may have thought about the nature ofaddiction, the law enforcers considered maintaining existingaddicts on opiates unacceptable. This group believed that, oncethe drug was removed and the addict had gone through withdrawal,he should have no further problems. Rufus King has given someexamples of this view: the medical conclusion, propounded as not open to question [was] that drug addiction was a correctable and curable condition, viz. the following preface to the Prohibition Bureau's Regulations: "It is well-established that the ordinary case of addiction will yield to proper treatment, and that addicts will remain permanently cured when drug addiction is stopped and they are otherwise physically restored to health and strengthened in will power." Moreover, a small but strident segment of the medical community went even further than the authorities ... In 1921 a member of the American Medical Association's Committee on Narcotic Drugs, purportedly speaking officially for the Association, was quoted [as saying]: "The shallow pretense that drug addiction is a disease which the specialist must be allowed to treat, which pretended treatment consists in supplying its victims with the drug which has caused their physical and moral debauchery .... has been asserted and urged in volumes of literature by the self-styled specialists.",, To people with this mental set, the maintenance clinics servedno useful purpose; they simply prolonged the addictive stateinstead of curing it. If one assumes that abstinence isrelatively easy, then drug maintenance does appear to be theequivalent of drug pushing. The government put severe pressure onthe clinics, and the last one was closed in 1923.' At the same time, a very tough policy toward physicians wasmaintained. The Narcotic Division of the Treasury Departmentarrested or threatened 14,701 persons registered to dispensedrugs under the Harrison Act in 1918, 22,595 in 1919 and 47,835in 1920.' Between 1914 and 1938, 25,000 doctors were arrested forsupplying opiates, and 5,000 of them actually went to jail.'Those doctors who maintained that addiction was more complicatedthan what the official view held, and who advocated maintenance,were purged from the field. It is tempting today to condemn this enforcement policy asboth cruel and ineffective. It was certainly cruel, but its realeffect will never be known. To begin with the most elementaryquestion, no one knows whether the policy of closing offlegitimate sources of supply decreased the total number ofaddicts. The Federal Bureau of Narcotics has estimated that thenumber of addicts declined from 200,000 at the time of theHarrison Act in 1914 to 118,000 in 1930, 60,000 in 1936, and20,000 in 1945. Dr. Alfred Lindesmith has pointed out that theseestimates are improbable, since they depend on the propositionthat new addicts were not being recruited to replace those whodied or quit the habit. if this were true, the average age ofaddicts would have risen as the population aged. In fact, theaverage age declined steadily throughout the period, and theother demographic characteristics of the population also changed,so there must have been substantial recruitment. Lindesmithreached no firm conclusion on absolute numbers, but pointed out:"Since the range of estimates of the addicted population atpresent is at least as great as it was before 1914, one can makeout a case for any trend one chooses by judiciously selecting theestimates."" One can argue that the policy worked fairly well for theaddicts of the early part of the century, who were 60 per centfemale, 90 per cent white, rural rather than urban, and middle orlower-middle class rather than impoverished. By 1945, the addictpopulation was about 85 per cent male and only 75 per cent white,a substantial change in character. Since then, the addictpopulation has remained about 85 per cent male and becomesteadily younger as well as more minority-group-concentrated. InNew York City, for example, the Narcotics Register shows 47 percent of the addicts to be black, 27 per cent Puerto Rican,"and 26 per cent white. During the last two or three years,addiction has been spreading back into the middle class, but thisis not a marked trend as yet. Clearly, the population of the1910's and 1920's did not replace itself, and this could bejudged a successful result of sorts. By any account, a hard core of addicts remained after theclosing of the clinics. During the 1920's, they were largelyignored, and treatment for opiate addiction disappeared for adecade. Then, in 1935 and 1938, the Public Health Service clinicsin Fort Worth and Lexington were opened, largely because ofproblems created by addicts in the prisons. The basic theory oftreatment remained unchanged since the earlier period-if anaddict could be separated from his drug for a time, he could becounted as cured. It was generally believed by this time that thehorrors of withdrawal were so great that few real addicts wouldundertake it on their own, but that a few months at one of theclinics would see them through withdrawal and allow them torecover. Once they went back to the community, it was presumed,they would never want to go near the drug again because of theirfear of withdrawal. Subsequent studies have indicated that the PHS clinics did notwork very well." This was not generally recognized at thetime, however, and there was another hiatus in the development ofnew treatment techniques until the explosion of urban addictionin the 1950's and 1960's. During the latter part of this period,several new methods came into being in response to the obviousinadequacies of the old ones. Synanon, founded in 1959, became the precursor of a line oftherapeutic communities that emphasized the psychologicalcomponent of readdiction and tried to restructure the addict'scharacter. During the next decade, many such communities werefounded across the country. The apogee of the movement wasprobably reached in New York City's Addiction Services Agencybetween 1965 and 1968. At the same time, civil-commitmentprograms more or less on the Lexington model were applied on alarge scale by California starting in 1961 and by New York Stateand the federal government starting in 1967. In 1964, Dr. Vincent Dole pioneered in the use of methadone, asynthetic opiate substitute for heroin. Methadone maintenance hasgrown rapidly in the last few years, and, as of 1971, it is thetechnique into which most new money is going. Contemporaneously with methadone, researchers at Lexington in1965 began experimenting with the use of antagonists-drugs thatblock the effects of opiates without themselves being addictive.This method, however is still experimental, has a great manyproblems, and is not yet an operating modality. At present, the dominant treatment modalities are therapeuticcommunities, civil commitment, outpatient abstinence, andmetbadone maintenance. A large number of hybrid programs,however, have developed in response to the concern over addictionduring the late 1960's. Some are explicitly multimodal, utilizingall the major techniques. There are also detoxification programsthat simply take an addict through withdrawal, often usingmethadone but sometimes not; there are also crisis interventioncenters, and programs that supply very small doses of methadoneon demand. Many community organizations have become active in thefield, with operations of all types and combinations. For purposes of clarity, this paper imposes more order on thefield than exists in practice. Methadone receives by far the mostdetailed analysis. In part, this is because methadone treatmentis expanding very rapidly, and thorough analysis is thereforeespecially important. It is also due to the fact that, sincemethadone maintenance has been in the hands of physicians andscientists who believe in records, evaluation, and research,information on these programs is more readily available. GOALS OF TREATMENT The apparent goals of treatment are obvious. Society wants theaddict to stop using heroin and committing crimes and, instead,to find a job, stabilize his personal life, generally improve hischaracter, and become a useful and productive citizen. Analyzingprograms in terms of these objectives presents a series ofproblems, however. The first is mechanical, although important:It is extremely difficult to get good information on the resultsof programs in terms of these or any other measures of success. The second is more subtle. Even when information on treatmentresults can be obtained, it tends to focus on whether the patienthas stopped using heroin. This represents in part a moraljudgment that this is the most important goal of treatment and inpart the belief that abstinence is a valid proxy measure of theachievement of the other objectives. Historically, there has alsobeen a tendency to believe that treatment has failed if an addictsubsequently uses narcotics for any length of time whatsoever, onthe assumption, perhaps, that any relapse automatically meanstotal relapse. Increasingly, experts have become aware that thisconcentration on abstinence is questionable. While abstinence isto some extent a proxy for the other possible benefits of atreatment program, it is not completely accurate. The many facetsof the addicted life-style are not totally inseparable, and,equally important, they need not all be treated at once. Aftertreatment, an addict might hold a job, support a family, refrainfrom criminal activity -and still go on occasional benders ofdrug use. Or, he might continue to commit crimes, but fewer thanbefore. His physical health might be improved even if nothingelse were changed. It is also possible for a program to have areverse effect. It might, for example, eliminate opiate addictionat the price of alcoholism, a dubious bargain. In short, there is a range of possible benefits and adverseeffects that can be produced by treatment programs. Differentprograms attach different importance to each; conflicts of valueare inherent in comparisons of effectiveness. Since suchquestions are not easily resolvable, an objective examination oftreatment programs should, ideally, use varying measures ratherthan only two categories-success (total abstinence) or failure(anything else) . Abstinence, stabilization on methadone (or, infact, stabilization on heroin), employment, decreased criminalconduct or non-criminal conduct, support of a family, improvedphysical health and psychological functioning-any of theseoutcomes represents at least partial success for a treatmentprogram and should be so regarded. Despite the strong reservations about using abstinence as ameasure, this paper repeatedly uses freedom from drug use as themajor criterion of the success of treatment programs. Whileevaluation of even this factor is fragmentary, it is far morecommon than evaluation in terms of other possible measures.Anyone trying to analyze program results has to use it as a proxyor refrain from any judgments at all, and it is sufficientlyimportant to be of use. It should be emphasized, however, thatgood multifactor evaluation might drastically change many of theconclusions contained here. The third problem is even more fundamental. No one knowswhether the goals of treatment as set forth in the beginning ofthis section are realistic or even desirable. Since no one knowswhy people become narcotics addicts, no one knows either how tomake them stop or what will happen to them if they do stop. Forexample, NIMH officials recently stated that about 25 per cent ofthe addict population are people who suffer from depression andchronic anxiety, another 25 per cent are hedonists who like toget intoxicated, and the rest are psychopaths who need immediategratification and are not particular about how they obtainit." Other researchers have also concluded that there is noone addict type, and that addiction can serve as a functional andadaptive characteristic for people with different types ofpsychic problems. Yet, there are also a number of researchers who, denying thisstress on psychopathology, contend that people are inducted intodrug use through peer pressure and that large numbers of addictsmay not suffer from severe psychopathology. The argument can bemade that whatever characteristics addicts appear to have incommon are forced upon them by the requirements of sustaining theaddiction once it exists. Still another view is that addicts dohave psychological problems but that these are in many cases nomore severe than those shown by many nonaddicts. If one conducteda mental-health survey of the population from which most addictsare drawn, one might discover as many symptoms of mental disorderamong the nonaddicts. Finally, some argue that heroin itselfcauses a metabolic change in the body that makes it difficult tocease being an addict. Thus, one can become addicted casually andthen be unable to rid oneself of the addiction no matter whattherapeutic techniques are brought to bear. 14 Treatment programs have disparate philosophies on thesequestions. Some, though by no means all, methadone programsassume some physiological basis of addiction. Most therapeuticcommunities probably assume a character disorder that can behelped by group therapy. Some outpatient abstinence programsassume that addiction may be an almost accidental event for manyaddicts, and that they can be helped with minimal intervention.But these assumptions are not constant within any modality, andalmost all spectrums of opinion exist in each. In short, there is no uniform theory of addiction and noadequate description of the addict population. Further, addictionhas spread rapidly in recent years, and we know less about thenew population than we do about the old. And we knew littleenough before. The difficulties these factors create in judging treatmentprograms are obvious. We do not know what expectations arerealistic or desirable. We do not even know for certain that itis good for addicts to stop taking drugs. Some programs may bebetter for certain types of addicts than others, but we are notsure what types, or whether the programs are attracting the typewith which they do best. All the figures given in this paper are gross figures-theprograms are judged by effects on the total number of people whowere involved without any breakdown of results for differenthypothetical subgroups of the addict population. The conclusions,therefore, are tentative, at best. ABSTINENCE PROGRAMS DETOXIFICATION The most straightforward way to help a heroin addict is todetoxify him-reduce his daily heroin intake to zero and see himthrough withdrawal. The addict can be maintained on an inpatientbasis without any drugs for the five-to-ten-day period necessaryfor primary withdrawal symptoms to disappear; or he can betreated with tranquilizers but not opiates; or methadone can beused to decrease his opiate dosage gradually until he isdrugfree. Detoxification services are offered in many places and modesacross the nation-in hospitals, therapeutic communities, freeclinics, and government programs. There is no way of learning howmany addicts receive them each year. Detoxification has several clear benefits for both the addictand society. Even if the addict does not intend to stay offdrugs, it reduces his habit and decreases its cost. This spareshim the hassle and society the crime costs of his addiction forsome period, even if only a few days, after the process iscomplete. For some addicts, it is also a step towardrehabilitation. After repeated failures to remain detoxified,they become ready for other modalities. On the whole, however, it is not clear that detoxificationitself contributes greatly to the achievement of long-termabstinence. One program that used methadone in decreasing dosesfound that 74 per cent of the patients either did not finish thewithdrawal program or relapsed to drug use within 48 hours afterleaving it. Another, which effects withdrawal without opiates,found that only 10 per cent successfully completed thewithdrawal, and almost all of these soon relapsed." The NewYork Narcotic Addiction Control Commission has estimated thatonly 24 per cent of those who receive detoxification withoutother services "remain drug-free for any length oftime."" The Haight-Ashbury Clinic in San Francisco has beenexperimenting with outpatient withdrawal, utilizing analgesicsbut not opiates. It reports the results with 450 patients: 56 per cent dropped out before they were clean and were lost to follow-up for at least two weeks; 5 per cent of these resumed their habit, 22 per cent were in treatment, and the rest were apparently not known. 12 per cent had decreased their habit to "chipping" no more than once a week. 5.5 per cent had been clean for one month or more. 38 per cent were lost track of after only one clinic visit." This population differs from the standard drug-addictpopulation because it includes individuals who are basicallymiddle class and who began using heroin after being involved inthe San Francisco speed scene; many have not been addicted forlong. No one knows whether this population is harder, or easier,to work with than the more familiar ghetto populations. Otherprogram examples could be cited-some better and some worse-butthe general picture remains: Detoxification does have somebenefits, but it is primarily a service for the drug user whoneeds a respite and a short-term way of protecting societyagainst crime rather than a long-term treatment for addiction. Assuch, it is valuable, especially for anyone who believes thataddicts should be treated more humanely than they are at thepresent time and that bandaids can be valuable things. Butexpectations should not be too high. CIVIL COMMITMENT In theory, civil commitment is the nonpunitive incarcerationof an addict for purposes of rehabilitation. This method oftreatment was started in the 1930's at the Lexington and FortWorth hospitals, where the programs were part voluntary and partcoercive. In the 1960's, civil commitment was applied on a widerscale, first in California then in New York. Subsequently, thefederal government started using civil commitment as analternative to imprisonment through the Narcotic AddictRehabilitation Program. Dr. John Kramer has traced therelationship between the earlier programs and the massiveinvestment of the 1960's: The roots of these commitment laws can be traced to the federal narcotics hospital in Lexington. In recounting the initial expectations for that institution Isbell writes . . . "Drug addicts were to be treated within the institution, freed of their physiological dependence on drugs, their basic immaturities and personality problems corrected by vocational and psychiatric therapy, after which they would be returned to their communities to resume their lives. It seems to have been tacitly assumed that this program was the answer and would solve the problem of opiate addiction. Within a year it was apparent this assumption was wrong . . . a more adequate treatment program [required]: (1) Some means of holding voluntary patients until they had reached maximum benefit from hospital treatment. (2) Greater use of probation and parole. (3) Provision for intensive supervision and aftercare. . . . Isbell goes on to say that the reasons why these problems were not solved were complex. "In 1961 the California Legislature enacted laws establishing a commitment program for addicts which was designed to accomplish those objectives recommended but never carried out at Lexington."18 It is generally thought that the programs started in the1930's were almost total failures. Between 1935 and 1964, therewere 87,000 admissions to the two centers, of which 63,600 werevoluntary and 23,400 were federal prisoners. Of the voluntarypatients, 70 per cent left against medical advice. A series ofstudies of addicts released from the abstinence facilities foundthat up to 90 per cent of those followed up relapsed into druguse within a few years." As is true of almost every other aspect of the field, thisconclusion is debatable. Recent research has suggested that itmay exaggerate the failures. Dr. John O'Donnell points out thatall the studies had problems with data collection and withcategorization of those addicts who could not be found. He alsoquestions the assumption that any relapse-any use of drugs-shouldbe regarded as a failure, an assumption that was made by severalof the studies. As has been pointed out, an addict may becomebasically abstinent, even though he does relapse a few times;and, even if he relapses regularly, he may spend more time offdrugs than he would have without the treatment. This is also anet social gain. O'Donnell uses the following example. If one has 2,000exaddicts in a two-year study (a total of 4,000 man-years) anddefines relapse as a two-week period of heroin use at any time,then a 90 per cent relapse rate could mean that anywhere between69 and 3,600 of the 4,000 man-years were spent in a state ofaddiction. That is, 90 per cent of the addicts could haverelapsed for exactly two weeks each, or, at the other extreme, 90per cent could have relapsed for the entire two years, oranything in between." The social and individual consequencesof these polar possibilities are very different. The revisionist approach to the Lexington experience hascaused many observers to soften their adverse judgments somewhat.Most still believe that it was not effective with very manyaddicts but concede that the question probably cannot be answereddefinitely. The data that would allow methodologically acceptablestudies are lost. This does not seem to bother anyone too much,however, because the Lexington population drew heavily from ruralwhite populations, and the exact results would be of marginalrelevance to our present situation. The three programs that were started in the 1960's built onthe Lexington model, although they tried to improve it. Theyappear to have been started because addiction was eitherincreasing or becoming more visible, and was thus becoming apolitical problem. In 1961, there was simply no treatmentmodality available except civil commitment, and even by 1966 itdid not appear that there was any clearly better alternative.Under pressure to do something, state and federal authoritiespicked up the only available model, apparently on the premisesthat: (1) The failures of the Lexington program were due in partto the fact that the duration of treatment was too short (sixmonths or a year) ; (2) Improved vocational and counselingservices would be helpful; (3) Some careful studies had indicatedthat better supervision in the community after release wouldimprove the success rate; 21 (4) Civil commitment would at leastget addicts off the street. The California program, instituted in 1961, provides forcommitment on court order in lieu of sentence or prosecution.Voluntary commitment and commitment by relatives are alsopossible, but over 90 per cent of the inmates are thereinvoluntarily, after conviction. In fact, the program isstructurally and functionally very similar to imprisonment. Themain center, in Corona, California, is a maximum-securityfacility under the direction of the Department of Corrections.There are armed guards and barbedwire fences, and most of thepersonnel are corrections workers. The minimum institutional stayis six months, and the average is about 14 months. After leavingthe institution the addict is required to undergo a three-yearperiod of "community aftercare," which is essentially"parole." During this time, he follows the same regimenas ex-felons, with the additional requirement of regularurinalysis testing and group counseling. Violations oft1parole" can and, in the case of relapse to drug use,usually do mean return to the institution. Attempted escape fromthe institution and serious parole violations are felonies inthemselves. The facility does provide inmates with a modified form ofencounter-group therapy, based on the hypothesis that drug use isa symptom of aberrant personality patterns which must be changed.However, a study of the program's results concluded that theprogram was interpreted by addicts and professional visitors asmore punitive than therapeutic. Whether one were releaseddepended in large part on how well one played the game at groupsessions. This was not conducive to the honesty that real grouptherapy demands. Evaluation showed that between 1962 and 1964 there were 1,209persons on release status at some time. At the end of the year,only 35 per cent were still in good standing and only 16 per centmaintained this status after three years. The majority who failin aftercare do so for drug use, "poor adjustment,"failure to report in, or new arrest. During the first year, 56per cent were detected using drugs and 20 per cent convicted ofnew crimes. In the three-year period, 81 per cent had beensuspended from release status at least once. The usual patternfor the inmate consisted of periods spent in the facilityfollowed by periods of abstinence in the aftercare phase, andthen return to the facility in Corona. As a result of thispattern, inmates who would have been serving a felony sentence(70 per cent) actually spent less time "incarcerated,"while those who were guilty of misdemeanors (16 per cent) were"incarcerated" longer than if they had served anordinary prison sentence. No later results seem to have changedthis pattern. Felon addicts who receive no therapy while inprison do as well as or better than California RehabilitationCenter addicts while on parole." The New York program, adopted several years later, differssomewhat in conception." Like California, New York providesfor commitment in lieu of sentence or prosecution, for voluntarycommitment, and for commitment by relatives or other persons,such as school officials or prosecuting attorneys. Unlike theCalifornia system, New York's system is under the direction of anindependent Narcotic Addiction Control Commission (NACC) and hasa mental-health orientation involving the use of professionalmental-health personnel. NACC is also more committed to researchand community aftercare programs. New York's total program, by far the largest in the UnitedStates, has spent $475.3 million in the last four years,including its investment in methadone and therapeutic communitiesas well as in civil commitment. The direct annual investment inthe civilcommitment program appears to be at least $50 millionout of a total budget of $88.5 million. As of the end of 1970,NACC had 10,764 addicts in its own facilities, and another 10,419were in facilities accredited or funded by NACC. These populationfigures were not broken down by modality." Despite the dominance of a mental-health approach andprofessionalized therapy, the emphasis on security and remoteinstitutions has apparently produced a penal atmosphere at manyof the NAOC facilities. Recreational and entertainment facilitiesappear to be lacking, and life in a NACC institution has beendescribed as a dreary round of a few hours in a classroom orworkshop, some time in group meetings led by civil servants, andthe rest of the time watching television or loafing. The peerpressures, ex-addict, encounter-group leadership, and meaningfulwork assignments needed to create an effective therapeuticenvironment are absent." The program has been subject tosome fierce attacks, as in the 1970 New York gubernatorialcampaign, when one candidate claimed that in three years NACC hadspent $345 million and cured 120 addicts." It is difficultto know whether all of these accusations are justified. But it isequally difficult to find disinterested observers who contradictthem. NACC officials state their results fairly carefully. In June,1971, the research director testified that "a relativelysmall number of people" had been processed through theentire civil-commitment procedure (the three to five years), andthat, of those who had gone all the way through, 25 per cent"are currently abstinent, according to a physicalfollow-up." Another 25 per cent had either recertifiedthemselves to NACC or had entered other treatment programs. Therest (50 per cent) were in jail as a result of new drug-relatedoffenses or had returned to drugs." This statement does notreveal how many addicts had completed the program, how many wereable to drop out or escape in some way, or what level offunctioning the abstinent addicts were maintaining. Thepopulation is referred to as "small." The federal NARA program of civil commitment for addictsincludes three separate programs. Title I provides for addictscharged with violating federal laws (nonviolent crimes only). Inlieu of prosecution, the addict can be committed to a three-yeartreatment period involving both institutional and aftercaretreatment facilities. Admissions under this title have been few.Between July, 1967, and June, 1970, only 207 persons wereexamined and 179 accepted, although a case load of 900 per yearhad been anticipated. The main reason seems to be a generaldisinterest by U.S. Attorneys." Title II offers treatment in lieu of sentencing for addictsconvicted of federal crimes. This program is administered by theBureau of Prisons, which provides facilities for treatment withinregular penal institutions. The time of incarceration is not toexceed ten years, and - the addict can be released to aftercareservices after six months. Only about 375 addicts are currentlybeing serviced under this title.30 Title III provides for voluntary commitment by addicts who arenot involved in criminal proceedings. The commitment is for aperiod of three years, most of which is spent in aftercarefacilities. The term of the institutionalization itself is to bedetermined by the patient's progress but is not to exceed sixmonths. Until recently, Title I and Title III patients were sent tothe Lexington or Fort Worth facility, under the Surgeon General.(Fort Worth has now been transferred to the Bureau of Prisons andwill no longer be used for addiction treatment.) Title IIIpatients receive their initial evaluation at Lexington, but manyare channeled into community or state programs funded by NARAgrants and contracts. The Lexington facility is the most open ofthe institutions and has a more relaxed policy toward escape orattempted escape. The primary treatment methods employed aredetoxification, counseling, and some work and recreation therapy.They have begun an experiment with a small therapeutic community(Matrix House) but require a longer time commitment for patientsin this program. The initial evaluation determines whether the addict issuitable for treatment. The rejection rate is about 55-60 percent. The grounds for rejection are not clear. Some officialsclaim that suitability is based on an assessment ofmotivation-whether an addict has sufficient self-control to beable to function in a relaxed and open environment, and, if not,the availability of other types of treatment facilities. Anotherview is that decisions on suitability are made on the basis ofobjective criteria, such as current legal status, criminalrecord, age, employment, history, prior drug experience, andmental state. In a study of the first 27 months of operation under the newAct (1966-69), about 2,000 addicts were tested at Lexington. Asof September 30, 1969, there were 802 Title I and Title IIIpatients on an aftercare status; 26 per cent had been recommittedto the institution for aftercare violations, and 5 per cent hadbeen discharged. As of March, 1971, 2,000 patients were in thecivil commitment program, of whom 1,300 were in aftercare. Of the2,000, 60 per cent were white. Average age was in the late20's." In June, 1971, the Director of NIMH stated: In the civil commitment program, a study of 1,200 patients who were in aftercare in 1970 showed that approximately 85 percent were employed, 70 percent were not arrested and spent no time in jail during that period, 35 percent were in self-help therapy, and 33 percent were pursuing their education. Patients who had been [in] aftercare for 3 months or more were, on the average, drug-free 80 percent of the time. A similar statement can be made regarding the heroin use of patients who were in the community treatment programs. As you know, many patients during the treatment of their addiction may abuse drugs other than heroin occasionally, such as cocaine, marijuana, amphetamines, or barbiturates. Of the patients in the civil commitment program who had been in aftercare for 3 months or more, 60 percent were not abusing any drugs. The same is true of patients who had been in the community treatment program for 3 months or more. Of the patients who are in the civil commitment aftercare phase, we know that 60 percent do not become readdicted during their first year in aftercare. Of the remaining, 25 percent do abuse some drugs or become readdicted and require further hospital treatment. About 15 percent were dropouts .32 It is difficult to know what to make of these results. Evenallowing for selectivity in acceptance into the program, they arefar better than the New York or the California experience wouldhave led one to expect. Since the detailed studies on which thisstatement is based are not available, one can only reservejudgment. The Bureau of Prisons has analyzed initial results from itscare of inmates committed under Title II of NARA. As of the endof 1971, 896 inmates had been examined for program eligibility,and 70 per cent (630) had been accepted. The program had released414 inmates to aftercare after an average institutionalization of15 months, and 297 (72 per cent) of these were still active. Theother 28 per cent had "violated or absconded." Overfive thousand months of "successful aftercare" had beenaccumulated, but the meaning of that term as used in the reportis unclear." Many drug experts believe that programs of civil commitmentoffer little more than custodial care in a predominantly penalsetting. Counseling and therapy, when employed, are imposed onthe patients by the staff and are of questionable value.Apparently, most addicts are committed as an alternative tocriminal prosecution or sentencing, and view commitment as such.Most do not appear to be motivated toward inner change, and thosethat do succeed might succeed equally as well in a voluntarycommunity program. In addition, civil commitment is expensive. Itrequires secured facilities, around-the-clock guards, and largestaffs. (Cost estimates for all three of the large programs are$10,000 to $12,000 per year per addict while the addict is in theinstitution. It is not clear whether this represents full costs,including capital expenditures, or operating costs only.) Inspite of these costs, the chief function of civil commitmentseems to be nothing more than to keep the addict out ofcirculation for intermittent short periods. The NARA information cited above seems to indicate that civilcommitment for a limited term followed by aftercare is more promising than this conclusion suggests. The Californiaprogram was structured in somewhat the same manner-although witha more open law-enforcement orientation-and it may be that itshows worse results than NARA because it was more carefullyevaluated and the patients were more carefully controlled. Adefinite answer to this will have to await more detailedinformation on NARA. THE THERAPEUTIC COMMUNITY "Therapeutic community" (TC) is a generic term usedto describe an institution that attempts to treat the addict bydealing with the underlying causes of his addiction. The basicconcept of the TC modality, as of the civil-commitment programs,is that addiction is the result of psychological problems, andthat intensive therapeutic techniques utilized within thestructure of a residential community can restructure thecharacter and personality of the addict to the point where he nolonger needs to use drugs. Although heroin addicts constitute themajor part of the TC population, most TC's service users ofnonopiates as well. As of mid-1970, there were probably 40-50therapeutic community programs in the country with approximately4,000-5,000 residents." The growth of therapeutic communities is in some ways as mucha quasi-evangelical movement as a drug-treatment modality, and itis difficult to describe them without distorting the views of atleast some of the participants." The flavor of this modalitycan be partly conveyed by tracing some analogies and intellectualroots. First, there is a parallel between the TC and AlcoholicsAnonymous. Synanon, the original addict-oriented TC, was foundedin 1959 by an ex-alcoholic as a treatment program for alcoholicsmodeled after AA. It drifted into treatment of opiate addictslargely by accident. Many of the TC's retain some of the basic AAcharacteristics-the concept that there is no such thing as anex-addict, only an addict who is not using at the moment; theemphasis on mutual support and aid; the distrust of mentalhealthprofessionals; and the concept of continual confession andcatharsis. However, the TC has extended these notions to includethe concept of a live-in community with a rigid structure ofday-to-day behavior and a complex system of punishment andrewards. The rise of the TC also parallels the rising popularity ofgroup therapy generally. Encounter groups, support groups, andmarathon sessions are as prevalent in the "straightworld" as in the TC's, and the many differences ingroup-therapy methods that exist outside exist in the TC's aswell. One reason for the frequent confusion about the differentTC's is that they reflect the many variations in approaches togroup therapy. The growth of TC's has occurred at the same time as the growthof interest in communes, and some TC's have an element of thecommune in them-the residents are rejecting a dishonest world infavor of a better way of life. Synanon, for example, hasresidents who have never been addicted to anything but who preferthe Synanon life-style. Dr. John Kramer has referred to Synanonas "the third community," different from the drug-usingcommunity and the "square" community. He points outthat there is a fundamental difference between Synanon and manyof the TC's in that "the Synanon ideal is to retain membersin the group indefinitely and to expand steadily, drawing in moreand more members, squares as well as addicts. Other TC's differin that they do expect their members to re-enter the squarecommunity. "3r The past decade has seen a movement towardcommunity action and a rejection of services furnishedexogenously. Community control is a familiar slogan, and thebeliefs that only the poor know what the poor want and onlyblacks can help blacks are also common. To some extent, TC'sreflect this movement. Many of them have adopted the view thatthe nonaddict does not really understand the problems and worldof an addict and therefore cannot contribute as an ex-addict can.Since addicts are often poor and black as well as addicted, thisconcept is a powerful force. Finally, the quasi-evangelical aspect of the TC creates aninteresting, although certainly not documented or provable,situation. The addict may be replacing his addiction to heroinwith an "addiction" to being an ex-addict and to theencounter therapy. The philosophy of the TC becomes a religionfor the addict. It is something to believe in and a message tospread to his fellow addicts in the world. The "religiousfervor" involved exists in varying degrees. In Dr. Kramer'swords: It has been undiplornatically stated that religiornania is a cure for narcomania. This observation is valid, particularly if one defines religiomania broadly as the devout acceptance of clearly defined tenets of a faith and its principles of behavior, and persistent participation in its prescribed rituals. The faith and its practice will usually encompass all the life activities of the communicant and in its practice he will have the opportunity for both penitence and ecstasy. Obedience is part of it as is the sense of being an accepted member of the congregation, however lowly, and thus possessing an attribute not possessed by anyone outside the sect. The requirements can be fulfilled not only by formal fundamentalist religious groups such as Teen Challenge but by such an organization as Synanon and other programs which have been modeled on it.37 In terms of structure and program, some common features ofTC's can be identified, despite wide individual variations. Mosthave three identifiable phases to their program. The first ofthese is a testing for admission; the addict must show thegenuineness of his desire to become drug-free. In some places,the addict must become drug-free on his own and remain so for agiven period of time before he is admitted. In some, he must workin a storefront center for a time, showing the proper attitude.Others do not require abstinence in advance and will have apatient detoxified on methadone or go through withdrawal afterformal admission. In some TC's, an addict is put through anencounter session with present residents to test his dedication. The methods vary, but at some point early in the process everyTC tests the candidate's motivation. As might be expected, thereis a high loss rate at this point, although numbers are difficultto find. The different entrance procedures must be kept in mindin evaluating TC's, because they can obviously make a substantialdifference in the statistical records of the program. A communitythat does not formally admit addicts until they have passedstringent tests is likely to show a higher success rate than acommunity that does its weeding out after formal admission. Whatever the form of testing used, relatively few addicts passit. In most TC's, somewhere between 50 per cent and 90 per centof the applicants are rejected or quit at this initial stage.Once admitted, the addict enters a treatment ladder. The programof treatment is usually highly structured and extremely rigid,with an enforced system of rewards and punishments. The residentstarts at the very bottom of the ladder, with little freedom, noresponsibility, and the lowest types of tasks. As he proveshimself, he begins to acquire more freedom, better jobs, andincreased responsibility. This period of treatment lasts at leasta year and is characterized by clearly marked stages in status.The emphasis is usually on confronting the addict with theimmaturity of his past behavior and his need to learn responsiblepatterns of dealing with the world. Group therapy is emphasized,and the encounters can be extremely rough. It is part of theethos, however, that the motives behind the encounters areconcern and love rather than hostility. Finally, the resident arrives at the re-entry phase. Duringthis period, he begins to have a life outside the communityagain-he takes educational courses, spends weekends with hisfamily, works, etc. When he has established a stable patternoutside the community and is considered responsible by theprofessional staff and/or peers, he may be discharged. (AtSynanon, there is no re-entry phase. Family life, education, andwork are all incorporated into the community. To Synanoncommunity members, the straight world outside the community hasnot changed, and the pressures and problems that resulted intheir addiction in the first place are still there. Return to theoutside means return to heroin addiction, alcohol, or whateverdrove them in.) A major problem in evaluating therapeutic communities is thedifficulty of ascertaining facts. Even a matter so rudimentary asthe costs involved is a matter of dispute because of differencesin calculating capital and operating costs, treatment of welfareexpenditures that go to support the community, allocation offunds from different government agencies, appraisal of donatedgoods and services, and simple lack of records. Costs rangeanywhere from $3,000 to $10,000 per year per resident. Even more difficult to assess is the result of the effort,since little careful evaluation has been done. One multimodalprogram analyzed the "split rate" from the TC componentof its program. They found that, of 122 entrants, 40 per centleft within three weeks, 50 per cent within seven weeks, and 85per cent within one year. A TC that appealed mainly to white,middle-class residents found that, during one year, almost 700persons entered the program, 535 left voluntarily, and 23 wereexpelled. Of those who left, 175 came back. The program graduated38 residents during the year. Of 113 graduates of the programover a four-year period, 13 had relapsed to drug abuse. Of theremaining 100 graduates, 25 were employed in the subject TC, 51in other addiction programs, and 19 in the community at large;five were unknown .18 These are only fragments, because there isvery little hard information on the results of TC's. In part thisis because evaluation is expensive and difficult and manyorganizations do not have the money to spend on it. Also, someprogram operators oppose evaluation on philosophical grounds-theybelieve that what they are doing is humane and valuable and thattheir work is demeaned by attempts to judge it in quantitativeterms. They may also believe that evaluation has negative effectson the program. If it shows many failures the residents will cometo believe that they, too, will fail, and the prophecy will beself-fulfilling. Finally, there are sound bureaucratic reasons for avoidingevaluation as much as possible. All the preliminary and anecdotalindications are that, while a few people are helped greatly byTC's, an overwhelming majority are not. In the hard competitionfor government drug-treatment money, evaluation might well hurtthe TC's more than it would help them. The incentive to permitevaluation, let alone fund it, is minimal. Looking at all the available evidence and the impressions ofexperts in the field, it is hard to escape the conclusion thatTC's are, at best, good for a very limited number of drugaddicts. As a rough guess, considering the initial rejectionrates, the split rates, and the relapse rate, it would besurprising if careful evaluation showed that more than 5 per centof those who come into contact with the program are enabled tolead a reasonably drugfree, socially productive life. There is also a major question about the type of addict forwhom the TC is the proper solution. Some experts believe that theTC works best for the sociopath who is tough enough to take theencounters but not for those with less serious psychologicalproblems or those who are the least alienated. Other experts havedifferent categorizations. The TC's may have advantages in dealing with particularsubgroups of addicts, however. Although exact populationbreakdowns are seldom available, it is generally recognized thatthe mean age of the residents is lower than that of eitheraddicts in the methadone programs or the total addict population.This could mean that the TC is especially attractive to youngaddicts, but this is not certain; the same result would ensue ifit were less attractive to older addicts. It may also beeffective with multidru'g users or with young experimenters, butthis has also been unproved. In terms of any national program of treatment of heroinaddicts, it is difficult to see a major role for the TC, simplybecause the success rate is too low and the cost too high to makean important impact on the problem. At the same time, most drugexperts, when they discuss the necessary elements of acomprehensive drug-treatment program, include a therapeuticcommunity, but whether this is based on a genuine belief in itsutility, on the hope that utility might be demonstrated, or onsimple politics is unclear. In the long run, it may turn out thatthe TC is much more interesting outside the drug context thanwithin it. By setting itself the task of rehabilitating drugaddicts-a notoriously hard group to rehdbilitate-the TC movementmay have destined itself to look bad. The real contributions thatsuch methods might make to improvements in the condition andfunctioning of more tractable populations are easily lost sightof by appraisers who are concerned with the drug problem. OUTPATIENT ABSTINENCE Many programs have a component that treats outpatients andattempts to get them to abstain from heroin use. Of 142 programscovered by an NIMH survey, only 23 were for inpatients only, andonly 43 of the 142 engaged in methadone maintenance; therefore,at least 76 were operating some form of outpatient abstinenceprogram. These programs differ as much as or more than the therapeuticcommunities. The major components are community outreach to findpeople who need help; group and individual therapy of varioustypes; vocational and social counseling; intervention withauthorities, employers, or schools on behalf of the patient;vocational training and education; and family counseling. Theprograms emphasize these elements in varying degrees, of course,and most probably do not offer a complete range of services.Another variable is the intensity of the patient's involvementwith the treatment center. Some are halfway houses, where thepatient spends the whole day and goes home only at night. At theother extreme are agencies that have only one or two sessionswith a patient or that are more or less social centers. Mostprograms are, of course, between these extremes." This method of treatment is not based on any constanttheoretical beliefs. Some people believe that addicts suffer fromunderlying character disorders and can be changed only throughheavy involvement in therapy. Others believe that helping withthe immediate problems of the patient will enable him to helphimself. Still others are desperately trying to fend off thetotal catastrophe that may overwhelm the patient if he does notreceive aid. Very little evaluation of these programs has been done, andthere are no reliable data on the results. Most observers believethat the attrition rates are very high, the number of patientswho remain drug-free is small, and the impact on such areas asemployment and criminal activity is minimal. Dr. Robert DuPont,Director of the Washington, D.C., Narcotic Treatment Agency, hasfound that only 15 per cent of the patients who selected NTA'sabstinence program remained in it for six months, although thosewho did remain did well." A -D.C. Department of Correctionsstudy of the performance of abstinence patients in NTA facilities(all of whom had been referred to NTA by the Department ofCorrections) came out with somewhat better results: 50 per centof 165 referees were failures after six months. If"escape" was removed as a category of failure, then thefailure rate was only 25 per cent." Programs connected withthe criminal-justice system usually have the spur of return tojail if the patient fails, of course. The Office of Economic Opportunity enlisted a contractor to doa thorough evaluation of eight OEO-funded projects; but thedata-collection problems were great, and it was impossible forthe evaluators to reach any meaningful judgments." OEO isnow trying again, but the results have not yet been published. In general, the conclusions for these programs are about thesame as for the therapeutic communities and the detoxificationcenters: They help a few people a great deal and more people tosome degree, but the failure rates are very high. They have aconsiderable cost advantage over the therapeutic communitiesbecause they do not need extensive and expensive residentialfacilities. Their over-all, long-term contribution to the drugproblem is in some doubt. The major imponderable is the extent towhich changes in the addict population may invalidate pessimisticconclusions drawn from past experience. Addiction may have spreadto people who are not so intractable as the groups on which theseconclusions are based. They might become abstinent with the helpthat can be given by the outpatient facilities. Most important is whether these programs have an impact on thejuvenile who is dabbling in the drug scene but has not yet becomea confirmed addict. This is the target population for many suchprograms and would seem to be the area in which they have themost to offer. At present, the answer is an enigma. Some of theconclusions reached and questions raised in 1969 by Judith Calofof New York's Community Service Society are still valid: Voluntary treatment agencies have always emerged in response to the neglected needs of segments of the community. In the addiction field, there are still grave unmet needs. For one, the number of school-aged addicts has been growing, while voluntary and public agencies continue to concentrate on the older addict. Are special techniques needed for reaching and treating this young age group?... A major unmet need is addiction prevention. Do voluntary treatment agencies have a major contribution to make in prevention? Could their coordinated efforts succeed in identifying and reaching those most vulnerable to this disease? The limited success of the voluntary treatment agencies should not be interpreted as failure, but should be viewed in long-range terms. Pioneering means trial and error, with inevitable setbacks and frustrations, but it reveals the assessment of a situation. Voluntary treatment agencies have already demonstrated the enormity of the addiction problem and the immense difficulties in rehabilitating heroin addicts. The results of their dedicated efforts should serve as a learning against unrealistic expectations. Their experience can prevent catastrophe in a massive government program, and refusal of the public to allocate further funds for treatment .43 METHADONE MAINTENANCE CHARACTERISTICS OF METHADONE Methadone is a synthetic opiate. For purposes of understandingits use in the treatment of heroin addiction, its most importantcharacteristics are as follows: It is a substitute for heroin, in that it will prevent an addict from having or feeling withdrawal symptoms if he replaces his usual drug with methadone. Unlike the heroin available in this country, it is effective when taken orally. If the dosage is sufficient (the exact level depending on the addict's level of tolerance to heroin), the methadone will block the action of heroin, so that the addict receives no euphoric effect if he tries heroin. At lower doses, methadone will not block this effect of heroin, but it will suppress the "narcotic hunger"-described by Dr. Jerome Jaffe as a "felt sense of physical abnormality"-that an addict feels without his drug. The effective action of methadone is about 24 hours, as opposed to about six hours for heroin. Thus, it needs to be taken only once a day. When taken orally in constant doses, methadone does not produce a euphoric effect. To date, no significant deleterious side effects have been reported. THE PROGRAMS Starting with a 1964 experimental project sponsored by the NewYork Health Research Council and conducted by Drs. Vincent Doleand Marie Nyswander, programs that maintain addicts on methadonehave grown steadily. Despite some differences in theory andpractice, in all maintenance programs an addict receives a doseof methadone every day, either at a clinic or, if he has provedhimself, at home. He may also receive ancillary services-group orindividual therapy, individual or family counseling, vocationalrehabilitation, employment services, use of social centerfacilities, and medical and dental care. The extent and qualityof these varies greatly, but almost all programs providesomething. There are wide variations in the modes of operation ofmethadone programs." For example, a study of 47 methadoneprograms found that 27 programs used ex-addicts on the staff,while the others did not; 6 had inpatients only, 19 hadoutpatients only, and the rest had both. Only 8 of the 47provided chemotherapy without any group work. Table 3-1 lists the types of service offered by the 47programs in terms of the numbers of programs and the per cent ofthe total sample offering the service. TABLE 3-1 TYPES OF SERVICE OFFERED BYMETHADONE-MAINTENANCE PROGRAMS Service Number Per cent Detoxification Methadone 30 64 Tranquilizers and other drugs 6 13 Drug freed 4 8.5 Chemotherapy Methadone maintenance 47 100 Cyclazocine maintenance 8 17 Naloxone and other 3 6 Group work Therapeutic community 8 17 Group psychotherapy 36 76 Group discussions and programs 9 19 Tndividual psychotherapy 35 74 Medical-surgical treatment 23 49 Educational classes 8 17 Religious counseling 5 1.1 Work assignments 3 6 Rehabilitation services Vocational rehabilitation 20 42 Employment counseling 24 51 Social and family services 16 34 Occupational therapy 10 21 Recreational programs 8 17 Prevention 6 13 Research 17 36 a Drug-free detoxification is not a feature of the methadoneprogram. More detailed statements obtained from 25 of the methadonemaintenance programs showed that 14 favored narcotic-freerehabilitation as the ultimate goal, and only 11 favoredprolonged maintenance. Also, 18 preferred high-doseadministration (50-180 mg.) and 7 preferred low-dose (20-40 mg.).Not surprisingly, there was a correlation between preference fornarcotic free rehabilitation and preference for low doses. The precise number of persons now in methadone-maintenanceprograms is not known. At the Third National Methadone Conferencein November, 1970, Dr. Vincent Dole estimated that there werethen about 9,000 people on methadone maintenance in the UnitedStates and Canada .4' This estimate was based on a variety of inputs, including discussions with the manufacturer ofmethadone. It was in rough accord with the numbers of patientsrecorded in publications by the major projects and was probablyfairly accurate. Growth has been quite rapid, however. The NIMH treatmentdirectory listed 44 methadone-maintenance programs as of 1968-69,and many of these had small patient populations. As of April,1970, 64 programs had acquired or applied for Food and DrugAgency authority to use methadone for maintenance, although notall of them were in operation. At that time, the best estimateswere that between 50 and 60 programs were actuallyoperating." By June 1, 1971, the FDA had given permission to257 sponsors representing 277 methadone-treatment programs, someof which included several clinics. Of these, 185 programs were ininstitutions and the other 92 were private. The number ofprograms now in actual operation is not known." The FDA estimated, in June, 1971, that there were 20,000 to30,000 people on methadone maintenance at that time. Dr. BertramBrown Director of NIMH, testified at the same hearings that20,000 was probably the best estimate." As of December,1971, the FDA has doubled its estimate again. It now believes,according to Dr. Elmer Gardner, that there are between 40,000 and50,000 patients on methadone maintenance. Costs. Costs of methadone programs are hard to determine. Manyfigures are given, but it is never clear whether all costs (suchas plant and equipment or the value of volunteer help, forexample) are included. As a rough estimate, the cost of theprograms is between $500 and $2,500 per patient per year,depending on a number of factors. Methadone itself is not an important cost, since it can beprocured for about $.05 per day per addict. Controlling and administering the methadone is a significantcost, since it requires a staff. Determination and preparation of individual doses aresignificant, since determination requires physician time,preparation requires careful work by a pharmacist, and keepingtrack of individual doses takes staff time. Whether individualdoses are more effective therapeutically than standardized onesis an open question. All programs use urinalysis to test the patients' use ofheroin and other drugs. This costs $1 to $3 per test, dependingon the frequency, the laboratory, and the number of samplestested. Obviously, this is a significant cost element: Testingthree times a week at $3 per test would cost $468 per addict peryear. There are some ways of avoiding these costs through randomtesting, which is effective for some purposes. There may also becost-reduction possibilities for the tests themselves. The method by which an addict is initially switched fromheroin to methadone makes a large cost difference. If the addictis switched to methadone as an inpatient in a hospital (as wasdone for most of the patients in the Dole-Nyswander project, forexample), each addict admitted may cause $200 to $1,400 forinitial hospital expenses. Physical plant and facilities obviously make a difference incosts. Legal requirements are important. To the extent thatjurisdictional law requires that elaborate information beobtained and records kept, the costs are increased. Any research component adds expenses. The level of ancillary services is important. An effort tosupply group therapy, counseling, vocational or educationalrehabilitation, and other services-all of which require highstaff-to-patient ratios-will increase expenses substantially.Many of the public statements on costs regard this as the majorvariable involved. While most programs pay lip service to theneed for these services, careful evaluation of the extent towhich they influence the success or failure of the program isonly beginning. The rate of expansion of a program makes a significantdifference in average cost. An addict will probably require moreservices and control in his first year than later, when he isstabilized in a new life-style, so that a new or expandingprogram should show higher average costs than a static one. These variations account for the wide range of the basic costestimate. At present, $500 per addict per year seems about theminimum for a program that uses standardized dosages, outpatientinduction, fairly cheap urinalysis, and no services except thosesupplied by the addicts themselves. A reasonable estimate for aprogram with individual doses, some inpatient induction, frequentand expensive urinalysis, and many ancillary services is $2,000,although, of course, the cost for each patient stabilized in theprogram would be much lower." This figure could be raisedalmost without limit by the provision of more extras, of course,a phenomenon sometimes referred to by program operators as thedanger of "Taj Mahalism"---providing very elaborateservices to a few addicts rather than minimal effective servicesto many. Population Characteristics. Because of regionaldifferences the demographic characteristics of the over-allmethadone population are hard to describe. The patient populationof the Methadone Maintenance Treatment Program (MMTP) in New YorkCity, for example, is about 40 per cent black, 19 per cent PuertoRican, 40 per cent white, and I per cent Oriental. This breakdowncompares with the ethnic breakdown of the New York City NarcoticRegistry, which, as of December, 1969, was 47 per cent black, 27per cent Puerto Rican, and 26 per cent white." The SantaClara County (California) Methadone Program reports a patientpopulation of 55 per cent Mexican American, 6 per cent black, and39 per cent white." Other programs also exhibit ethnicbreakdowns' indicating that methadone maintenance appeals tominority-group addicts. The Washington, D.C., program, forexample, is 95 per cent black." The ethnic composition ofany methadone project is probably not too dissimilar from that ofthe local addict population of comparable age, although it may beskewed slightly toward overrepresentation of white addicts. Methadone has not had similar success in attracting youngeraddicts. Although the minimal age required for admission to mostprograms is 18, the mean age of the patient population is usuallybetween 30 and 35. In addition, the average length of addictionfor the patient population on methadone is 10 to 15 years,although most programs require only two years, and some nowrequire only one. There are reports, however, that the mean andmedian ages and length of addiction are now falling."Unfortunately, no treatment method has been developed thatattracts the majority of young addicts. Most members of thisgroup do not seem to be sufficiently disenchanted with either thelife-style or the effect of heroin to seek treatment of any type,or are as yet unconvinced that they are truly hooked. Results. Most methadone programs have made an effort toevaluate their effect on the patients. The criteria employedusually follow those developed to evaluate the MMTP in New York-remaining in the program, employment, freedom from drug use,decrease in crime, and willingness to accept help for personalproblems. The New York program is not only the largest but also the bestevaluated over time. Consistently, the evaluation committee,headed by Dr. Frances Gearing of Columbia University's School ofPublic Health and Administrative Medicine, has found the programsuccessful with a large percentage of the addicts. The findingsof the evaluation, as of October 31, 1970, are as follows: " Population. Most of the patients had been selected undercriteria that required them to be 20 years old, have a five-yearhistory of addiction, display no serious psychiatric problems,and have no addiction to drugs other than heroin. Although in1969 the requirements were reduced to age 18 and two years ofaddiction, this had little impact on the age distribution of thetreatment population because of the waiting time. The mean age atadmission remained about 33-higher than the 27.9 mean age of theaddicts on the New York City Register. Whites had a mean age atadmission of 31, blacks of 35, and Puerto Ricans of a year inbetween. Retention. A total of 4,376 patients had been admitted sincethe inception of the program in 1964. Of this group, 3,485 (80per cent) were still in treatment at the time of evaluation. Theothers had left voluntarily or had been discharged because ofexcessive use of other drugs or alcohol, death, incarceration, orantisocial or generally uncooperative behavior. Of the 2,424originally inducted on an inpatient basis, 74 per cent were stillenrolled. Of the 1,952 who had been admitted directly asoutpatients, 88 per cent were still enrolled. (This group had notbeen in treatment as long as the others, since outpatientinduction was started only in 1968. They were also a selectedgroup.) Special studies of three 500-patient cohorts have been done.One of those covered the cohort for 21 months, one for 33 months,and one for 48 months. About 23 per cent of each cohort had beendischarged by 21 months after admission, 34 per cent of twocohorts by 33 months after admission, and 42 per cent of onecohort by 48 months after admission. As is shown by the cohort studies, the commonly cited80per-cent success rate is misleading. The statistic includes alarge number of addicts who have been in the program for arelatively short period and does not fully reflect the attritionover time. For example, the total admissions, as of October 31,1969, were 2,325. As of October 31, 1970, they were 4,376. Thus,the data for the latter date included 2,051 patients who had beenin treatment for less than one year, and half or more of thesemay have been in for six months or less. (The cohort studies showthat the attrition rate during the first six months is about 10per cent, and over the first year it is about 16 per cent.)Maintenance of the over-all average of 20 per cent attrition istherefore dependent on continuing expansion of the program. There is another side of this argument, however. MMTP hasfairly strict standards for behavior and drops people forviolation of those standards; a large proportion of those listedas failures were therefore dropped by the program (theythemselves did not want to leave). A study of 138 terminationsfound the following causes: 55 Involuntary terminations 81.2% Uncooperative behavior 17.4% Antisocial behavior 7.2 Unreachable psychopathology 7.2 Drug abuse 8.7 Alcohol abuse 10.9 Arrested 15.2 Medical disability 2.2 Death 12.3 Voluntary terminations 15.9 Voluntary discharge 14.5 Loss of contact 1.4 Administrative terminations and unknown 2.9 Administrative .7 No information 2.2 One can question whether a methadone program should terminatepatients for all of the causes given. Even if the patient hasserious problems remaining, the program may have substantialbeneficial effects. One can argue that the only patients whoshould be counted as failures are those who drop out voluntarily.If this criterion is applied to the 500-patient cohort that had a42 per cent attrition rate over 48 months, and if we assume thatonly 15.9 per cent of these dropouts were voluntary, then only 34of 210 dropouts would be counted as failures. By this standard,the MMTP may claim that it has a ' t least partial success with93.2 per cent of all addicts who are admitted to the program. Again, this is not totally satisfactory, for several reasons.For example, it is difficult to know how to categorize those whodie or are discharged for medical disability. Some of thevoluntary patients moved to programs in other cities. Somepatients who were expelled might have dropped out voluntarily ata later time. Thus, 93.2 per cent may be unrealistically high.But it does show that a 42 per cent termination rate over fouryears probably understates the value of the program somewhat. To sum up, if one adopts MMTP's own standards on the retainingpower of methadone, the common figure of 80 per cent success errson the high side. If, however, one argues that those standardsare too stringent, excluding too many patients who are receivingworthwhile benefits from the program, the 80-percent figure maybe too low. (it should be noted that the same problems exist inassessing the effects of nomnethadone programs. They are justmore obvious in this context.) Employment. For the group that stayed in the program,employment rose markedly. About 26 per cent of the men wereemployed when they entered. This figure rose sharply to about 57per cent and 66 per cent for those in the program six and twelvemonths, respectively, and then rose more slowly to about 78 percent for those in the program for 48 months. Because ofattrition, this percentage rise represents a much smallerabsolute rise in employment. Out of a cohort of 100 entrants, 26would be employed. After four years, 58 members of the cohortwould still be in the program, of whom 45 (78 per cent of the 58)would be employed. So, out of any group of 100 entrants, only 45would be employed after four years. Criminal Activity. For the group that stayed in the program,criminal activity apparently decreased. In the three years beforeadmission to the program, the methadone patients had 120 arrestsand 48 incarcerations for every 100 man-years. In the four yearsafter admission, they had 4.5 arrests and 1.0 incarcerations. A group of detoxification patients studied for purposes ofcomparison showed 131 arrests and 52 incarcerations per 100person years in the three years prior to detoxification and 134arrests and 63 incarcerations for the four years afterdetoxification. A separate study of 912 patients admitted over afour-and-a-half year period showed a 90-per-cent drop in criminalconvictions." Drug Use. While most patients test the methadone blockage afew times while on methadone, none had returned to regular heroinusage while still in the program. About 8 per cent have problemswith chronic alcohol use and 10 per cent with continuing use ofamphetamines, cocaine, and barbiturates. Fate of Dischargees. A Gearing Committee study of 281expatients six months after discharge had the following findings: Left Discharged Total voluntarily for cause discharge Arrested or jailed 10% 26% 23% Dead 2 2 2 Detoxification 13 20 19 Other R. program 11 4 7 Medical or psychiatric facility - 3 2 Private M.D. 2 2 2 Moved 7 1 1 Readmitted 33 6 11 No reports found 22 36 33 Total sample 100 (45) 100 (236) 100 (281) Total N (90) (472) (562) Two other studies have produced similar results. Previous evaluations of MMTP have been criticized on theground that the original selection criteria (since eased, as wehave noted) picked only those addicts most amenable to treatment.Another criticism is that the ambulatory induction program hasrequired that the applicant have either a job or a family. Thismay also select the strongest candidates. Finally, the fact thatthere is a waiting period may also operate to select patients whoare most amenable to treatment. The Gearing evaluations through1970 do not include any analysis of attrition rates from thewaiting list or any comparison of those who enter treatment andthose who drop off the list. These criticisms seem at first glance to have weight. Thereare several compelling arguments that they do not, however. Dr.Carl Chambers, Research Director of the New York NarcoticsAddiction Control Commission, headed a study that utilizedsingle-factor analysis to compare patients who stayed in theprogram and patients who did not. He found that continuing in theprogram was not related in any statistically significant way tothe patient's sex, marital status, multiple abuse of drugs, abuseof alcohol, ethnicity, education, age at onset of heroin use, ornumber of prior treatments. Continuing in treatment wasmarginally related to conviction history, in that there was asignificant difference between those with three or moreconvictions and those with two or fewer. It was related to thelength of abuse of narcotics, in that 90 per cent of those whohad abused five or fewer years and only 77 per cent of those whohad abused more than five years remained in treatment for twoyears. There was a relationship to the employment status of thepatient at time of admission-88 per cent of those who wereemployed and 77 per cent of those who were not remained intreatment for at least two years. The item with the greatestpredictive power was the number of convictions-the fewer thenumber, the greater the chance of remaining in treatment.Combinations of these characteristics do have some predictivevalue. For example, the Chambers study concluded that a patientwith seven or more convictions who had no marketable employmentskills was least likely to remain in treatment two years (55.6per cent of these did remain), and that a patient with fewconvictions and no multiple drug or alcohol problems was mostlikely to remain in treatment (95.8 per cent)." In short, the original admission criteria may exercise someinfluence on the success rate as measured by retention, but itseems to be minimal. Some admissions criteria, such as the fouryears of addiction, would operate against success. Others, suchas freedom from severe psychiatric problems (which would probablyresult in a higher percentage of employed addicts than the numberin the population at large), would operate in favor of success.But none seems to be very important. Some special studies indicate that problem groups of patientsdo respond to methadone, although not quite so well as the normalgroups. Of 269 patients on probation or parole-a group that wouldbe especially difficult to work with-72 per cent remained in theprogram in good standing." Even more convincing is the factthat the Dole-Nyswander results have been replicated by reputableresearchers in other places. At the National MethadoneConference, sponsored by NIMH and the National Association toPrevent Addiction to Narcotics, a succession of researchers fromdifferent parts of the country recited results comparable to,though usually not quite so good as, those achieved by the DoleNyswander program. Results have been generally good no matter howfew the restrictions placed on patient characteristics." Interpreting these reports is complicated by the fact that,while the basic criteria remain fairly constant, there arevariations in the exact methodology of evaluation-in the extentto which information from addicts is verified independently, inthe frequency of urinalysis, in the relations between the policeand the program (in some places, for example, the police maycooperate with methadone treatment by not prosecuting addicts inthe program except for very serious crimes), in the samplingtechniques used, and in the definition of retention. In addition,some programs use outside evaluation teams, and some rely oninternal information systems or on special studies done by theirown staff. At present, no two major programs have been thoroughlyevaluated by the same team of outside experts, although theColumbia group that evaluated the MMTP will probably alsoevaluate the Narcotics Treatment Agency in Washington, D.C. Nevertheless, the basic consistency of results is quiteimpressive. Although we may not yet know exactly how goodmethadone maintenance is, its essential efficacy is as wellestablished as anything in this field can be. It is now generallyacknowledged that methadone is medically safe, acceptable to manyheroin addicts, effective, and administratively feasible forlarge-scale programs." Clearly, methadone should not beregarded as a miracle cure. The majority of program operatorsbelieve that most addicts on methadone try heroin a few times,partly out of curiosity as to whether the block works, partlybecause of the desire for euphoria. Judging a program in terms ofwhether an addict ever relapsed might well make it appear to be afailure. Methadone addiction avoids the large swings anddemanding schedule of heroin addiction, thus making it easier foran addict to hold a job and support his family, but it is likelyto take months for an addict to revamp his life-style into a newpattern. Underlying psychological problems remain, except forthose caused by the demands of heroin addiction itself. Addictstend to abuse some other drugs, such as amphetamines and alcohol,to about the same degree that they abused them while onheroin." From society's point of view, the most important of all theevaluation criteria is remaining in the program. An addict who isusing methadone is not continuing either extensive heroin use orheroin-seeking behavior, and his criminal behavior will probablybe reduced because he does not need the money to purchase thedrug. He is not spreading hepatitis contracted from infectedneedles by selling his blood to hospitals." He is not tryingto sell heroin because he needs money for a fix. He is nothanging out in a shooting gallery or on the street serving as arole model for the neighborhood adolescents. And he is nothelping to provide the mass market for heroin that makesinvestment in its importation and distribution economicallyattractive despite the risks. It should be emphasized, however,that the addict will still have the criminal skills he haslearned and may choose to use them to support himself. In suchcase, the decrease in crime would be the difference between theamount needed to support the habit and the addict and that neededto support the addict alone. Some patients may continue to commitcrimes at the same level as before, using the extra money toraise their standard of living or to build up a nest egg.Criminal activity, according to several experts, declines slowly,over a period of a year or more. BASIS FOR THE SUCCESS OF METHADONE The expansion of methadone maintenance has been based onempirical evidence of its utility, not upon any solidunderstanding of the pharmacological reasons for its success.While, obviously, this success is due to its nature as an opiateand long-acting substitute for heroin, an understanding of thenature of addiction itself is missing. It is not known whethermethadone is more effective than other modalities becauseaddiction has physiological components that only another opiatecan offset or because of factors rooted in the psychology ofaddiction. The issues concerning possible physiological components ofaddiction can be stated succinctly: Are some persons physiologically vulnerable to heroin, in thesense that it causes physical changes in them that it does notcause in "normal" people? Are there inherent physiological factors that make some peopleseek heroin-is there some pre-existing felt physical need thatdoes not exist in most people? Does taking heroin cause a permanent or long-termphysiological change in the addict that makes him crave the drugafter he becomes abstinent? Does heroin addiction create a physiological change that makesan ex-addict particularly vulnerable to stress after he becomesabstinent? There is no clear answer to any of these questions. Yet, mostscientists would be inclined to think that the answers to atleast the first two are "No." Dr. Vincent Dole, in thepast, has hypothesized that narcotics addicts may have aninherent neurological vulnerability to the drug, but recently heseems to have modified his view." The second two questionsare the subject of debate among experts. Dr. Dole does seem tothink that opiate addiction causes a metabolic change in theaddict that, in turn, causes drug hunger. Whether he thinks thischange is permanent or only fairly long lasting (i.e., wellbeyond the period during which overt withdrawal symptoms arepresent) is, however, unclear." In either event, givingmethadone to an addict, iti Dr. Dole's view, simply corrects themetabolic imbalance that has already been caused by his heroinaddiction. In this sense, he believes the analogy betweenmethadone for an addict and insulin for a diabetic is valid.Others are skeptical." Dr. William Martin has hypothesized a more elaboratephysiological model. In his view, an opiate such as heroin ormethadone causes a metabolic change that makes the user morevulnerable to stress." An addict may become abstinent, butstress will trigger a physiological reaction that makes him cravethe drug again. Furthermore, this effect may increase withcontinued or increased doses of opiates. Thus, when an addict ismaintained on a methadone dosage higher than his prior heroindosage, as is true in many programs, the underlying physicalproblem is aggravated. This, in turn, makes it even less likelythat he will ever be able to become totally abstinent. Dr. Martinis uncertain whether the opiate-induced change is reversible. Which, if any, of these theories are correct is obviously animportant question. A finding that there is an inherentneurological vulnerability or that addiction causes anirreversible or long-term metabolic change that induces drughunger, either inherently or as a response to stress, would haveimportant consequences for law enforcement, treatment, education,and research. To reiterate, the metabolic theories are far from proved atpresent. They may turn out to be wrong, or it may develop thatthere is a physiological change that is reversible over a periodof months or years. Such a finding would pose very difficultpublic policy problems, because methadone might be prolonging andaggravating a physical condition that could be reversed if anaddict could endure abstinence from opiates for some period that,in practice, most addicts cannot endure. There are other hypotheses about the reasons for the successof methadone maintenance that are alternatives or supplements tothe metabolic theory. Some of these are as follows: To some extent, abstinence symptoms may be a conditioned response to environmental factors. In turn, self-administration of heroin is a conditioned response to the existence of these symptoms, in that for the addict it has been a successful way of eliminating them in the past. (There are reports, for example, of men who have been in prison and "clean" for years experiencing withdrawal symptoms upon return home.) By blocking the effect of heroin, methadone extinguishes the reinforcement for its self-administration .61 Heroin has a short duration of action and involves wideemotional swings, from euphoria after administration to thethreshold of withdrawal six hours later. The rapidity of thiscycle forces a totally drug-oriented existence on the addict. Ifhe does not concentrate on procurement of the drug to theexclusion of virtually everything else, he is not going to haveit when he needs it. Methadone, with its twenty-four-hour actionand gentler swings, allows the addict the luxury of thinkingabout something besides drugs. Methadone programs, with or without supporting services, givesthe addict a good deal of psychological support. The staff isconcerned with his well-being and is giving him a medicine inwhich they have obvious confidence. Medical practice has longknown that this placebo effect is important. Heroin addiction imposes a structure and purpose on theaddict's life-getting the drug. Daily visits to the methadoneclinic may provide comparable structure. The life-style and personal associations of an addict providegreat pressures to relapse after a period of abstinence. Anabstinence program located where the addict will not live in thefuture (e.g., Lexington) does nothing about this problem, becausethe addict does not build up an alternative life-style andalternative associations and will probably return to the old onesafter release. Methadone protects him from heroin while he buildsnew patterns of behavior and loses touch with the addict culture.In this view, after new patterns have been developed, it might bepossible to withdraw the addict from methadone because hisaltered environment would not put pressure on him to relapse. There is some evidence that a substantial number of addicts-perhaps as many as one-third-"mature out" of addictionwhen they reach their 30's and 40's. Some of the patients who dowell on methadone may come from this group." Studies have indicated that monitoring an ex-addict is animportant factor in keeping him off drugs." The crucialingredient of methadone treatment may be not the methadone per sebut the urinalysis. Addiction to methadone is necessary only toforce the patient to come to the program. At present, one can do little but note these differences; onecannot know how these vary in validity for different addicts orgroups, or, in some cases, even how they could be researched. ISSUES CONCERNING METHADONE Dosage Level. The first question about dosage levels ishow much methadone should be given to an addict. Most people havea general preference for administering the least amountconsistent with success. This is based partly on moral feelingsthat one should give as little of an opiate as possible andpartly on a desire to minimize unknown side effects or metabolicdisruption. The problem is to determine this minimum level. The general rule of thumb is that a daily dose of 100 mg. willblock any effect of heroin for almost all addicts. Most programsadminister a maximum of 180 mg., although a few may go as high as300 mg. in selected cases. A program that administers 80 mg. ormore is probably aiming at a blockage dose. A lower dose will notblock the effect of heroin-an addict can achieve euphoria if hetries. However, the lower dose will block the narcotic hunger andthus remove some of the pressure for heroin use. For mostaddicts, a dosage of 40 or 50 mg. is enough to eliminate thiscraving, but an even lower dose may be enough if the addict has alight habit. In the early methadone programs, it was apparently assumedthat any addict who found that he could break the block would doso, and that the higher, blocking doses were necessary. In thelast few years, some experiments have been made comparing theefficacy of high and low doses. Dr. Avram. Goldstein, at theSanta Clara County Program, maintained three groups of randomlychosen addicts on blind doses of 30, 50, and 100 mg.,respectively. (Blind dosage is not discussed with the patient,who is not aware of how much he is receiving.) The addictsreceiving the lower doses did tend to use heroin more oftenduring the first month, but by the third month in treatment therewas no significant difference among the groups in either heroinuse or retention in the program." Dr. Jerome Jaffe, of theIllinois Drug Abuse Program, has done similar research withroughly equivalent results. For the first month or so, thehighdose group has a higher retention rate; thereafter, the twogroups do about the same in terms of retention, employment, andarrest rates. Dr. William Weiland came to the same con clusionsafter similar experiments in Philadelphia with groups of 52patients on 50 mg. of methadone and 52 on 100 mg. for a period of60 days." There are few dose-related side effects. These results suggest that suppression of the narcotics hungermay be more important than the blockage effect, at least formotivated addicts. The results are only suggestive, however,because the time spans involved in these experiments are limited,and it is not known what the results of a more extendedexperiment might be. The results might also be different if thepopulations involved were younger or less motivated. Drs. Doleand Goldstein, among others, regard these experiments as veryinteresting. The low dose does mean that some addicts will dropout in the initial stages who might have been retained with ahigher dose. In addition, it exposes the patient to the medicalrisk of relapse. Given these known costs and risks, and given thelack of any solid reason to believe that a 100-mg. dose is insome way more harmful than 50 mg., some doctors are reluctant touse a low dose. The major reason for doing so is that itminimizes leakage into the community from patients who take theirmethadone home, minimizes side effects, and safeguards somewhatagainst unknown side effects or long-term effects. Some programs use doses even smaller than those describedabove, but none has been scientifically evaluated. Colonel HassanJeru Ahmed, of the Blackman's Development Center in Washington,D.C., claims to give a number of addicts as little as 5 mg. perday with good success. Without controlled experiments, it is hardto know whether his opinion is accurate. Theoretically, such adose might suppress the hunger in an addict with a very lowhabit, or there might be some placebo effect involved. SinceColonel Hassan's aim is abstinence rather than maintenance, thismight also be a method of slow detoxification. A second issue about dosage involves expense. Most programshave assumed that the specific dose should be tailored to theindividual addict and therefore give doses of anywhere from 25mg. to 180 mg., depending on the individual. From the standpointof administrative efficiency, this is costly. To work with a fewstandardized doses would allow programs to treat more addictswith the same expenditure. Dr. Goldstein has done an experimentto determine whether the individualized dose is really moreeffective and has concluded that it is not." To test this,he used a blind dosage procedure. (This procedure not only isnecessary for research on dosage but also has substantivebenefits as well. The most important of these may be that the"dosage game" is part of the addict's life style of"conning," and eliminating it contributes to over-allrehabilitation.) An initial dose of 30 mg., increased by 10 mg. aday until final stabilization at 100 mg., was equally effectivefor all patients. Ancillary Services. Most program operators declare thatancillary services are a vital part of methadone treatment. Groupand individual therapy, job training, job placement, familycounseling, medical and dental care, and education are allregarded as crucial to the process of helping addicts make theadjustment to a new life-style once they have broken the heroinhabit. MMTP, for example, provides extensive services, which isone reason the total cost is estimated at about $2,000 per yearper patient. (The cost for each patient who has finished theinduction stage is about $1,000 per year.) In its evaluationreports on MMTP, the Gearing Committee always emphasizes theimportance of services." Dr. Jaffe, whose Illinois DrugAbuse Program also offers services, agrees. In particular, hebelieves that the techniques and group procedures developed intherapeutic communities are helpful in stabilizing addicts onmethadone because they create an environment in which patientsnot only can be relieved of narcotics hunger but also can beginto develop attitudes that may be useful to them in achievingsocial rehabilitation. There are some programs that operate with a minimum of extras,however, and their success rate does not seem markedly lower thanthe others'. In New Orleans, most addicts are treated in privateclinics and pay about $10 per week." The program has limitedability to finance additional facilities. The Santa Clara CountyProgram, which also operates at a cost of about $10 per addictper week, is equally limited in its services." About 10 percent of the patients receive psychiatric help outside theprogram, and there is some vocational counseling. There is alsosome group work by the patients themselves without professionalinvolvement. Since the initial retention rate of the Santa ClaraCounty Program is relatively close to that of the MMTP,additional ancillary services might contribute little as comparedwith their costs. (An important aim of the program has been tostudy this question.) The Santa Clara Program did include avocational counselor, which many observers feel is the mostimportant single service that can be offered. It also emphasizespeer-group therapy as a key to rehabilitation." Drs. Jaffeand Dole have experimented with giving methadone without servicesto people on waiting lists. Preliminary results from MMTP aregood." Although one could easily find widespread agreement thatancillary services would be clearly desirable if they were free,one seldom finds any explicit analysis of the cost/benefitaspects of the issue. The key fact is that, as long as the supplyof addicts holds out, a minimal program can treat many morepatients than an elaborate one at any given level of expenditure.A program costing $500 per year per addict, with a retention rateof only 50 per cent, can treat more people than a program costing$2,000, with an 85-per-cent success rate. With $1 million, forexample, the cheaper program could treat 2,000 addicts for a yearand would retain half of them. The more expensive one could treatonly 500 addicts, even though it would retain 425 of them. Theeconomic advantages of the cheaper program are even greater whenthe comparative outputs are analyzed over time. Still, assuming alimited budget and an unlimited supply of addicts (and, atpresent, almost all methadone programs have waiting lists) , eachtype of program will be losing its failures and retaining itssuccesses. After some period, each would have a success rate of100 per cent, because only the successes would remain; but the$500 program would be maintaining four times as many addicts forthe same amount of money. This analysis holds even for gross differences in successrates. Since, as New Orleans and Santa Clara show, the actualdifferences may be limited, or even nonexistent, the case for thecheaper program is even stronger. Any city with a large addictionproblem and limited funds should probably choose a methadoneprogram with minimal services rather than full ones. Theprincipal argument against this conclusion is that services mightmake a crucial difference for the hard-core addicts, and thatthis is the population that causes most of the crime. But, whileit is true that addicts with long criminal records are lesssuccessful on methadone than are others, it has not yet beenproved that the services make a crucial difference for thisgroup. In addition, the proposition that society should condemnfour treatable people to addiction in order to treat one otheraddict who is causing more trouble is a hard moral position todefend. It might be better to put the hard-core addict on heroinmaintenance and treat the others with methadone. Another argument sometimes used in support of extensiveservices is that society should spend the money necessary to givefull treatment to all addicts, thus obviating the whole questionand avoiding the need for moral choices. In the practical world,however, everyone knows that the cities are in financial troubleand have tremendous demands on their limited resources. It isneither possible nor desirable to give narcotics addicts a priorclaim to limited public resources that might otherwise be spenton education, health, welfare, or countless other pressing areas.The best model may be one in which the patients are encouraged todevelop their own services, with the expensive ancillary servicestargeted on the hard-core. Outpatient Induction. The MMTP originally inductedpatients into the methadone program by putting them in thehospital for a week or two during the transition from heroin tomethadone. Because this is expensive, and because the limitednumber of available hospital beds imposes a constraint on thenumber admitted to the program, there has been much interest inambulatory induction. Starting in 1968, MMTP has adopted such aprogram for some of its patients. As of 1971, about 1,952 of its4,376 patients had been admitted in this fashion. Preliminarydata indicate that rates of attrition are almost identicalwhether patients are inducted as inpatients or outpatients. After24 months, about 72 per cent of each group remains." Thisfigure is not entirely valid because of the specialcharacteristics of the ambulatory group. Having a job or familywas a requirement for admission to the ambulatory component, and79 per cent of admittees were employed or in school. Whether apatient is employed, as we have seen, is a statisticallysignificant predictor of whether he will remain in treatment. Other programs have also used ambulatory admission withconsistently good results, and the effectiveness of this methodis no longer in doubt." Withdrawal. Eventual withdrawal from methadone ratherthan perpetual maintenance is regarded as a goal by drug experts-in part because of a moral feeling that people should not and donot need to be drug-dependent; in part because of a desire tofree the addict from his ties to the clinic; in part because ofthe wish to minimize any unknown long-term effects of opiates onthe human body. At present, it is uncertain whether withdrawal is possible. Ina study of 350 patients who withdrew from the MMTP, Dr. Dolefound that "narcotics hunger" returned in almost allindividuals immediately after they ceased taking the methadone,whether their withdrawal was voluntary or involuntary. Since thisis a somewhat special populations high proportion were treatmentfailures-the results are not conclusive, although they aresuggestive that withdrawal may be difficult. Dr. Dole has alsofound in blind experiments that a patient stabilized on methadoneand free from drug hunger may have a return of drug dreams if hismedication is withdrawn. He believes that, for most addicts,maintenance has to be a permanent way of life. It is important tonote, however, that the return of "narcotics hunger"does not automatically mean a return to heroin use; someindividuals are able to live with the hunger without returning todrugs. But hunger does make successful abstinence substantiallymore difficult."' Dr. Jaffe believes that withdrawal from methadone can besuccessfully accomplished, although his work in this area has notyet been extensive. In a study of 53 patients in activetreatment, he found that 29 per cent had voluntarily withdrawnfrom methadone but remained affiliated with the methadone units,either participating in group therapy or transferring totherapeutic communities or aftercare systems. Not all thoseobserved on withdrawal remained abstinent, although some patientsobserved after six months had been able to do so. Dr. Jaffe seemsto feel that continued therapy techniques are helpful inmaintaining abstinence." Dr. Avram Goldstein has done experiments showing that themethadone dosage can be reduced without discomfort to the patientif it is done slowly at a weekly reduction rate of no more than10 per cent. Withdrawal from a moderate methadone stabilizationprogram would then require about six months." But follow-upresults are not yet in. Although the results to date are ambiguous, it seems certainthat substantial experimentation with withdrawal from methadonewill be undertaken. Some black activists, in particular, arestrongly opposed to the concept of permanent maintenance and willaccept methadone programs in their communities only if they areseen as intermediate-term therapies with the ultimate goal ofabstinence. Dr. Beny Primm, of Addiction Research TreatmentCorporation in New York City, for example, told us that hisexplicit goal is to get everyone off methadone and into adrug-free state. Dr. Goldstein has also suggested that methadonetreatment should be thought of as "methadone temporarysupport rather than methadone maintenance, with its implicationof life-long medication." An addict could join the program,become stabilized on methadone, eventually taper off slowly andbecome drug-free, but be able to return to methadone if the urgeto take heroin became overwhelming." Ultimate determinationof the possibilities of withdrawal must await determination ofthe metabolic-change issue. Meanwhile, the only way to find outif withdrawal is possible is to try it. Since we do not know whymethadone works, there is no way of telling a priori. Someprograms have reported an unexpected phenomenon that might becalled "the 20-mg. barrier." The patient undergoingwithdrawal does well until the dose is reduced to about 20 mg. Atthis level, there is a sudden increase in physical complaints andheroin usage." What this means for permanent withdrawal is aquestion that needs study. Benefits to the Addict. Methadone maintenance issometimes criticized on the ground that it is society's way ofdealing with the addict crime problem without regard to theaddict himself. This view is especially strong among so-calledmilitant black groups. On the whole, however, the idea thatmethadone sacrifices the addict for the sake of society does notseem valid. Although many communities adopt methadone programs inan attempt to solve their crime problem, the program resultsshowing increased productivity and family stability of thepatients suggest that they themselves benefit from the changedlife-style and reduced crime as much as or more than thecommunity at large. Since most programs operate primarily on avoluntary basis, the patients themselves must prefer methadone tothe addicted life. Even when an addict is coerced into treatmentby law enforcement, simply staying in treatment is a vote againstthe former life-style. Finally, even if one were to concede the truth of thecriticism, the logical rejoinder would be "So what?"There is no good reason for society to tolerate crime simplybecause the criminal is a heroin addict when it can eliminate thecrime by forcing him to switch to being a methadone addict. It isnot as if one could choose between methadone and an equallyeffective but more expensive alternative: The other alternativesdo not appear to work so well. Even if they did, it would bedifficult to argue that addicts deserve priority in allocatingscarce public resources that could be devoted to the generalwelfare of the groups in society that furnish most of theaddicts. In general, to the extent that the criticism representsthe truth of the situation, its use as a criticism seems based onwishful thinking rather than sound analysis. Its proponents wishthere were another, equally effective treatment method or wishthat public resources were unlimited. If the metabolic theories of addiction should prove accurate,the issue will become more acute. Dr. William Martin, forexample, poses the issue as the "medical dilemma ofmethadone maintenance, namely, the creation or continuance of aserious medical disorder, physical dependence, in order todecrease antisocial behavior."" If this dilemma is areal one, all the choices would be unpleasant. The nation couldlegalize heroin or move to a massive system of heroinmaintenance, but this would pose exactly the same moral problemsas administering methadone. It could continue to keep heroinillegal and prosecute addicts for crimes committed to obtain itwhile refusing them methadone, but this seems both morally wrongand politically impossible. It could declare that addicts are notresponsible for crimes committed to obtain heroin because of thephysical duress involved. This would necessitate either heroin ormethadone maintenance, however, since no one can be given such alicense to steal without some counteraction by society. Despitethe problems stated by Dr. Martin, methadone seems the bestchoice. Methadone and the Law-Enforcement System. Some programoperators are strongly opposed to the development of closerelations between methadone maintenance and the law-enforcementsystem. In their view, a coercive system that forces an addict toaccept methadone as a condition for probation or parole is anintolerable violation of civil liberties. Others, with equallystrong opinions, disagree. They believe that the realistic choicelies between having the addict on methadone and having him injail, and that the authorities will not often impose a methadonerequirement on a man who would otherwise have been released. Inthis view, accepting treatment set by courts or parole boardsgives addicts an option that would not have been availableotherwise. All agree that participants in the methadone programshould avoid becoming informers for the law-enforcement system.Because of the need to maintain the confidential doctor-patientrelationship, patients should not be reported by the treatmentagency for violations of probation or parole. Methadone and Causes of Addiction. Addiction is oftenseen as a sociopsychological disorder, stemming from basicpersonality defects. In this view, it is useless and wrong totreat addiction by administering methadone without, at the sametime, treating the underlying disorder. A better way to approachthe problem is to deal with the basic pathology; when this isdone, freedom from drug use will follow naturally. As stated by aManhattan probation officer: My objection to the methadone program . . . is predicated on the observation that while the drug methadone removes the physical craving for the other opiates it nevertheless fails to combat in any way or deal with the various emotional or other difficulties that permitted the individual to initially become and remain involved with drugs. Since the drug problem has, so to speak, been eliminated, that basic problem has not been dealt with; that of the inadequate, ineffective person unable to cope with the reality of his situation. In essence, an aspect, the symptom, has been treated not the entire individual, with the result that they then frequently resort to other avenues of escape including amphetamines, barbiturates, wines, and liquor, or they begin to manifest serious forms of instability.88 Most proponents of methadone would readily agree thatmethadone per se does not cure any personality disordersthat might cause addiction. (Not all would; it is entirelypossible that the opiates constitute an effective treatment forcertain as yet undefined psychic states.") Those who doagree would respond to the basic criticism as follows: No consistent pathology has been found. No psychiatricdiagnosis can be shown to apply to all heroin addicts or even toa majority of them. Thus, while addicts tend to be depressive,they are not so depressive as neurotic nonaddicts. While someaddicts are schizophrenic, 80 per cent to 90 per cent are not.Some are psychopathic, but the great majority are not. In short,no satisfactory explanation of the psychological roots ofaddiction has been found, much less developed to the point whereit is operationally useful for treatment purposes's The view that an underlying pathology is responsible is anassumption rather than a proved fact. One can construct equallyplausible theories that experimentation is caused by exposure andnormal psychological processes, and addiction is caused byphysiological factors. Dr. Dole, for example, believes that theobserved common characteristics of addicts are simply thoseforced on them by the nature of the life-style required tomaintain a heroin habit. Other experts also believe that, evenfor addicts with marked problems, it is the addiction that causesthe problems rather than vice versa. Even granting the argument that pathology is at the root ofaddiction, it is easier to work on underlying causes with anaddict who is on methadone and free of drug hunger and the heroinlife-style. Again granting the argument that pathology is at the root ofaddiction, the success rates in attempting to cure suchpathologies-especially among the socioeconomic groups thatfurnish most of the addicts-are not very high. Thus, one has norealistic choice except to accept the second best solution ofmethadone maintenance, which has very great benefits for societyand for the addict, even though it is not a complete cure. Perhaps the best summary has been given by Dr. John Kramer,discussing the psychopathology of addiction generally, not justmethadone: It is generally conceded that traditional psychiatrictechniques have not been useful in the management of opiatedependence. In a psychoanalytic frame of reference symptoms areconsidered to be the behavioral or somatic representations of anunderlying intrapsychic conflict. Once the conflict is resolvedor reduced to manageable proportions, the symptoms will diminishor disappear. This conceptual model fails to account for two differentissues, either or both of which may play a role in people whoabuse drugs. First, though intrapsychic determinants may play apart in whether a person uses drugs, other circumstances such asdrug availability, subgroup attitudes, peer pressures, and plainchance are very often more important. In other words, in someindividuals, there may be no serious underlying conflicts, thoughthere may be considerable conflict with the community. Second,whatever the original determinants of drug use may be, thesymptom, dependency on drugs, can become so central an issue thatit, so to speak, assumes a life of its own, and even solving theunderlying conflicts may have no influence on the drug dependenceitself. An analogy may be drawn with a depressed person who in anattempt at suicide breaks his neck and becomes paraplegic.Psychotherapy may relieve his depression but will not restorefunction to his legs. Because drug use has been invested with such great importancein our society (an importance it did not always have) it isassumed that the intrapsychic events which cause, or contributeto it, are of equal magnitude. Hence the view, that since druguse potentially subjects the person to such serious consequences,the psychological problem he has must be equally big. Experiencewith drug users does not validate this view. Some do indeed haveclearly definable psychiatric problems, but many do not. Where itis sought, some subtle psychiatric defect can always be found, ashas been the case with addicts. Further investigation may clarifythis question. In the meantime a functional approach, handlingthe symptoms, educating and giving practical assistance as wellas offering psychotherapy in selected instances seem desirable.91 Multiple Drug Use. If a heroin addict is involved in the useof other drugs, methadone will do nothing about that use. Thereis evidence, however, that methadone patients do not increasetheir use of other drugs-a charge that has been made-althoughthey do tend to maintain it at about the same level. The SantaClara County Program found that, both before and after going onmethadone, about 20 per cent of the patients overused alcohol, 5to 10 per cent used amphetamines, 45 per cent used marijuana, and30 per cent used nothing. The only significant difference wasthat 20 per cent abused barbiturates before going on methadone,and only 6 per cent did so afterwards." Since barbituratescreate a dangerous addiction if used too much, this is animportant shift. We know of no other before-and-after study of drug use bypatients on methadone. A recent study of multiple drug use byheroin users, however," supports Dr. Goldstein's conclusionthat the use of other drugs does not increase. A sample of 422heroin users were asked whether they had used certain drugs morethan six times. The per cent who had done so were: marijuana-86per cent; cocaine-47 per cent; barbiturates-34 per cent; andamphetamines-33 per cent. (They were also questioned about otherdrugs, not recounted here.) In general, it had not been thoughtthat multiple use among heroin addicts was as high as this, andthere may have been some tendency to assume that multiple useamong methadone patients was a new pattern for them rather thanthe continuation of an old one. Leakage of Methadone. As more large methadone projects comeinto existence, it is reasonable to anticipate that some of themwill be lax in their control of methadone, permitting leakageinto the community at large. Several possible consequences ofsuch a development cause concern. First, there is a fear that thedrug will become available in an injectable form that is anacceptable, if not a totally satisfactory, euphoric substitutefor heroin. Secondly, the availability of even oral methadonewill create a new group of addicts. Thirdly, nonaddicts,particularly children, may take methadone and die. These fears have a sound factual basis. Indeed, methadone canalready be bought on the street in any major city, although it isunclear whether the source is diversion from the programs orindependent manufacture. The major concern is injectablemethadone. Many addicts regard it as a very good drug, and itcould result in a substantial addition to the present addictionproblem. This is probably a controllable problem, however.Methadone can be mixed with Tang or some other substance beforedispensation (as is true in almost all programs at present), sothat it is suitable for oral administration only. More important,the drug companies have developed a methadone disk that requiresa large volume of water for it to dissolve. This makes itdifficult, although not impossible, to inject." The second concern, the leakage of oral methadone, is morecrucial. The rapid expansion of methadone programs is highlyprobable. With this will inevitably come carelessness about staffand about control of methadone. If there is a market for thedrug, there will also be some corruption. It will be surprisingif there are not some major scandals involving the diversion ofmethadone from treatment programs. In some ways, leakage may not be very important. While thereare some methadone addicts who are not involved in treatmentprograms, oral methadone is not so euphoric as heroin, and fewcurrent heroin addicts would prefer it to heroin as aeuphorogenic. There is no reason to believe that methadone addiction isphysically more harmful than heroin addiction, and, if themethadone is pure, there is good reason to think it less harmful.There is substantial evidence to the effect that methadoneaddiction is psychologically less harmful than heroin addiction.In general, while a few addicts might make oral methadone theirdrug of choice, it is probable that the major market for illegalmethadone will consist of addicts who are on do-it-yourselfmethadone maintenance, who tide themselves over with methadonewhen they cannot get heroin, or who want the euphoric effects ofheroin only occasionally. In these cases, both society and theaddict are better off if they can get methadone to substitute forheroin. There is some possibility that methadone will make addicts ofpersons who would not otherwise have become addicted. Heroin hastwo major defects that may exert some deterrent effect onpotential experimenters: It often contains dangerous impurities;and it is not effective when taken orally. On the whole, however,it seems unlikely that these factors are very influential. Forthose who might not like to inject a drug, heroin can also besnorted. (This is, in fact, the usual method by which neophytestake the drug.) The impurities point might be valid, but it isdifficult to believe that anyone willing to get into the generallife-style of addiction is going to be deterred by the marginaladditional disadvantage of impure drugs. It does seem likely,however, that, as methadone becomes increasingly available, itwill be used as the drug of initiation by persons who wouldotherwise have tried heroin. More difficult to accept are the overdose deaths that arealready starting to occur-most poignantly, among children whofind and drink methadone-laden Tang. Recurrences could beprevented by insisting that methadone patients keep methadone ina locked box outside the refrigerator. The drug will keep a weekwithout refrigeration, so that this is perfectly feasible."Noninjectible methadone could also be given in a tablet form thatis too large and bitter for children. Other deaths occur among people who use methadone to achieveeuphoria. Because methadone is slower-acting and longer lastingthan intravenous heroin, even a veteran heroin addict may takemethadone, decide that the drug is not having an adequate effect,take more, and overdose when the peak comes two or three hourslater. Self-education within the drug subculture might keep suchincidents to a minimum. But some deaths will occur, and it isreasonable to expect that the more methadone available, the moredeaths it will cause. The only effective answer to this argument is to point to thelarge number of heroin deaths caused by overdose, disease, andinfection and to the other deaths caused by addict-committedcrime and by such practices as the sale of infected blood byaddicts. Almost certainly there will be an over-all decrease inopiate-related deaths as methadone replaces heroin in thecommunity. Side Effects." A number of possibly undesirableside effects of methadone have been hypothesized, ranging fromimpotence to damage to the bones and teeth. So far, clinicalstudies have found no evidence of birth defects and no indicationof physical damage. Drowsiness is a frequent complaint of programinitiates, but this is a natural consequence of an increase inthe opiate dose and disappears as the addict develops tolerancefor the new level. Some addicts continue to complain of the lossof libido, but the best evidence is that, for most, sexualperformance is better when they are on methadone than when theyare on heroin. In short, although it cannot be statedcategorically that there are no serious side effects, clinicalinvestigation so far has failed to find any. To date, however,research has concentrated on possible physical effects; there donot seem to be detailed studies of the effects of methadone onintellectual or motor functioning, and we do not know howmethadone affects a wide range of important functions, fromproblem-solving ability to the ability to operate a car or oftencomplex machinery. Since methadone is a powerful tranquilizer, itmay well have effects in these areas. It is also possible thattolerance to tranquilization develops, as may be indicated by thedisappearance of excessive drowsiness. THE FUTURE OF METHADONE It is virtually certain that methadone maintenance willincrease rapidly in the next few years. While many observers havereservations, the cost/benefit and cost/effectiveness advantagesof methadone have become obvious. Since the relationship betweenaddiction and crime has been widely publicized, politicalpressures to do something about crime are great enough so thatthe government will probably support methadone, and vigorously. While the federal subbureaucracies involved-the NationalInstitute of Mental Health, the Bureau of Narcotics and DangerousDrugs, and the Food and Drug Administration-have never been fondof methadone maintenance, its social and political advantagesshould now be obvious enough to induce large scale federalfunding in the near future. Most informed observers regard theAdministration's proposal to create a Special Action Office onDrug Abuse Prevention and to increase funding dramatically asconfirmation of this. At this writing, the Food and DrugAdministration is on the verge of liberalizing the rules underwhich methadone is approved for use. As the programs expand, several issues in addition to thosealready discussed will become important: Administrative Problems. There are clear differencesbetween operating small, experimental programs and operating massprograms. Such issues as the extent to which ancillary servicesshould be supplied, the extent of monitoring through urinalysis,high doses versus low doses, standardized doses versus individualones, and control of leakage will arise over and over. Inaddition, there will be the problems of recruiting and trainingstaff common to any expanding area. At present, there are notenough people experienced in methadone programs to double ortriple current programs. One can expect a period of raiding ofexisting programs (with a consequent decline in theireffectiveness) and increasing use of less qualified and lessdedicated people. The difficulties of hiring good staff willcompound the leakage problem. It will also create pressures touse the cheapest methods available. Most of the higher costs ofthe more expensive programs are caused by the increased staffrequired for added services; if the trained staff to providethese services is simply not available, they either will not beprovided or will be done poorly. Analysis of the impact of theseservices is therefore urgent. Community Problems. As noted, some black militants areopposed to methadone maintenance because they regard it as adevice to keep the black community "drugged andenslaved." Many of the rumors of side effects are alsobelieved. These fears can be countered as long as there appearsto be a possibility that methadone maintenance leads toabstinence; but, if experiments indicate that this is not areasonable hope, the situation may become more difficult. This isnot the type of problem that is amenable to rational solution, oreven advice. Methadone-program operators, however, can do atleast three things to meet the challenge: 1. Maintain close contact with various elements of thecommunity, to explain what they are doing and why it is good forthe addict and the community. 2. Provide facilities to ensure that any methadone patient whowants to try to become totally drug-free will receive the bestpossible support for his effort. 3. Involve the community in the staffing and administration ofthe project. Since these are all good policies irrespective of any militantreaction against methadone, programs should follow them whetheror not they foresee any problem. Some program operators believethat the fear of adverse community reaction is exaggerated and islikely to decrease over time. The area in which the addict lives,after all, bears the crime costs and the risk of a spread inaddiction. As a methadone program becomes operational, thesurrounding community comes to appreciate it, and strongopposition dissolves. Dr. Robert DuPont, of Washington's NarcoticTreatment Agency, has told us that methadone patients become thebest missionaries in the community. Long-acting Methadone. The effect of the methadone usedat present lasts only about 24 hours. Drug companies have beenexperimenting with a drug (acetylmethadol) that will last up tothree days, and it is expected that this will become generallyavailable soon." This will have several significant effectson methadone maintenance. It will cut costs by reducing theexpense of preparing and administering the drug. It will alsomake it more difficult for the patient to skip his dose and tryheroin. Another effect may be to allow the patient greatermobility and weaken the ties between the patient and the program.In the view of some, this will be a good thing because it willenable the patients to lead a more nearly normal life. Othersspeculate that it will be counterproductive, in that the routinedaily visit provides an important element of structure in thepatient's life and has positive therapeutic benefits. There is noway of resolving this dispute a priori. Changing Patterns of Addiction. There is consensus thatthe primary reason addicts volunteer for methadone programs, orstay in them once assigned by the law-enforcement system, is thatthey are tired of the life-style of an addict, with the constantneed to make a connection, the strains of criminality, the jailtime, and the risk of infection and death. Participation in amethadone program and abstinence from heroin become a moreattractive choice. Whether he procures methadone on the street orthrough a clinic, as long as it is cheap he can maintain hisopiate habit at low cost and then occasionally obtain the desiredeuphoria by skipping the methadone and using large amounts ofheroin. Since the data from existing programs indicate that manyaddicts do use heroin occasionally-anywhere from 10 to 50 percent, depending on the program and length of time intreatment-this may already be a common pattern. This problem presents a difficult choice to program operators.To eliminate this last increment of drug use might requireexpulsion of addicts for occasional heroin use. This wouldcertainly return some patients to the addicted life, with all thesocial and personal costs involved. If an addict is adjustingwell in other ways, this cost is not justifiable. Eliminating thelast vestige of heroin use in such a case is essentially ameaningless concession to moralism. There is a more serious question involved, however. There isno way of knowing the extent to which the negative aspects of theaddicted life have a general deterrent effect that keeps peoplefrom experimenting with heroin. Clearly, almost anyone exposed toheroin is also exposed to the addict community generally andknows the risks involved in becoming addicted. It -is possiblethat the existence of large methadone programs would indicate tosome portion of the nonaddict population that they could attainthe euphoria of heroin without having to adopt the life-style asa whole, and they might find this option more attractive thaneither abstinence or full-scale heroin addiction. Presentevidence indicates that there may be a curious gap of belief inpeople who become addicted to heroin. They know full well thatthe drug is addicting and that the life-style is terrible, butthey do not doubt their own ability to handle the drug withoutbecoming addicted. For all we know, the unattractiveness of thelife-style may be exercising a potent deterrent effect on otherswho are curious but more realistic about the danger of becomingaddicted. Opening up the methadone choice might make these peoplemore willing to run the risk. Since we know little about thecauses of addiction and even less about deterrent effects, we donot know whether this is a matter for real concern. If it turnsout to be an important phenomenon, it will create some painfulpublic-policy choices. Total Size of Methadone Programs. A final questionconcerns the portion of the addict population that is amenable tosuccessful methadone treatment. Any figure is only an educatedguess based upon the observer's estimate of the total number ofaddicts, observations about the results of existing methadoneprograms, and judgments about the criteria of success. Official U.S. Government calculations seem to agree that 25 to33 per cent of the addicted population will be helped bymethadone." This estimate may well be too low; some programoperators have estimated that their methadone programs drewalmost 50 per cent of the addicts in an area within a year or soafter beginning operations."' Considering that many addictsbelieve street rumors adverse to methadone, and that one wouldnot expect any program to reach its full potential right away, anestimate of 50 per cent probably represents a more realistic, butstill conservative, figure, if one assumes that"success" means "derives substantial benefit frommethadone maintenance." ANTAGONISTS Antagonists are drugs that prevent opiates from having anyeffect if the antagonists are administered before opiateinjection and that precipitate withdrawal if administered afterinjection. The possibility of using these drugs as a majortreatment modality has intrigued researchers for the last sixyears, but at present the antagonists remain experimental."' There are two basic antagonists currently in use for thetreatment of heroin addicts, cyclazocine and naloxone, but anexcellent survey by New York's Health Services Administrationnoted that there might be several hundred others already inexistence, as yet untested."' The most importantcharacteristics of these drugs are as follows: Cyclazocine produces unpleasant side effects, such as nauseasweating, a drunken feeling, anxiety, and hallucinations, buttolerance to these effects does develop. Naloxone does not appearto have significant side effects. Cyclazocine is effective whentaken orally and has a duration of action of 12 to 24 hours.Naloxone is effective when taken intravenously but is relativelyineffective when taken orally. There does not appear to be anyinformation on subcutaneous administration, though presumably itwould be less effective than intravenous but more effective thanoral administration. Small doses of an antagonist are effective.Thus, 4 mg. of cyclazocine will block the effects of 15 to 25 mg.of heroin for one day. Naloxone is even more powerful if usedintravenously: 1 mg. will block the effects of 25 mg. of heroinfor ten hours. (Taken orally, it requires 200 mg. to block theeffects of 25 mg. of heroin for six hours.) Cyclazocine hasaddictive qualities, in that an abstinent user will show somewithdrawal symptoms. Users do not crave the drug even when theyare in withdrawal, however. Naloxone does not have addictiveproperties. The antagonists do not reduce the "drughunger" felt by the opiate addict. Most experimentation to date has been done with cyclazocine,largely because the short duration and ineffectiveness of oralnaloxone makes it an unsuitable candidate for mass treatment. The NIMH Addiction Research Center is now experimenting with anew antagonist, EN-1639A. It is two to three times more potentthan the other two, is effective orally, and has a longerduration of action than naloxone .103 Besides the mechanical problems of dosage and delivery, thereare several major problems in using the antagonists as atreatment modality. Because they do not eliminate the "drughunger," the patient is constantly tempted to miss his doseand take heroin. As the HSA paper points out, the fact thataddiction to the antagonist itself is minimal means that it ispossible for him to do this. A methadone patient is tied to theprogram by his addiction; an antagonist patient is not. Becauseof this problem, and also because of the short duration of actionof many possible antagonists, a major search is under way for acapsule that could be implanted in the patient to release thedrug slowly over an extended period. It is likely to be some timebefore success is achieved, however."' The civil-libertiesquestions involved are also substantial. Two apparent disadvantages may be due to the experimentalnature of the programs. So far, the costs have been high ($3,000to $5,000 per addict per year), partly because of the need forinpatient care common to all experimental programs and partlybecause of the scarcity and high price of some of the drugs. Thesuccess rate so far is hard to calculate, but, at best, it hasbeen about 40 per cent over all, judged by the criterion ofremaining in the program."' However, some of the failuresmay reflect the fact that dosages had to be worked out andsupportive services developed. Future experiments may do better.One can, of course, argue the opposite-that future, largerprojects will be less successful because the Hawthorne effect ofparticipating in a new experimental program will be gone. Inaddition, there is some evidence that the success rate foroutpatients may be considerably lower than for inpatients. It is as yet unproved that the antagonists will ever be auseful treatment modality. Nor is there any reason at present tobelieve that the side effects of any antagonists would be lessadverse than those of methadone. It could easily turn out to bethe reverse, with the antagonists having more serious adverseeffects. If an addict is going to be dependent upon long-termchemotherapy, there appears to be no reason at present forpreferring that he be dependent on an antagonist rather than onmethadone. Under some theories of addiction, the antagonists could beuseful adjuncts to treatment. If one takes the view that it isimportant to extinguish reinforcement of the desire to useopiates, the antagonists may turn out to be successful. One canalso argue that the use of an antagonist, combined withsupportive services, would force the addict from the addictedlife-style and give him an opportunity to forge a new one.Finally, and probably most important, is the possibility that useof an antagonist might turn out to be the only practical way anaddict on methadone can become abstinent. If research shouldultimately show that opiate use does create a drug hunger thatpersists for a long period after obvious withdrawal is complete,then antagonists might be developed that would help the addictsurvive this period without readdiction. Dr. William Martin hasfound that secondary withdrawal symptoms persist in animals forat least six months after withdrawal from opiates. If the drughunger is such a symptom, and if it persists in humans in similarfashion, there is at present no way for an addict to leave amethadone program without enduring six months of craving opiates.As is obvious from the failure rates for abstinence programs, fewmanage to do this. If an antagonist could prevent relapses fromleading to readdiction during this period, it would bevaluable."' Dr. Martin is cautious about the antagonists. He states onlythat, if the research goals are achieved, "I believe thatcertain motivated addicts can be benefitted by this approach. . .. [They] may find a role in the treatment of the juvenileexperiment. Others are more enthusiastic, andsuggestions of mass inoculations are occasionally heard. Thewisdom of such ideas is questionable. MULTIMODAL PROGRAMS Several programs now contain components of all the differentmodalities. The Illinois Drug Abuse Project (IDAP), in Chicago,the Narcotics Treatment Administration, in Washington, D.C., andthe New Haven Mental Health Center, for example, includemethadone, therapeutic communities, detoxification, abstinence,and supportive services for all types of patients. The CommunityMental Health Center'in New Haven has an experimental naloxonegroup as well, and IDAP at one time tried cyclazocine on somepatients. While the approach is promising, rigorous comparison ofmultimodal and unimodal programs has not yet been done, and onecan only set forth the present arguments for and against themultimodal approach. The arguments in favor run along the following lines: Most observers believe that different programs work best fordifferent addicts, although the typologies are not worked out andno tool has predictive value at present. If a program has severalmodalities, an addict can readily transfer from one to another ifhe or the staff feels that his performance could be improved bythe change. In addition, failure in one modality does not meantotal failure, because the addict can try another with minimaldelay. Different modalities attract different types of addicts.Therapeutic communities, for example, may have more appeal toyounger addicts; methadone, to older. Differences in age,education, employment, or criminality may also be significant.But the modality that attracts an addict may not be the one inwhich he will ultimately do best. Combining the modalities makesone an intake center for each of the others, to the benefit ofall. In some cases, the modality to which an addict applies is anaccident of geography and personal contacts. Centralizedadministration can make this choice more rational and productive. Each modality has something to contribute to the others. Thegroup-therapy techniques and intense environment of thetherapeutic community may help methadone patients by encouragingthem to become abstinent or by improving their understanding ofthe factors that led them to addiction. They may also have animpact on abuse of other drugs by methadone patients. Conversely,TC residents and other abstinent patients may benefit fromknowing that there is a back-up program if they do not succeed inremaining abstinent. A multimodal program will find it easier to develop newstrategies for the treatment of addiction. For example, it may bepossible to have patients who are basically abstinent but receivelow doses of methadone if they feel the craving for drugs isabout to overwhelm them. This could be a particularly importanttechnique for teenagers. It would be difficult to operate such aprogram in connection with any single modality, because both theadministrative structure and the ambience would be against theexperiment. Politically, it is advantageous to combine the modalities, sothat they will stop fighting each other and unite to get moresupport from the government. The primary arguments against multimodal programs are asfollows: Most of the benefits to be gained from eliminating accidentalassignment, allowing rapid reassignment, and experimenting withnew programs may be achieved just as well by betteradministration and coordination of separate modalities. Multimodal programs have the basic problem that they transmitcontradictory messages to the patients. The ethos of most suchprograms is that abstinence is superior and that methadonepatients, while not so bad as heroin addicts, are definitelysecond-class. This lack of psychological support makes it morelikely that the methadone patient will fail. It may also make itdifficult for a patient who is not doing well on an abstinenceprogram to change to methadone-he may leave treatment entirelyrather than accept what be and his peers view as a demotion. Ifsuch an attitude does not pervade the project, the reverseproblem may occur: The abstinent patient may not see why heshould endure drug hunger while others are receiving methadone. In this view, faith is a very important part of everymodality. The evangelical nature of the TC has been discussed,for example, and it may be a necessary part of the therapy. Partof the success with methadone may be due to the fact thatpatients come to believe that they have a metabolic disease andare going to receive a medicine that will help them. In short,mixing different modalities may undermine all of them byconfusing the patient about the expectations and possibilities ofthe program. Resolution of this issue must await further research thatexplicitly compares the success of the different components ofmultimodal programs with that of comparable techniques usedalone. Since multimodality is a growing trend, such evaluationsshould be performed soon. HEROIN MAINTENANCE One treatment modality that is not used in the United Statesat present is maintenance of addicts on heroin or morphine. Whilemany, perhaps most, observers react negatively to the idea, thereare good reasons for trying it on an experimental basis. Themajor argument in favor is that heroin maintenance might attracttwo important groups of addicts: those who do not succeed onmethadone maintenance and those who do not volunteer for it inthe first place. If this were the result, addiction-related crimewould be decreased, because the costs of the heroin habit wouldbe eliminated and, as a benefit to the addict, the chances ofinfection, overdose, and imprisonment would be lessened. Inaddition, since remarkably little is known about the etiology ofaddiction or the effects of heroin, controlled clinicalexperimentation with heroin maintenance would allow someimportant questions to be studied. It is also possible thatheroin maintenance would break the market for heroin and removethe impetus for expansion caused by the high profits of illegaldistribution. (The English experience, described by Edgar May inStaff Paper 7, is, of course, instructive.) The most important objections to heroin maintenance are asfollows: The administrative expenses would be high. If the drug wereadministered in clinics, it would have to be made available aboutfour times a day. Also, because heroin is relatively ineffectiveorally, medical personnel might be required to give injections toensure a sterilized procedure. Both factors would increaseexpenses. If the English system were adopted and the heroin weredispensed from pharmacies on prescription, it would be difficultto control the dosages, track the patients, secure the heroin,and avoid infection and disease. Because of heroin's sharp peaksand short duration of action, it may be a difficult drug on whichto find and maintain a constant dosage even if the patientdesires stabilization. There is always physical pressure on thepatient to increase his dosage. To make this problem worse, amaintenance program would draw addicts who were not willing togive up the effort to attain the euphoria of heroin. Thus, theymight take their maintenance dose, buy more on the street, andthen demand that the clinics maintain the new, higher dosage.While there may be a pharmacological ceiling beyond which thedrug has no additional euphoric effects, this is not definitelyknown. Addicts on heroin maintenance might quickly reach levelsof 100 to 200 mg. of heroin per day, a dose higher than that ofalmost all present addicts. The physical effects of this dosageare not known. Many members of the black community would opposeheroin maintenance, interpreting it as a scheme to keep the blackcommunity tranquilized and quiet or as an indication that societyis concerned only with the crime caused by addiction, not withthe addicts themselves. Still others, who believe that continuinguse of heroin causes long-term organic damage, might regardheroin maintenance as a form of mass murder. The high doses that would tend to prevail in such a programwould tranquilize addicts and make them function ineffectively.This would make rehabilitation efforts impossible. Heroin maintenance might draw patients away from methadone,thus transferring them from a program with proved effectivenessfor rehabilitation to one that is probably counterproductive interms of reformation of the addict's life-style. The existence of heroin maintenance would remove an importantdeterrent to experimentation with heroin-the obvious degradationof the addicted life. These objections have force. It seems doubtful that societywould wish to move to a large-scale heroin-maintenance program atthe present time, especially if doing so would undercutmethadone. However, there are limitations on the effectiveness ofmethadone and on the extent to which it can eliminate theaddiction problem. If, for example, only 50 per cent of theaddicts are helped by methadone, the country may be left with asizable addiction problem even after methadone has reached itsfull potential. Despite the problems, it is likely that heroinmaintenance will begin to receive serious consideration. It wouldbe wise to start accumulating solid knowledge on its workings andeffects, and on the validity of the objections to it, beforeproposals for large scale programs make the matter urgent. Therewill not be time to do so afterwards. Careful experimentation isdesirable. TREATMENT OF USERS OF NONOPIATES Treatment of users of the amphetamines, barbiturates,hallucinogens, and cannabinols has two distinct aspects. Thefirst is (,crisis intervention"-emergency assistance tothose who are suffering from adverse effects of drugs. The secondconsists of longterm programs designed to prevent future druguse. CRISIS INTERVENTION Overdoses of opiates and barbiturates constitute a medicalemergency, and death results unless steps are takenquickly."' For other drugs, the adverse effects are morepsychological than physical-usually the user is having a severemental disturbance as a result of the drug and needspsychological support until the body clears the drug from thesystem."' Until recently, users of nonopiates suffering from adverseeffects of drug taking had nowhere to go except hospitalemergency rooms. Most users were reluctant to do this, bothbecause hospitals often felt compelled to report the illegal druguser to the authorities, and because emergency-room personneltreated them demeaningly. In addition, drug users came to believethat the treatment received in hospitals was not very helpful. Infact, the reaction of the medical personnel tended to intensifyand prolong the user's own panic. In the words of one observer,"Modern medical science can keep a panic reaction going forabout five days." The hospital use of strong tranquilizersis regarded by experienced drug users and drug-treatment doctorsas unnecessary and possibly damaging. Chlorpromazine, the usualdrug given, has strong side effects... and is unpleasant in itspsychoactive characteristics."' Free clinics, manned by interested professionals, experiencedyouths, and volunteer doctors, have sprung up in many cities. TheHaight-Ashbury Clinic in San Francisco seems to have been theprototype. The Langly Porter Youth Drug Unit at the University ofCalifornia is another. It is not known how many there now are,but it is probable that every large city has at least one, somehave several, and the movement is spreading rapidly to suburbancommunities. The treatment provided to drug users on a "bad trip"consists primarily of "talking down" the patient, whichcan be done by peers who have had similar experiences."Quiet rooms" for such "talk downs" have beenrecommended as a component for all emergency medical centers thattreat youthful drug users. The patient is not left alone and isconstantly reassured about who he is and where he is.Establishment of verbal contact with the patient is recommended,and there is little or no use of tranquilizers. Whentranquilizers are used, chlorpromazine is the most common, giveneither orally or, preferably, intramuscularly, which avoidsadverse gastrointestinal symptoms. Experimentation is going onusing short-term barbiturates instead. As of 1970, the BerkeleyFree Clinic claimed to have given only three tranquilizinginjections to "freakouts" since the clinic began; therest were talked down. Heavy amphetamine users and barbiturate addicts presentdifferent detoxification problems. The barbiturate addict needsto be withdrawn from his addiction under a carefully supervisedmedical regimen in an inpatient hospital setting, for thewithdrawal process itself is life-threatening."' Heavyamphetamine users are apt to suffer from paranoia, sometimesleading to violence; they need a quiet recovery room away fromstrangers whom they may consider enemies. They often shy awayfrom hospitalization for fear of arrest. Treating soft-drug users for adverse reactions is an importanthealth measure to prevent possible deaths, suicides, or bizarreand self-destructive behavior. Since most facilities that performthis service do not have a follow-up capacity, there is no way oftelling how many patients return to drug use and how many abandonit after experiencing adverse reactions. The treatment processitself is not concerned with abstinence but with the immediateproblem. Many of the patients seen in these clinics are onlyoccasional experimenters or sporadic-users. Before the drug legislation of 1970, there was no basis forfederal funding of these crisis clinics. The law now providesthat HEW can make grants for such partial services to drug users.Some of the clinics are not enthusiastic about federal backing,fearing that it will lead to greater conformity in approach and adecreased ability to utilize ex-drug users in new roles. Federalor state governments might also impose bureaucratic standards onstaff training and facilities without contributing enough moneyto meet the costs of these requirements. There is also a fearthat government backing will turn away some clients. LONG-TERM THERAPY While the crisis centers provide necessary emergency services,it is unlikely that they have much permanent impact on drugusers. There is therefore a movement to expand the centers toinclude programs that will have some effect on the drug-usingbehavior of patients. As a result, the crisis centers arebeginning to offer long-term therapeutic help as well asemergency services. This expansion is not limited to the treatment of drug users.Most clinic staff members view drug problems as only one aspect-and not always the most serious-of human malfunctioning forwhich help should be provided. For example, the Center forSpecial Social and Health Problems in San Francisco, according toits descriptive materials, is concerned with drug abuse, sexualproblems, violence and hatred, compulsive gambling, suicide,management of death and dying, crime and delinquency, inabilityto manage finances, obesity, and insomnia. While this list ismore ambitious than most, it illustrates the general trendtoward, broadening the scope of the crisis clinic. In a way,these organizations are becoming privately run communitymental-health centers. The techniques and operations of these programs are about thesame as those of the therapeutic communities and outpatientabstinence programs. Since, at present, there is no chemotherapyfor soft-drug use, no treatment comparable to the methadonemovement is possible. The basic problem with nonaddictive softdrugs is that continued use reflects the user's desire to keeptaking them or a psychological dependence on them, which can beeven more difficult to deal with than a physical craving. As onestudy points out, "Student drug users are, as a group,knowledgeable about the undesirable effects of drug abuse. Ingeneral, it is not difficult for most student drug abusers tostop. The issue is to get them to want toStop.11113 While some soft-drug users are in TC's, the majority of thosereceiving help are in some form of outpatient program, usuallythe same programs described in the section on outpatientabstinence for opiate users. Often, the patients themselves arethe same. A number of heroin addicts use other drugs as well, andyouthful drug users are increasingly experimenting with heroin asone of several drugs they try. Whether it is possible to sustaina pattern of sporadic heroin use without becoming addicted is asyet uncertain. The "speed culture" in theHaight-Ashbury section of San Francisco has produced someevidence that speed users, who first use barbiturates to ease the"crash," soon learn that heroin is an even smoother wayto achieve this purpose. Eventually they may abandon speedentirely and become heroin addicts. It is possible that a patternof multiple drug use that includes heroin is an intermediate steptoward full addiction."' It is even more difficult todetermine the success of these programs with soft-drug users thanwith narcotics addicts, in part because most experts believe thatyouths who become heavily involved with cannabis andhallucinogens do not usually stay involved for a long period oftime."' This fact, of course, increases the difficulty ofevaluating the impact of any drug program, because abstinence isa poor indication of the program's effect. Some work is going on in the area of chemotherapy. An effortis now being made to find antagonists to some of the more commondrugs. Researchers tentatively claim to have found a drug that isan antagonist to amphetamines, although it has not yet been fullytested, and some work is being done on antagonists to LSD.However, it is not clear whether these drugs, when and if theyare perfected, will have a significant impact on drug use, sincesoft drugs are taken without the spur of physical necessity.Unless a policy of forced implantation is followed, the drug userwill always have a choice about taking the antagonist, and inmost cases the choice would probably be to continue drug use. There are, however, two hypotheses under which the antagonistsmight be useful. The amphetamines appear to be physicallyaddictive to a limited extent, and this could exert some pressureon the amphetamine user to continue his use."' An antagonistmight prevent the constant renewal of this physical dependenceand give the user's body a chance to become free of it. Secondly,if one adopts a conditioning theory of drug use, an antagonistwould eliminate the reinforcing effect of gratification from druguse and might in time extinguish the conditioned response oftaking drugs. One of the most carefully evaluated methods of decreasing softdrug use is transcendental meditation. A Harvard Medical SchoolStudy gave questionnaires to 1,950 subjects who had beenpracticing transcendental meditation for three months or more. Ofthese, 1,862 completed the questionnaire. The decrease in druguse was quite striking. The study says: Following the start of the practice of transcendentalmeditation, there was a marked decrease in the number of drugabusers for all drug categories. . . . As the practice ofmeditation continued, the subjects progressively decreased theirdrug abuse until after practicing 21 months of meditation mostsubjects had completely stopped abusing drugs. For example, inthe 6-month period before starting the practice of meditation,about 80 percent of the subjects used marijuana and of thoseabout 28 percent were heavy users. Aftel practicingtranscendental meditation 6 months, 37 percent used marijuana andof those only 6.5 percent were heavy users. After 21 months ofthe practice, only 12 percent continued to use marijuana and ofthose most were light users; only one individual was a heavyuser. The decrease in abuse of LSD was even more marked. Beforestarting the practice of transcendental meditation, 48 percent ofthe subjects had used LSD, and of these subjects about 14 percentwere heavy users. In the 3 months following the start of thepractice of meditation, 1 1 percent of the subjects took LSDwhile after 21 months of the practice only 3 percent took LSD.The increase in the number of non-users after starting thepractice of meditation was similar for the other drugs: non-usersof the other hallucinogens after 21 months of the practice rosefrom 61 to 96 percent; for the narcotics, from 83 to 99 percent;for the amphetamines, from 70 to 99 percent; and for thebarbiturates, from 83 to 99 percent.117 As the researchers point out, these correlations are not proofof causation. "Involvement in other kinds ofself-improvement activities may also lead to decreased drugabuse. The motivation to start meditation may have influenced thesubjects to stop drug abuse. The subjects in the present studymay have spontaneously stopped, continued, or increased takingdrugs independently of transcendental meditation.""' Despite these necessary caveats, the results are striking,especially in an area in which, as the study delicately pointsout, "Existing programs for the alleviation of[non-narcotic] drug abuse usually involve education as to thedangers of the effects of drugs and sometimes provide personalcounseling or psychiatric care. The efficiency of these programshas yet to be established."' (Staff Paper 6, by Dr.Andrew Weil, deals with meditation and other nonchernical meansof achieving altered stages of consciousness.) CONCLUSION Few solid conclusions emerge from this morass of conflictinginformation. It is clear that methadone is a helpful treatmentmodality, but just how helpful is not yet known. It is equallyclear that its almost inevitable expansion will create newproblems, some of them predictable and some of them totallyunexpected. Not much can be said about the other treatmentmodalities and concepts. Those who favor them have not yet provedtheir case, but neither have those who are skeptical. On thewhole, it seems probable that they will turn out to have onlymarginal effectiveness as drug-treatment methods, although theymay have possibilities as a part of the more generalhuman-potential movement. The basic problem is that we lack anysolid theory or understanding of the nature and causes ofaddiction. As researchers have repeatedly pointed out, for mostdrug users the drugs are functional and adaptive mechanisms.Society cannot make long-term progress toward developing moreeffective treatment mechanisms without grasping and acceptingthis fact. At present, however, we have little choice but toproceed empirically. NOTES 1. Alfred Lindesmith, The Addict and the Law(New York: Vintage ed., 1967), pp. 105-6, 124. (Hereaftercited as Lindesmith.) 2. Charles Terry and Mildred Pellens, TheOpium Problem (Bureau of Social Hygiene, 1928), p. 627.(Hereafter cited as Terry and Pellens.) 3. Ibid., pp. 137-65. 4. Troy Duster, The Legislation of Morality (NewYork: Free Press, 1970), p. 15. 5. Terry and Pellens, pp. 30-32. These authorsare skeptical and believe that physicians would have reportedonly addicts under curative treatment. 6. Rufus King, The DrugHang-up-America's Fifty Year Folly (in press), MS. pp. 76-77. 7. Terry and Pellens, p. 866. 8. King, op. cit., note 6, MS. p. 57. 9. Norman Zinberg and John Robertson, Drugsand the Public (in press), MS. p. 40. 10. Lindesmith, pp. 99-134. For a brief reviewof relevant population estimates, see Arthur D. Little, Inc., DrugAbuse and Law Enforcement (A Report to the President'sCommission on Law Enforcement and Administration of Justice:1967), "Appendix C: History of the U.S. AddictPopulation." This report argues that "what is apparentis not the constancy of the addict and his habit, but rather thatthe addict deserts his habit quite easily" (pp. C-4 andC-5). It points to sources showing a decline from about 246,000in 1890 to 100,000 in 1926. These sources are criticized in thecited portion of Lindesmith. 11. Frances Gearing, "MethadoneMaintenance Treatment Program: Progress Report of Evaluation Through March 31,1970" (mimeograph, 1970), p. 1 1. (Hereafter cited asGearing, 1970.) 12. The studies are summarized in JohnO'Donnell, The Relapse Rate in Narcotic Addiction: A Critiqueof Follow-up Studies (New York State, Narcotic AddictionControl Commission Reprints, 1968) (originally published in1965). 13. William Martin, Statement in NarcoticsResearch, Rehabilitation, and Treatment, Hearings before theSelect Committee on Crime, House of Representatives, 92d Cong.,Ist sess., April 26-28 and June 24, 23, 1971 (GPO, 1971), Part 2,pp. 437-38. (A number of statements at these hearings are citedhereafter. They are footnoted as Hrgs. 14. These summary statements are drawn from alarge number of published sources and interviews. Some of themare discussed at greater length later in the paper, particularlyin the methadone section. For development and discussion ofpsychological characteristics, see Isador Chein, Donald Gerard,Robert Lee, and Eva Rosenfeld, The Road to H (New York:Basic Books, 1964), a book that equals The Opium Problem asa classic in the field. 15. David Smith, George Gay, and Barry Ramer,"Adolescent Heroin Abuse in San Francisco," ProceedingsThird National Conference on Methadone Treatment, November 14-16,1970 (GPO, 1971), pp. 89, 90. (These proceedings arehereafter cited as Third Meth. Conf.) 16. Howard Jones, Hrgs., p. 588. 17. George Gay, Alan Matzger, William Bathurst,and David Smith, "Short-Term Heroin Detoxification on anOutpatient Basis," International journal of theAddictions, VI, No. 2 (June, 1971), 241, 259-60. 18. Kramer, Hrgs., p. 668. 19. U.S. Comptroller General, Limited Use ofFederal Programs to Commit Narcotic Addicts for Treatment andRehabilitation (September 20, 1971), p. 6; Jonathan Cole,"Report on the Treatment of Drug Addiction," inPresident's Commission on Law Enforcement and Administration ofJustice, Task Force Reports: Narcotics and Drug Abuse (GPO,1967), pp. 135,140-41. 20. O'Donnell, op. cit., note 12. 21. These are reviewed in Cole, op. cit., note19, pp. 135-36. 22. Duster, op. cit., note 4, p. 134.The description and statistics that follow are taken from Dusterand from John Kramer, Richard Bass, and John Berechochea,"Civil Commitment for Addicts: The California Program,"American Journal of Psychiatry, CXXV (1968), 816. 23. Kramer, Hrgs., p. 654. 24. Compare the descriptions of the twoprograms in National Institute of Mental Health, NationalClearinghouse for Mental Health Information, Directory ofNarcotic Addiction Treatment Agencies in the United States, 1968-69(GPO, 1970), pp. 5-6. (Hereafter cited as NIMH Directory.) 25.Jones, Hrgs., pp. 565, 584. The budget estimate iscalculated from the budget numbers given. It is not a statementof the Commissioner. 26. For a thoughtful critique based onobservation of five centers, see Community Service Society of NewYork, Committee on Youth and Correction, Observation on FiveResidential Facilities of the Narcotic Addiction ControlCommission (1971), pp. 89-101. 27. New York Times, October 4, 1970.See, also, the statement of the Health Policy Advisory Center: The program promises to return the addict to auseful life "through extended periods of treatment in acontrolled environment followed by supervision in an after-careprogram." The emphasis is on "controlled." Theaddict receives about as much rehabilitation as the criminalprisoner with about as much result-the recidivist rate foraddicts is much higher than for criminals. Moreover therehabilitation centers are run like prisons. There are guards,most of whom receive training for prison work-one guard for everytwo inmates, recalcitrant addicts are beaten and placed inisolation on reduced diets; inmates are sexually abused; there isno separation of the young from the old. The few rehabilitationprograms that do exist are staffed by instructors and therapistswho have received little or no training. For the 5,000 or soinmates in the 14 separate institutions there are only 4psychiatrists, 16 psychologists, and 78 teachers and vocationalinstructors. The prison-like atmosphere has caused a largepercentage of the addicts to try to escape. [Health PolicyAdvisory Council, Health/PAC Bulletin, June, 1970, pp.16-17.] 28. Carl Chambers, Hrgs., p. 566. 29. U.S. Comptroller General, op. cit., note19, pp. 12-17. 30. Information furnished by the Bureau ofPrisons. 31. The information on 1969 was furnished byNIMH. The 1971 information is from Bertram Brown, Hrgs., p.470. 32. Brown, Hrgs., p. 433. 33. U.S. Bureau of Prisons, "NarcoticAddict Rehabilitation Act: Progress Report" (mimeograph),February 22, 197 1. 34. These are difficult numbers to pin down.According to the NIMH Directory (p. 144), 40 programslisted themselves as therapeutic communities as of about 1968. Itis not clear how stringent the standards for inclusion were,however, and this may include some programs that are essentiallyoutpatient abstinence with group work. At the other end, itmisses some of the newer therapeutic communities. The population figure is also an educatedguess. Most TC's are in New York, and knowledgeable sourcesestimate that the Phoenix Houses (the city's TC program) hadabout 1,000 residents and private TC's about 1,400 in 1970.Synanon had about 1,400 residents (NIMH Directory, p. 32).These places account for the largest number of TC residents, butthere are many others with 10 to 100 residents scatteredthroughout the country. The estimate of 5,000 residents isprobably an upper limit. 35. A description of four of the New York Cityprojects is given in Community Service Society of New York,Committee on Youth and Corrections, The Long Road Back from aLiving Death: A Study of Four Voluntary Treatment andRehabilitation Programs for New York City's Narcotics Addicts (Part1) (1967). 36. Kramer, Hrgs., p. 667. 37. Ibid. 38. This study was given to us on ano-attribution basis. 39. NIMH Directory, passim. For adetailed description of two projects, see Community ServiceSociety of New York, Committee on Youth and Corrections, Lifelineto Tomorrow: A Study of Voluntary Treatment Programs for NarcoticAddicts (Part 11) (1 969). 40. Robert DuPont, Hrgs., p. 144. 41. D.C. Department of Corrections,"Performance of Corrections Referrals Under ThreeNarcotic-Addiction Treatment Modalities" (Research ReportNo. 42: mimeograph, July, 1971). 42. Friends of Psychiatric Research, Inc., UniformEvaluation of Programs to Combat Narcotic Addiction (Baltimore,1970). 43. Op. cit., note 39, pp. 93-94. 44. The data that follow are from S. B. Sellsand Deena Watson, "A Spectrum of Approaches in MethadoneTreatment: Relation to Program Evaluation," Third Meth.Conf., p. 17. 45. Vincent Dole, "Planning for theTreatment of 25,000 Heroin Addicts," Third Meth. Conf.,P. I 1 1. 46. NIMH Directory, p. 144; SecondNational Methadone Maintenance Conference, New York, October26-27, 1969, published in the International journal of theAddictions, V, No. 3 (September, 1970) (hereafter cited as.SecondMeth. Conf.); Third Meth. Conf. 47. Charles Edwards, Hrgs., p. 395. 48. Elmer Gardner, Hrgs., p. 397; Brown,Hrgs., p. 440. 49. Avram Goldstein, "Blind ControlledDosage Comparisons with Metha- done in Two Hundred Patients," ThirdMeth. Conf. (hereafter cited as Goldstein, 1970); RayTrussell, "Treatment of Narcotics Addicts in New York,"Second Meth. Conf., pp. 347, 352; Lynwood Holton, Hrgs.,pp. 600601. Governor Holton's statement is particularlyinteresting because it makes budget estimates within the contextof a comprehensive state treatment program. 50. Gearing Report 1970 and "Successes andFailures in Methadone Maintenance Treatment of Heroin Addictionin New York City," Third Meth. Conf., p. 2. 51. Goldstein 1970, p. 31. 52. DuPont, Hrgs., p. 173. 53. See, e.g., Gordon Stewart, "A Surveyof Patients Attending Different Clinics in New Orleans," ThirdMeth. Conf., p. 27. 54. The information on MMTP is drawn, exceptwhere otherwise indicated, from three sources; the GearingReport, 1970; the 1969 edition of the same report; and the paperpresented at the methadone conference, cited in note 50. 55. Carl Chamber and Dean Babst,"Characteristics Predicting Long-Term Retention in aMethodone Maintenance Program," Third Meth. Conf., p.140. 56. Herman Joseph and Vincent Dole, "Methadone Patientson Probation and Parole" (mimeograph) (New York: RockefellerUniversity Press, 1970), P. 9. 57. Chambers and Babst, op. cit., note67. 58. Joseph and Dole, op. cit., note 56. 59. The Second National Methadone MaintenanceConference had reports from New York, Chicago, Minneapolis, St.Louis, Baltimore, New Haven, Vancouver, New Orleans, and Miami.The Third National Methadone Treatment Conference had reportsfrom New York, Brooklyn, Chicago, New Orleans, Santa Clara,Philadelphia, Vancouver, Baltimore, Denver, and Washington aswell as from Sweden. 60. Henry Brill, "Methadone Maintenance: AProblem in Delivery of Service," Journal of the AmericanMedical Association, CCXV, No. 7 (February 15,1971), 1148-50. 61. Goldstein 1970, p. 37. 62. The incidence of hepatitis among addictshas been described as "unbelievable." Some expertsthink the sale of blood by these addicts is creating a majorpublic-health problem. See Stewart, op. cit., note 53. 63. For a more detailed discussion, see StaffPaper 1. 64. Vincent Dole and Marie Nyswander,"Methadone Maintenance and Its Implication for Theories ofNarcotic Addiction," in Abraham Wikler, ed., TheAddictive States (Baltimore, Md.: Williams & Wilkins Co.,1968), p. 359, postulates an inherent neurological vulnerability.But, at the Second National Methadone Maintenance Conference, Dr.Dole was asked: "Apart from any psychological factors oremotional factors, is there a metabolic irregularity which causesa craving for drugs in the first place or does the metabolicirregularity come after the use of drugs or both?" Hisresponse was: "This is a very important question for which Ihave no adequate answer. I can only guess. My opinion is that aheavy exposure to heroin induces the metabolic changes. Accordingto this theory, the abnormal drug craving in man, like theinduced drug seeking behavior in animals, is a result of exposureto narcotic drugs and not the original cause of theaddiction." Second Meth. Conf., pp. 359, 370. 65. Dr. Dole seems to lean toward the idea thatthe metabolic change is permanent. He has stated: "I believeone has to reckon with the fact that heroin hunger is probably asymptom of a pharmacological imprint that may last for a man'slife." Vincent Dole, "Research on Methadone MaintenanceTreatment," Second Meth. Conf., pp. 359, 370. 66. See, e.g., Avram Goldstein, "BlindDosage Comparisons and Other Studies in a Large MethadoneProgram" (paper presented at the National Heroin Symposium,June 20, 1971, pp. 12-13; to be published in the Journal ofPsychedelic Drugs). (Hereafter cited as Goldstein 1971.) 67. William Martin, "Pathophysiology ofNarcotic Addiction: Possible Roles of Protracted Abstinence inRelapse" (unpublished paper, 1970), pp. 6-7, and privatecommunications. 68. Abraham Wikler, "Interaction ofPhysical Dependence and Classical and Operant Conditioning in theGenesis of Relapse," in Wikler, ed., The AddictiveStates, op. cit., note 76. The views of Wikler and Martin canbe merged into one coherent psycho-physical theory. See Max Fink,"Narcotic Antagonists in Opiate Dependence," Science,CLXIX (September 4, 1970), 1005. 69. The maturation hypothesis was firstproposed by Charles Winick in "Maturing Out of NarcoticAddiction," Bulletin on Narcotics, XIV, No. 1 (1962).Since then a number of researchers have looked at particulargroups of addicts to determine whether they do, in fact, matureout. The onethird figure is based on a number of these works aswell as on interviews. 70. See Cole, op. cit., note 19. 71. Goldstein 1970, p. 35. 72. Jerome Jaffe, "Methadone Maintenance:Variation in Outcome Criteria as a Function of Dose," ThirdMeth. Conf., p. 37. 73. William Weiland and Arthur Moffett,"Results of Low Dosage Methadone Treatment," ThirdMeth. Conf., p. 48. See also Hugh Williams, "Low andHigh Methadone Maintenance in the Out-patient Treatment of theHard Core Heroin Addict," Second Meth. Conf., p. 439. 74. Goldstein 1970, p. 24. 75. See, e.g., Gearing Report 1970, pp. 8-9. 76. Stewart, op. cit., note 64. 77. Goldstein 1970, p. 32. 78. Goldstein 1971, pp. 2-3. 79. Gearing Report 1971. 80. Gearing, op. cit., note 50. 81. For a general review of ambulatoryinduction, see the material from the different cities containedin Second Meth. Conf. and Third Meth. Conf. 82. Dole, op. cit., note 65, pp. 364,370, 386. 83. Jerome Jaffe, "Further Experience withMethadone in the Treatment of Narcotics Users," SecondMeth. Conf., pp. 375, 383-84, 386. 84. Goldstein 197 1, pp. 13-14. 85. Goldstein 1971, pp. 14-15. 86. Ibid., P. 14. William Vandervort,"Treatment of Drug Abuse in Adolescents," ThirdMeth. Conf., P. 87. 87. William Martin, "Commentary on theSecond National Conference on Methadone Treatment," SecondMeth. Conf., P. 545. 88. Quoted in Joseph and Dole, op. cit., note56, pp. 14-15. 89. See Gerald Davidson, Hrgs., pp.326-27. 90. See material in Second Meth. Conf. andThird Meth. Conf., which includes several papers on possiblepsychopathology. See also John Kramer, "MethadoneMaintenance for Opiate Dependence," California Medicine, CXIII,No. 6 (December, 1970), 6, 9. 9 1. Kramer, Hrgs., pp. 668-69. 92. Goldstein 1970, p. 35. 93. John Langrod, "Secondary Drug UseAmong Heroin Users," International journal of theAddictions, V, No. 4 (December, 1970), 61 1. 94. IvanBennett, "Development of a Newly Formulated Tablet forMethadone Maintenance Programs," Third Meth. Conf., p.143. 95. This statement was made by Dr. Goldstein at the ThirdMethadone Conference. It was not included in the printed version. 96. See the papers presented at the Second andThird Methadone Conferences. Many of them are directedspecifically at side effects. This section summarizes what seemsto be the general experience of the programs. 97. Edwards, Hrgs., pp. 393-430; WashingtonPost, November 2, 1971. For a discussion of some of theproblems, see "Oral Methadone Maintenance Techniques in theManagement of Morphine-type Dependence"; Combined Statementof the Council on Mental Health and Its Committee on Alcoholismand Drug Dependence, American Medical Association; and theCommittee on Problems of Drug Dependence, National ResearchCouncil, March 169 1971. 98. Jaffe, Hrgs., p. 2 1 0. 99. Brown, Hrgs., p. 455. 100. Stewart, op. cit., note 53;Goldstein 197 1) p. 5. 101. The antagonists were introduced as anexperimental addiction treatment modality in 1965. Max Fink,"Narcotic Antagonists in Opiate Dependence," Science,CLXIX (September 4, 1970), 1005. For a review of thepharmacology, see Jerome Jaffe, "Narcotic Analgesics,"in Louis Goodman and Alfred Gilman, The Pharmacological Basisof Therapeutics, 4th ed., (New York: Macmillan, 1970), pp.237,264-71. 102. City of New York, Health ServicesAdministration, Narcotics Antagonists Research Program: TheCurrent State of Knowledge of Drug Antagonists for HeroinAddiction (mimeographed staff paper: 1971), p. 7. (Hereaftercited as HSA.) We have found that this is the best source writtenin a form comprehensible to laymen. 103. Martin, Hrgs., pp. 435-36. 104. HSA, pp. 3, 8-9. HSA said that theconsensus of researchers is that it would take three to fiveyears for a long-lasting antagonist or long-lasting depot vehicleto be ready for use, and, in any event, there is no guarantee ofsuccess. Other people we have talked to are skeptical about thefeasibility of the whole idea, and raise both pharmacological andsocial objections. 105. Fink, op. cit., note 101, saysthat, since 1968, 40 per cent of more than 450 adult male addictshave remained in cyclazocine treatment. 106. Martin, Hrgs., p. 435. 107. Ibid., p. 436. 108. Treatment for an opioid overdose consistsof immediate administration of an antagonist to prevent deathfrom respiratory depression. See Jerome Jaffe, op. cit., note101, pp. 237, 268. The treatment of barbiturate poisoning isconsiderably more complicated and requires more elaborate medicalfacilities. See Seth Sharpless, "Hypnotics and Sedatives: 1.The Barbiturates," in Goodman and Gilman, pp. 97, 117-18. 109. There are variations, of course. The userwho has taken an excess of hallucinogen or cannabinol is notdangerous. He requires support but rarely restraint. The user whohas taken too much metharnphetarnine may have paranoid delusions,and considerably more caution is indicated. 1 10. Side effects are not always encountered,but those that are, are (I many, varied,and can be quite severe." They usually occur only withcontinued use, however. See Charles Solow, "Drug Therapy ofMental Illness: Tranquilizers and Other Depressant Drugs,"in Richard Rech and Kenneth Moore, eds., An Introduction toPsychopharmacology (New York: RavenPress, 1970), pp. 289,299-301. 111. Chlorprornazine, although a powerfultranquilizer, is not a drug of abuse. See Staff Paper 1. 112. David Smith and Donald Wesson,"Phenobarbital Technique for Treatment of BarbiturateDependence," Archives of General Psychiatry XXIV(January, 1971), 56-57. 113. Herbert Benson and R. K. Wallace,"Decreased Drug Abuse with Transcendental Meditation: AStudy of 1,862 Subjects," in Hrgs., pp. 682, 684. 114. Smith, Gay, and Ramer, op. cit., note15. 115. William McGlothlin, "PoliciesConcerning Hallucinogenic Drugs," in Hudson Institute, PolicyConcerning Drug Abuse in New York State, 11 (HudsonInstitute, 1970), 27, 31-32. 116. See John Kramer, "An Introduction toAmphetamine Abuse," journal of Psychedelic Drugs, 11, No.2 (1969), 1, 13. Dr. Kramer, commenting on treatment, states that". . . abstinence is probably the most important therapeuticdevice, and that may be difficult to attain. Many users whoattempt abstinence find it difficult because of the fatigue whichresults, extreme at first, gradually diminishing, but persistent,perhaps for months." 117. Benson and Wallace, op. cit., note113, pp. 683-84. 118. Ibid., p. 685. Ibid., p. 682. CliffSchaffer's Home Page Contents | Feedback | Search DRCNet Library | Schaffer Library | Major Studies | DealingWith Drug AbuseWT02-B02-32IA086-000614-B045-256http://206.61.184.43:80/schaffer/Library/studies/dwda/staff4.htm 206.61.184.43 19970122021839 text/html 104372HTTP/1.0 200 OKDate: Wednesday, 22-Jan-97 02:18:20 GMTServer: WebSitePro/1.1f (S/N wpo-0deb)Allow-ranges: bytesContent-type: text/htmlLast-modified: Saturday, 28-Dec-96 07:07:59 GMTContent-length: 104153 Dealing With Drug Abuse - The Economics of Heroin Contents | Feedback | Search DRCNet Library | Schaffer Library | Major Studies | DealingWith Drug Abuse Dealing with Drug Abuse A Report to the Ford Foundation THE DRUG ABUSE SURVEY PROJECT STAFF PAPER 4 The Economics of Heroin by John F. Holahan, with the assistance ofPaul A. Henningsen Production * Policy Options: What Can Be Done *Distribution * Consumption This paper applies economic analysis to theheroin market and to the effect of alternative governmentpolicies on this market. The principal concern is supply, butsome discussion of demand is included because the effects ofpublic policy on the supply of drugs cannot be adequatelyanalyzed without some knowledge of the effect on demand ofchanges in price, risk, and availability. The analysis must beconsidered tentative. Accurate information on the economicaspects of all drugs of abuse is scarce, that which exists isfrequently unreliable, and conclusions are often suspect. Thispaper is no exception. Much of the data used were taken from twostudies: (1) The World Opium Situation (October, 1970), bythe Bureau of Narcotics and Dangerous Drugs (BNDD) IntelligenceStaff; and (2) Economics of Heroin Distribution (1970), byMark Moore. While these papers contain the most extensiveeconomic research available in this area, the information is notunimpeachable. This is not because of deficiencies in thestudies-which are excellent -but because of the inherentdifficulty of gathering accurate information on illegalenterprises or consumers of illegal commodities. The BNDD staff paper is the result of anextensive survey of opium production and consumption throughoutthe world. The paper provides considerably more data, in terms ofboth quantity and quality, than are available from the UnitedNations or from other publications. Unfortunately, it is notpossible to verify this information through other sources, nordoes it appear that it will be possible to do so in the nearfuture. The Moore paper provides a macroeconomicanalysis of the heroin distribution system, as well asconsiderable interview data on daily expenditures of addicts andsources of funds. The data are not derived from sufficientlylarge samples to allow precise estimates, but they do indicaterough orders of magnitude. Other data derived from interviewswith BNDD staff members or U.N. publications are subject to thesame general weaknesses. PRODUCTION SOURCES OF SUPPLY The production and distribution of opiatenarcotics at the international level are complex andlittle-understood matters. The crisis of heroin addiction thathas afflicted the United States in recent years has obscured thefact that the growing of opium is an age-old, legal occupation inmany areas of the world. Heroin addicts in the United Statesconsume only a very small amount of the total quantity of opiatesproduced worldwide. The Bureau of Narcotics and Dangerous Drugsestimates that 10,000 to 12,000 pounds of heroin are sufficientto supply the entire addict population in the United States forone year.' Since, as is generally acknowledged, ten pounds ofopium are required to manufacture one pound of heroin, only100,000 to 120,000 pounds of opium are needed for illicit heroinuse in the United States about 2 per cent of the estimated worldproduction .2 Of the opium used by the U.S. heroin market, 80per cent comes from Turkey, 15 per cent from Mexico, and 5 percent from the Far East.' These are not precise figures, however,but assumptions rather generally derived from heroin seizures andknowledge of the international illicit drug-import routes.'Moreover, several recent developments may change the sources ofsupply for the U.S. market. On June 30. 1971, President CevdetSunay of Turkey decreed that all poppy cultivation and opiumproduction in that country will be forbidden beginning in thefall of 1972. Until that time, licit opium production will belimited to only four provinces and strictly policed. How wellthis policy will be enforced, and what ultimate effect it willhave on heroin use in the United States, cannot as yet bedetermined. However, already there has been considerablespeculation that the Far East supplies a greater amount than wasthought previously. The tighter controls now being imposed byTurkey and the increased contacts between the U.S. and SoutheastAsia caused by the Indo-China War have shifted the sources ofsupply somewhat. Raw opium itself is produced from the poppyplant (papaver somniferum-the sleep-bearing poppy), whichconsists of a thin main stalk, three to four feet tall, withseveral egg-shaped pods on top. Between June and July, the poppyblooms, and, 10 days later, when the blossoms lose their petals,the pods are ready for the opium resin to be extracted. Incisionsare made in the pods, and a milky fluid oozes out. At the end ofthe day, this substance is scraped off the pods by hand. It laterhardens into a brown gum and is pressed into cakes of raw opium.The amount of opium produced from a poppy crop will increase ifthis process is repeated once again, as in Turkey, or severaltimes, as in India, but the morphine content will be reduced witheach lancing.' Many factors affect the opium yield peracre-the quality of the soil, the temperature, rainfall, thequality of the seedirriga-tion, fertilization, and crop rotation.Intensive cultivation and a great deal of labor are required toproduce opium, particularly during harvest, when the pods must beincised and the raw opium collected by hand, but labor is alsoneeded during the growing season to thin the poppy plants. It isestimated that between 175 and 250 man-hours of labor arerequired to produce 1 kilo of opium.6 Because of thislabor-intensive production process, poppies tend to be raisedonly where labor is abundant and relatively inexpensive; butthere seems no clear reason, given a different set of relativeprices for labor and capital, that a more capital-intensiveprocess could not be employed. Most poppy cultivation occurs in a zonestretching from central Turkey through Iran, Afghanistan,Pakistan, India, Burma, Laos, Thailand, and southern China, withthe greatest concentration in India and Southeast Asia. Poppycultivation is legal in India, Turkey, the U.S.S.R., and Iran.Turkish licit poppy acreage was reported to be 29,600 acres in1970.1 According to U.N. figures, India has at least 86,500 acresplanted.' Iran, which abolished the production of opium from 1956to 1968, planned 29,600 acres of poppy cultivation for 1970. Inaddition, roughly 30,000-32,000 acres each are believed to beplanted in the Soviet Union, Afghanistan, and Pakistan, andnegligible amounts of licit opium are produced in Yugoslavia andJapan.' According to figures reported to the UnitedNations by producing countries, the total licit world productionof opium is 1,0601,085 metric tons, or approximately 40-45 percent of the total produced. India is by far the world's largestlicit producer of opium, with a reported 750 metric tons in 1968.Turkey and the U.S.S.R. each contribute 115-120 metric tons oflicit production. An estimate of 75-100 metric tons was made forCommunist China, based on expected medicinal needs for itspopulation. The estimated totals for licit and illicit productionare presented in Table 4-1. Licit opium is used primarily in themanufacture of medicinal opiates. Legal morphine productioncurrently amounts to approximately 150 metric tons per year-asubstantial rise from around 85 metric tons per year in themid-1950's. This growth is due chiefly to the rising demand forcodeine, but a small portion of the licit opium is used foropium-maintenance programs in India, Pakistan, and Iran. The world's illicit production of opium isestimated at 1,2501,400 metric tons annually.10 The principalconcentration of illicit production is in the Burma-Laos-Thailandregion, which produces an estimated 700-750 tons. TheAfghanistan-Pakistan area produces another 250-300 tons ofillicit opium, and the illicit output of Turkey is estimated at 100 tons.Illicit cultivation of the plant also occurs in parts of Mexico,South America, and North Africa, althoughthe amounts produced there are negligible. While some illegalacreage is planted in Turkey, most of the illicit opium there isdiverted from the yield on legal acreage. On the other hand, allthe opium produced in Afghanistan, Burma, Laos, and Thailand andpart of the outputs of India and Pakistan are derived fromillegal acreage. About 40 metric tons of illicit Turkishproduction was thought to enter Iran in 1970; the remainder isexported to Western Europe and the United States. The Southeast Asian countries consume most oftheir own opium, but some is shipped to Hong Kong for use thereand for distribution throughout the Far East. A small amount,perhaps one or two metric tons, is shipped to the United States,although this figure has probably risen recently. India alsoconsumes the major part of its illicit production; and, althoughsome of the Afghanistan-Pakistan production is consumedinternally, approximately 200 metric tons is thought to enterIran. Iran is the largest consumer of illicit opium in the world,with an estimated 350,000 opium and heroin users. In 1969, Iranbegan controlled production of opium in order to maintain its ownaddicts. YIELDS, MARKET PRICES, ANDINCOMES Income from poppy cultivation is affected bythe opium yield obtained, the morphine content of the raw opium,and the current licit and illicit market prices. The reportedyields per acre in 1969 for four countries are presented in Table4-2, but, since these are government figures provided by thelocal farmers, both yields and acreage are probably understated.This is undoubtedly the case for the crop yields in Turkey andPakistan. Turkish yields are closer to 13.4-14.2 pounds per acre,with the nonreported amount diverted to illicit traders."Opium yields are estimated at 8.6-28.6 pounds per acre inSoutheast Asia" (probably closer to the lower figure"),and the Soviet Union reports yields of 27.5-32 pounds peracre." Prices for opium vary with quality. Themorphine content of Turkish opium, reportedly the highest in theworld, varies from 9 to 13 per cent, while in other producingcountries the morphine content varies from 4 to 12 per cent.Prices to farmers for raw opium are presented in Table 4-3.Because of its quality, the prices for Turkish opium are thehighest, with the exception of the Iranian price, which issupported by the government in order to discourage diversion toillicit traders. The licit prices are determined by the worldmarket price: the price at which the national opium monopoliescan sell to pharmaceutical companies. In Turkey, the illicitprice varies with the yield of the current year's harvest, theseason, enforcement efforts, and the demand for Turkish opiumfrom other countries, particularly Iran. The illicit price inIran is extremely high because of the strict enforcement of lawsagainst illicit trading. The absolute income per farm from opiumcultivation is greatest in Turkey, but the percentage of totalfarm income accounted for by opium increases as one moveseastward. In the late 1960's, there were an estimated 70,000farms producing opium in Turkey. If 120 tons are sold by thesefarms at the licit price of $11 per kilo 0 kilo=2.2046 pounds)and 100 tons on the illicit market at $25 per kilo, the grossincome from opium amounts to $3,820,000, or $55 per farm. Thisamounts to roughly 5-10 per cent of farm income in Turkey. InIndia, roughly 200,000 farms earn $70-75 from poppy cultivation,or 15-20 per cent of average total income per farm. Since theincome figures include income-in-kind (food, clothing produced onfarm), the income from opium provides an even higher percentageof cash income than we have indicated. Opium is probably theprincipal source of farm income in Burma, Laos, and Thailand;cultivation is said to be concentrated in areas controlled by guerrillainsurgents, who transport much of the output to Hong Kong and usethe proceeds for arms purchases.',' Licit production of opium is of minorimportance even in India and Turkey. India earned roughly $6-7million for exports of 530 metric tons in 1968, compared withtotal export earnings of $2 billion. Indian farmers earnedapproximately $7.7 million on production of 700 metric tons.Turkish exports of 120 metric tons yield approximately $1.7million, less than 0.3 per cent of total exports. Turkishproduction is also very small in relation to national income of$9 billion. On the other hand, opium sales are undoubtedly ofgreat economic importance to the producing regions of Burma,Laos, and Thailand. POLICY OPTIONS: WHAT CAN BE DONE Policies designed to attack the heroin problemat the source of supply devolve into two basic alternatives: (1)the purchase of entire opium crops, or (2) direct controls onproduction. Each of these proposals has problems difficult tosurmount at present. PRE-EMPTIVE BUYING The first alternative would be for the UnitedStates to purchase the total output of opium from those countriesthat supply the heroin entering its borders. The administrativesimplicity of this proposal makes it appear deceptivelyattractive. In time, however, pre-emptive buying wouldnecessarily involve purchases of both licit and illicitproduction in all countries where opium is currently grown. TheU.S. offer price would have to be raised above the maximum priceillicit traders are willing to pay; otherwise, the farmer wouldhave an incentive to sell to the higher bidder. If the offerprice is less than the illicit price, leakages into the illicitmarket would probably result, and the policy would therefore havelittle effect on the supply of opiates sent to the United States,especially since the amount is so small relative to total worldproduction. And, seemingly, the illicit trader would be willingto increase his offer price substantially, because, given thelarge markups at each stage of the distribution system, the priceof raw opium has relatively little effect on the ultimate retailprice in the United States (see Table 4-4). (For example, if thecurrent price to the farmer for 10 kilos of illicit opium is$250, and the retail street price for I kilo of heroin is$264,900, then raising the farm price 100 per cent would raisethe retail price only .09 per cent.) A pre-emptive buying policy would become verycostly, because opium producers would have a clear incentive toincrease their outputs, and other farmers would have a similarincentive to begin substituting opium for other crops. EugeneRossides, Assistant Secretary of the Treasury for Enforcement andOperations, has gone on record as strongly opposing any conceptof pre-emptive buying. He told a congressional committee that"it would simply stimulate production and it would take awaythe responsibility of each nation to handle the problem as partof the international community."" Moreover, without strict administrativecontrols, this policy would not only increase production in allcountries currently producing opium but might induce othercountries whose climate is suitable to begin production in thehope of sharing in the windfall. If this policy were directed at only one sourceof supply, such as Turkey, it would not prevent traders fromobtaining illicit supplies in other producing countries. The100,000-120,000 pounds of opium used by the U.S. market could begrown in an area of, at most, 11.2-23.2 square miles and thuscould easily be absorbed in another producing region." Infact, some experts believe that 35 pounds of opium could beproduced on a single acre of land if a capital-intensive processwere employed under controlled circumstances. -If this provedtrue, -generally, only 4.55.4 square miles would be needed tosupply the entire U.S. market. Consequently, a pre-emptive buyingpolicy, in the long run, could result in a change of location forthe source of U.S. supply with little or no effect on theaddiction problem. Pre-emptive buying within an individual countrymight prove effective in dealing with an internal addictionproblem if coupled with strict limitations on acreage and illicitimportation. Iran, for example, has discouraged export to illicitmarkets in other countries by purchasing its entire internalopium crop at a very high price, restricting production tocertain designated areas, and strictly enforcing its laws againstillicit markets. The legal opium purchased by the government isused by the state-run addict maintenance program, in which 50,000individuals are registered. The potential expense is one problemwith the high-support-price approach. If nearly all Iran's300,000-400,000 users and addicts entered the program, the costwould rise dramatically. Furthermore, even with severe penaltiesagainst smuggling and illicit trading, Iran still experiencesdifficulty in trying to prevent the importation of opiates. Somesuccess has been reported in eliminating illicit supplies fromTurkey, but imports from Afghanistan and Pakistan have not beenhalted. The mid-1970 price in Iran for Afghani opium was wellbelow the licit price, despite intensive law-enforcement efforts.It seems that the heavily armed mountain tribes operating out ofboth Afghanistan and Pakistan have not as yet been deterred byeither the border authorities or the death penalty on smuggling.On the other hand, the price of illicit Turkish opium in 1970 wasas high as $400 per kilo in Tehran-six to seven times thegovernment support price. As the Iranian example shows, the success of apre-emptive buying policy, even if accompanied by administrativecontrols, depends on whether government can effectively exert itswill over the producing regions. In fact, most of the world'sopium supply is produced in areas where little political controlexists. Administrative controls themselves are difficult toenforce, as we shall see. Therefore, because of the size of theworld market relative to U.S. heroin consumption, the highelasticity of supply, and the difficulty of control, it isunlikely that a policy of pre-emptive buying could be successful. DIRECT CONTROLS The application of administrative controlsalone is the other basic alternative to reduce opium supplies.This involves restricting the acreage on which opium can be grownand maintaining a low official price. A low official price mayreduce the illicit price, at least in the short run, and therebydiscourage illegal planting and crop diversion. Certainly, takenby itself, a low official price will not induce new production.But the most salient feature of direct controls is increasing therisks of illicit trading and consequently reducing theprofitability. Practically, however, continuous enforcement ofdirect controls is both difficult and costly, and the necessaryresources available to most producing countries are quitelimited. Especially in countries with weak central governments,controls present severe administrative problems. All countrieswith an illicit trade lack adequate numbers of both trained lawenforcement personnel and motor vehicles. Given the low wages inpublic-service jobs and the large profits in the opium trade,corruption of government and police officials is a widespreadproblem in most countries and is likely to continue. The bribesthat illegal importers are willing and able to pay areconsiderably higher than the amounts officials are currentlyaccepting for inaction or nonenforcement of the law. Widespreadsocial acceptance of opium use in many rural areas of Pakistan,Afghanistan, India, Burma, Laos, and Thailand is anotherdifficulty that makes enforcement of controls for the benefit ofan outside country appear especially burdensome. In Turkey, wherethere is reportedly little opium use, controls have beenextremely unpopular because of both the loss of an importantsource of farm income and the rising anti-American sentiment.While limitations on local financial resources could presumablybe eased by American aid, the administrative and politicaldifficulties severely limit the possibility of successfulcontrols. If, however, the desire and resources to do sowere present, controls could probably be applied successfully incertain individual countries. Communist China and Iransuccessfully eliminated production in the 1950's. Turkey hasrestricted legal acreage of poppy cultivation to 29,652 acresfrom 103,782 acres in 1960. In the process, illegal productionmay have been somewhat reduced, because illicit Turkish opium isbelieved to come principally from larger than declared yields onlegal acreage." Turkish officials seem committed to theirpledge to enforce a ban on all poppy cultivation by the fall of1972. The chances of this policy's success will be discussedlater. The major problem in curtailing opiumproduction is that most of the world's supply is produced inareas where no national control exists. The lack of control isvirtually complete in the producing regions of Burma, Laos, andThailand. Areas that are largely controlled by tribal groups areresponsible for opium production and distribution in Pakistan andAfghanistan. Therefore, it seems likely that attempts to controlor abolish opium production in Turkey would have little effect,as illicit traders turned to these areas for supplies. Indeed,the recent changes in Turkey do not seem to have caused anydecrease in total U.S. imports of illegal opiates. Still another difficulty is that of restrictingopium production in one country when neighboring countries donot, or cannot, restrict production. After twelve years ofprohibition, Iran returned to limited production, because itsaddicts were purchasing illicit opium from Turkey, Pakistan, andAfghanistan. Even in Turkey and India, control systems havefailed to halt the cultivation of illicit opium. Turkish farmersmake written declarations to the government of their licensedacreage and expected kilogram yields, selling the surplus to theillicit market. In 1969, for example, Turkish officials collected116 tons of licit opium from poppies in eleven provinces. But in1970, when nine provinces were allowed to produce, only 60 tonswere turned in. Presumably diversion accounts for some of thedifference. Some illicit production in Turkey has occurred fromunlicensed acreage, but this is relatively easy to discover ifsufficient efforts are made, since the poppies have a longgrowing season and are easy to detect, especially from the air.In India, on the other hand, the illicit opium output is producedprincipally on unlicensed acreage. Direct controls might be more effective if theywere combined with crop substitution, subsidies for production ofother goods, or direct payments for not growing poppies. But cropsubstitution is unlikely to be successful, since it is difficult,if not impossible, to find crops that yield as high a return perunit of land as opium. For example, attempts to substitute ahigh-yielding Mexican wheat in Pakistan failed because the cropprovided a return per acre roughly half that of opium, assumingopium is sold at official prices." In Turkey, there has been a sound agriculturalreason that crop substitution is difficult. Apart fromlow-income-producing grains, the poppy is the only autumn-sowncrop and is not easily replaceable by the higher-yielding springcrops, such as cotton, maize, sugar beets, tobacco, or melons.The opium produced is important to the small farmer, not onlybecause of the amount of income gained, but also because it isharvested before the grain and therefore provides expense moneyfor the main harvest. Furthermore, the harvest of opium occurs ina period when the farmer has little else to do and can spend histime on the lancing of the poppies and collection of the opium. Subsidies for production of alternative cropswould certainly be required if the substitute crops provided lessincome than opium. The cost of producing a unit of a substitutecrop would be reduced by a subsidy, and the transfer payment fromthe government would allow the grower to increase production and,in the process, bid resources, land, and labor away from othercrops, including opium. Because these inputs would become moreexpensive, the cost per unit of producing opium would increase. However, if demand for opium in this particularnational black market is relatively insensitive to changes inprice, opium production would be little reduced, and littlereduction in farmer income would result. A higher subsidy wouldbe necessary to raise the relative return on the alternativecrop. If the demand for opium varies with price," perhapsbecause of the availability of opium from other sources orsynthetic opiates, then the subsidy would probably reduce much ofthe country's production. Clearly, subsidies for output of other goodscould be set high enough so that the output of opium in a givencountry could be greatly reduced. This may come, however, only atgreat expense to the government or to the United States, if thelatter sponsors the program. The same types of administrativeproblems that exist in the crop-purchase proposal are repeatedhere. Basically, it may be difficult to determine howmuch of the production of the subsidized crop is actually landdiverted from opium. Similar administrative problems would result ifgovernments made payments to producers for not growing opium,since it would be difficult to determine how many farmers who donot grow opium now would demand payment. In 1972, when Turkey'scomplete prohibition on poppy cultivation goes into effect, thegovernment plans to pay farmers on the basis of the value on theinternational market of their whole opium crop sold the previousyear to state officials. But, if only those who were originally"licensed" to produce are given payments, and nopayments go to those who planted illegal acreage, there is noincentive for these growers to cease producing opium, nor isthere an incentive for nongrowers to resist the urge to produce.Furthermore, to be effective, payments must exceed the return onoutput sold illegally. Since the illicit price of opium isextremely low relative to the retail price of heroin in theUnited States, it could rise greatly without much effect on thefinal price to the addict. Therefore, payments would have to beextremely high to be effective and would make the program verycostly. Thus, it also seems unlikely that a policy of directcontrols on opium production, even if combined with cropsubstitution, subsidies for production of other goods, or directpayments for not growing opium, could be completely successful. General economic development in poppy-growingareas may eventually reduce the relative profitability of thiscrop. The usual process is for technological innovations inagriculture to increase the productivity of fanns to the pointwhere large surpluses of labor develop. Migration of labor to thecities occurs because of the availability of employment andpublic services. As industrial development increases the demandfor labor, real wages rise, and capital-intensive productionprocesses become more desirable. If no capital-intensive methodof cultivating opium can be found, then the return on poppy fallsrelative to other goods and opium cultivation is greatly reduced.Clearly, this ignores changes in the demand for opium; moreover,it is, at best, a long-run solution. This situation mayeventually develop in Turkey but is not likely for a very longtime in the East. DISTRIBUTION Several books and articles have described thesystem ky which opium is transformed into heroin and importedinto the United States. They are all in substantial agreement,possibly because the primary source of information on the subjectis the Bureau of Narcotics and Dangerous Drugs. In the case of Turkish opium, growers eitherwithhold part of their output or plant illegal acreage.Small-scale entrepreneurs gather opium from the farms inrelatively small quantities and deliver it to syndicates in ornear Istanbul. At this point, the opium is transformed intomorphine, which cuts the volume by 90 per cent. This processformerly took place in Syria. but as relations between Syria andTurkey have deteriorated in recent years, border controls havebeen tightened and the morphine labs moved to the Istanbul area.From Istanbul, the morphine is transported overland throughBulgaria and Yugoslavia or by ship to its destination in southernFrance, where covert laboratories refine the morphine intoheroin. (One theory is that some of the heroin labs are locatedin trucks and are thus mobile and difficult to detect.) Oncerefined, the heroin is smuggled to the United States through NewYork, Montreal, or some other large port. According to somesources, shipments are also being sent to the U.S. via SouthAmerica through a Southern port. MARKET STRUCTURE The best available outline of the domesticheroin distribution system, at least for New York City, wasdeveloped by Mark Moore of the Hudson Institute." Hisoutline relies, in turn, on earlier analyses by John Casey andEdward Preble" and information from the Bureau of Narcoticsand Dangerous Drugs. Moore suggests that heroin passes through sixlevels of distribution: the importer, the kilo-connection, theconnection, the weight dealer, the street dealer, and, finally,the juggler or pusher. Table 4-4 shows the outline of the systemand includes estimates of the prices and value added to theheroin at each level. Before reviewing the operation of thespecific segments of the system, it is important to discuss theover-all market structure of the business. The key questions hereare: How tight is vertical organization? How competitive is thesystem at the various levels? How much increase in risk would berequired to make it unprofitable for large operators to stay inbusiness? For many years, conventional wisdom held thatthe heroin business was monopolized by organized crime, perhapsby the Mafia. BNDD now seems to believe, probably as a result ofrecent arrests of South Americans at relatively high levels, that10 or 12 large wholesalers with varying degrees of connection toorganized crime now control the distribution process in theUnited States. It seems clear that many economic principlesoperating in society at large must also apply to illegalenterprises," since the business of supply and distributionof illicit drugs is presumably subject to the same generaleconomic laws, and responds to the same general set ofincentives, as prevail in more open industries. There are, ofcourse, some crucial differences caused by the fact of illegalityand also by the moral problems associated with dealing in many ofthese drugs-for example, the need to minimize the risk ofdetection of the origin of the distribution system. The Hudson monograph argues that the objectiveof the industry is to maximize profits within the constraint ofthe risk of arrest and imprisonment, and that this objective ismost likely to be attained if the industry is organized intoseveral small distribution units separated vertically from oneanother, if higher levels in the system are monopolized, and iflower levels are competitive with some elements of market power(monopolistic competition). The small distribution units in theheroin industry are separated from one another by restrictinginformation at one level about the identity and activities ofother levels. Risks are limited by close supervision anddiscipline of employees, thus reducing the probability ofinformation leaks, and by the fact that penetration of one levelwill not result in penetration of another. The primarydisadvantage of small, separate distribution units is theirinability to adjust to large changes in demand; suppliers end upwith either excessive or deficient inventories. Moore argues that a monopoly could mostefficiently perform the functions required of the high levels inthe distribution network. The top levels in the system must: (1)restrict the total supply of heroin to maintain high marketprices, (2) regularly and reliably supply an amount of heroinfairly close to the realized demand, (3) manipulate supplyconditions above them with a minimum of explicit planning andnegotiation, and (4) adjust to errors in supply with aminimum of negotiation and activity. A centralized organizationwould be more effective in handling each of these problems. Amonopolist can restrict the total supply, allowing high pricesthroughout the system. In addition, he is in a position to havean efficient ordering policy, thus successfully accommodatinguneven deliveries and lead time. Agents can be coerced intoholding inventories or resupplied when short of heroin. Tightcontrol can be maintained over the circulation of information.Finally, a monopolist can maintain a monopoly position inrelation to producers.. thus reducing lead times, unevenness, andquality deterioration. In contrast, a competitive market would be lesslikely to ensure a smooth, restricted supply, adjusting to errorsin a discreet, efficient manner. In a more competitive situation,it is more difficult to pool shipments or parcel out unevendeliveries of heroin. With many suppliers at the top, there aremore transactions, more explicit negotiations, more occasions ofshort supply or large inventories, more information circulatingfreely-and thus a greater probability of arrest. A monopoly,therefore, is logically the most efficient type of organizationalstructure at high levels. But a successful monopoly requires theexistence of some type of leverage or barrier to entry, such as(1) special knowledge unavailable to others, (2) total controlover some vital raw material, or (3) total control over themarket as to make the cost of entry prohibitive, especially ifentry requires a large fixed investment. It is doubtful that anyof these considerations applies to the heroin traffic. Theknowledge required to refine opium into heroin is certainly notdifficult to acquire. It is also doubtful that the knowledge ofmethods of conducting illegal activities-such as smuggling-is solimited as to allow any firm to maintain a monopoly. There are nosubstantial fixed costs other than the investment in aninformation system, needed to offset the high level of risk inthe trade. However, the difficulty, and thus the cost, ofdeveloping such an information network may be a formidablebarrier to entry. Trusted personal relationships with Turkish orFrench syndicates may have put some organizations in a monopolyposition for Turkish opium. However, it would be in the interestof the Turkish or French firms to sell to as many importers aspossible, forcing them to bid against each other and thus raisethe price of heroin. A firm desiring to enter the businessshould, therefore, be able to establish the necessaryconnections. It is possible, of course, that the suppliersare not profit maximizers; they may not wish to accept increasedrisks for the sake of increased profits. Instead, afterestablishing an acceptably low level of risk, they may seek tomaximize profits within this constraint. Such an approach wouldsacrifice many of the benefits of competition among buyersbecause of the need to limit the number of people who know thesupplier's identity. (This factor also operates as a barrier toentry at other high levels of the distribution system.) If thebarriers to entry in the market for Turkish opium are too great,however, a potential importer could go to Hong Kong,Bangkok, Karachi, or Saigon. Finally, as noted, trying to erect a barrier toentry by attempting to control the raw material does not seemfeasible. The U.S. market relative to total world production issimply too small to prevent other supplies from becomingavailable. Also, the retail product is homogeneous and easilydivisible, making it difficult to hoard. However, for an illegal business, there areadditional techniques of monopolization. Violence is the mostlikely method of securing market control; illegal operators canreadily hire agents or firms willing to kill quietly andefficiently. If a heroin-distribution monopoly became establishedearly and acquired both a large organization and a sophisticatedinformation system, it could make it extremely dangerous for arival to compete. First of all, it might have the key advantageof knowing who is trying to enter the business before its ownprior presence can be discovered. Since rivals would find itdifficult to purchase a comparable intelligence service secretly,this acts as an important barrier to entry. Another way ofenforcing monopoly of an illegal product is to control the use oflegal force-corrupting police officials to serve one's own ends.An effective use of corrupt police would be to have one's rivalseliminated via arrest; sufficient arrests would satisfy thepublic and allow the police to refrain from attacking themonopoly itself. It is in the interest of the police, in turn, toeliminate competition, protecting the source of their payoffmoney while appearing to be effective law enforcers. Thesymbiosis between criminal enterprise and elements in lawenforcement is well known and has occupied many investigatorycommissions without being eliminated." A firm could also obtain police cooperationwithout police corruption. If one organization has betterintelligence than any other, and better intelligence than thepolice, it could simply inform the police of the competing ringand possibly provide the evidence necessary to break it up. The BNDD believes that 10 or 12 large wholesaleoperations exist in the United States today. Thus, the potentialbarriers to entry have apparently not been strong enough to allowany one firm to enforce a monopoly. The system has probablydeveloped into an oligopoly or cartel, with each firm maintaininga type of monopoly control of firms below it in the lowerdistribution levels. It is not clear what agreements, if any,exist among these firms with respect to prices or market areas,but the risk of detection may limit the mobility of distributorsbetween top-level suppliers, thus allowing firms at the top tomaintain vertically integrated supply systems. At lower levels in the system, there are manycompetitive suppliers, strict monopoly being impossible becauseof the difficulty of disciplining customers. At these levels,most customers are addicts who are highly motivated to maintainrelations with as many suppliers as possible. Low level suppliersare arrested much more frequently than those in higher levels,because they deal more often and more openly. Thus, relationshipsbetween consumers and suppliers are constantly breaking up andbeginning again. Furthermore, addicts are always trying to breakinto the lower levels of the system, and, given the small amountof trust, skill, and capital needed, personnel and organizationschange rapidly. Nevertheless, some elements of monopoly controlremain. Information is often unavailable to consumers, thusrestricting the number of markets in which they can buy. Also,addicts find it useful to restrict their purchases to dealers whoconsistently provide a high-quality product and who give themlower prices as loyal and trusted clients. Thus, limitedinformation and product differentiation maintain elements ofmonopoly advantage even for suppliers at low levels. COSTS AND PROFITS Existing analysis of the economics of eachsegment of the heroin industry is fragmentary because of thenature of the business. The best available analysis is again thatof Moore, and most of the comments in this section are derivedfrom his model of the system. For the importer and kilo-connection at thehigher levels of the distribution system, the operatingcosts-principally wages and inventory finance costs-are estimatedto be a much greater percentage of value added than at lowerlevels (50-55 per cent versus 30 per cent). Importers needskilled employees for the smuggling process and periodicallyrequire large amounts of capital to finance transactions withproducers and processors. Kilo connections have relatively largewage costs because of the elaborate organization needed forexchanges and maintaining inventories as well as disciplininglower-level suppliers. Financing costs are also high at thislevel because of the need to store inventories for uncertainperiods of time. Operating and finance costs are more moderatefor connections. Although they need to employ agents to developnew markets, discipline customers, dilute heroin, and makedeliveries, there is a much faster turnover of inventories atthis level. The rate of turnover minimizes financing, butconnections may be forced to accept it from sources higher in theorganization. Weight dealers, street dealers, and jugglers are,for the most part, self-employed; inventories are turned overquickly, and individuals at these levels rarely have financingproblems. In contrast to operating costs, expendituresfor bribes as a per cent of value added appear to increase as onemoves from high to low levels (2 per cent versus 5 per cent). Atthe importer and kilo-connection levels, well-placed bribes cansecure considerable immunities at relatively low costs. Expensesfor bribery increase at the connection level, because they aremore vulnerable to arrest, engaging in a relatively more visibleactivity. They must also frequently make payments to othercriminal organizations for "protection." Weightdealers, street dealers, and jugglers become even more vulnerableto extortion and will also have to pay rather large bribes (as aper cent of value added) to law-enforcement agencies. Profits are great at each level of thedistribution network but decrease as a per cent of value added atlower levels of distribution. Gross profits include (1) afinancial return equal to what could be made in the firm's nextbest alternative line of business (its opportunity cost), (2) areturn to compensate for the risk of arrest and incarceration,and (3) a return to monopoly power. The kilo-connection at the top level ofdistribution is probably the single most powerful component inthe system. At this level, gross profits are high and aremaintained by a large degree of monopoly power. Economic theorysuggests that the firm's profits must be at least as high as thereturn from other attractive illegal opportunities, such asloansharking or gambling. While risk-the probability of arrest-isrelatively low, the combination of monopoly power and highopportunity costs makes profits at this level high. For theimporter, profits are probably less than those ofkilo-connections. His risks are low, because, being high on theladder, he is difficulty to identify. Opportunity costs are low,because, with the substantial investment in building hisinformation network, an importer can make more money dealing inheroin than he could make elsewhere. Some monopoly power existsbecause the personal-relations network operates as a barrier toentry, but this is probably limited by the encouragement bykilo-connections of free-lance importers. Gross profits of connections are less thanthose of the two upper levels. The restricted access toinformation about operations allows some degree ofmonopolization, but risks become greater as visibility increasesand the police become more successful at arrest and conviction.At this level, opportunity costs are low because of the largeinvestment in personal relations, which are not valuable unlessthe connection is engaged in the heroin trade. Connections canaccept lower profits, and still find the business more profitablethan alternatives. The remaining levels are characterized byrelatively high risk and low opportunity costs. All three levelsof operation are -relatively visible, have relatively higharrest rates, and thus require adequate compensation for risksincurred. On the other hand, opportunity costs are low becausefew operators on this level have the skills required in othertypes of enterprise. At the weight dealer level, a small degreeof monopoly is maintained, because access to information islimited. At the street-dealer and juggler levels, monopolyprofits are minimal. Analyzing operating costs and profits at eachstage of heroin distribution carries important implications forlaw-enforcement policy. In summary, if a firm's costs are high,and it has little monopoly power or attractive income-producingalternatives, it may be quite easy to increase the risk enough sothat the firm leaves the industry. If these conditions do nothold-if profits are high and protected by monopoly, or if fewgood alternative profit opportunities exist-the firm might wellabsorb the cost of the increased risk. These factors largelydetermine the outcome of possible law-enforcement strategies. EFFECTS OF -POLICE -PRESSURE Increased police pressure on the distributionsystem can clearly increase the risks' and operating costs ofthose involved. Evidence does not show, however, that any onefirm is large enough or monopolistic enough so that itsdestruction or neutralization would have an important impact onthe total distribution system and thus on heroin use at thestreet level. During the last few years, the arrest of even majordistributors and traffickers has had no significant impact on theprice or availability of heroin. On the international level, forinstance, in the first six months of 1971, BNDD participated inthe arrest of 113 major traffickers outside the United States,seizing large quantities of drugs in the process. Federalofficials face an almost impossible task of trying to stop thesmuggling of drugs at the border. About 250 million people enterthe country every year. Approximately 65 million cars and trucks,306,000 planes, and 157,000 ships entered in 1970." If thiswere not enough, customs officials state that, on anaverage-size ship arriving at the Port of New York, there are30,000 places where heroin can be hidden. Domestically, thesituation is not much different. A study of the undercover unitof the New York City police narcotics division revealed that, in1970, agents made 7,266 buys of narcotics that resulted in 4,007arrests. However, only 4.97 pounds of highly adulteratedheroin were seized in these actions, at a total cost of $91,197,and with no appreciable effect on heroin distribution citywide. In such a situation, law enforcement must relyon the indirect effects of general deterrence rather than ondirect disruption. But it is far from clear how firms operatingin the field regard a successful attack on another firm.Possibly, such an attack will cause them to reassess their ownrisks and assume that they are in greater danger than theybelieved before. On the other hand, it may be that existing firmswill simply assume that the destroyed operation was incompetentor lacking in security and see no need to reassess their ownrisk. To the extent that police are successful inincreasing a distributor's probability of arrest, one wouldexpect the chain to lengthen as each supplier attempts to dealwith fewer buyers and places more distance between himself andthe street. Suppliers would invest more time and absorb greateroperating costs in designing more complex delivery systems tobetter conceal their activities. The risk involved in holdinginventories would cause suppliers to hold less in reserve, thusincreasing the time and complications involved in arrangingpurchases and sales. However, police pressure might also increasea monopoly's hold on the system. A monopoly can absorb theincreased risks more easily and is also likely to be betterprotected. Markets might become even more centralized. Because ofhigher costs and lack of competition, prices could be expected torise. For all these reasons, it seems clear that lawenforcement can raise the price of heroin. The effects of higherprices, and thus the ultimate impact of law enforcement, areuncertain. They depend heavily on how total demand reacts to thechanges. One hypothesis is that demand is inelastic,that an addict is dependent on heroin and will try to maintainhis level of consumption regardless of price. If this is so, thenlaw-enforcement policy will have little effect. The added costsof greater risks will be shifted to consumers, and the revenuesof the industry will increase. So will the social costs of theactivities addicts engage in to support the habit. (A logicalquestion is why firms are not already maximizing profits-that is,if prices and revenues could be raised before the increased costwas incurred, why did this not, in fact, take place? This may bedue to concern with public reaction. Higher heroin prices causehigher crime rates, which increase the public's demand for strongpolicy measures against the heroin traffic. Therefore, firms mayattempt to maximize profits, given the -constraint of maintaininga low level of risk. This calls for keeping prices low enough sothat the crime needed to support it remains"tolerable." Competition might also play apart.) A second theory is that demand is elastic, thata price rise does cause a disproportionate decrease inconsumption. If so, then the suppliers would have to absorb theincreased cost of higher risks or raise the price and accept adecline in total revenues. While it is commonly believed that theaddictive nature of heroin causes the demand for it to beinelastic, it might, in fact, be elastic, for two reasons: First,the development of methadone during the past few years hascreated a low-cost alternative for addicts that did not existbefore. Secondly, over the last thirty years there has been asubstantial long-term rise in the price of heroin relative to theprice of other consumer goods. This may have produced a situationin which most addicts are maintaining their habit at the highestprice level they are able to support. If the price increasedfurther, these addicts would have no choice except to decreasethe quantity of heroin used, because they would be unable toraise their income enough to meet the new cost. If the demand is elastic, a law-enforcementpolicy could be effective. If the price of heroin increased andmethadone was necessarily substituted, the social costs ofaddiction, including crime, would decrease. If addicts chose toadapt by using less heroin for the same cost, however, the crimecosts would not be decreased. It could be argued, on the otherhand, that increasing the cost of being an addict hastens thetime when the addict voluntarily leaves the addicted life. The firm attempting to maximize profits,subject to the constraint of maintaining a low level of risk, maychoose to absorb the risk as increased operating costs ratherthan attempt to shift it to the consumers. This, of course,results in a lower rate of return and reduces the attractivenessof heroin distribution. In the heroin business, the gross profitsof a firm (revenues minus operating costs) must be at least equalto the return the firm could earn in an alternative investment(its opportunity cost). Profits that exceed opportunity costs can beconsidered a return to a monopoly position or compensation forrisk. Gross profits must exceed opportunity costs by at leastenough to compensate the firm for the risks it undertakes. Ifgross profits, less opportunity costs, exceed the compensationrequired for risk, the firm will stay in the business.Alternatively, if gross profits, less opportunity costs, are lessthan the return required for undertaking risk, the firm will notbe willing to absorb the risk and will leave the industry. Risk for an illegal firm can be viewed as equalto the probability of punishment, as the firm perceives it, timesthe cost of certain punishment to that firm. The cost of certainpunishment is equal to the amount the firm would be willing topay to avoid it.26 The probability of punishment can be affectedby public policy and by the firm's own actions, because itdepends on the probability of being apprehended and successfullyprosecuted. Changes in the criminal-justice system are essentialif high-level distributors are going to be put out of business.These include more sophisticated training of police personnel,higher salaries to lessen the temptation of bribes, and higherbudgets for purchasing information. In reality, law-enforcementagencies have been unable to raise the level of risk anywherenear what would be required to make this criminal enterpriseunprofitable. The cost of the expected punishment to theillegal operation can also be influenced by changes in judicialprocedures and increases of sentences. Currently, many defendantsin narcotics cases forfeit bail, become fugitives, and, ifapprehended, are more likely to be tried for violating theconditions of bail than for the original charge. If convicted,this means a lesser sentence. The economic cost in such acase-the amount the offender would pay to avoid detection-shouldbe equal to the amount of bail, plus the probability of beingarrested while. at large, times the penalty for jumping bail.This cost would be increased if a change in public policy raisedthe amount of bail or the penalty for violating its conditions .21 On the other hand, the probability ofpunishment can be reduced if the illegal operation spends more onbribes and devising elaborate, less conspicuous pickup anddelivery systems. If increased amounts are spent to reduce risks,however, the illegal firms reduce their gross profits at the sametime. A firm will expend these sums if in doing so it can keepits gross profits (minus opportunity costs) above the 'cost ofescaping imprisonment. If it is impossible, through furtherspending, to reduce the expected risk below gross profits, lessopportunity costs, firms will leave the business. Alternatively,firms could limit sales to trusted buyers, thereby reducingrevenues and gross profits but also reducing the chances ofgetting caught. According to Moore's analysis of thedistribution hierarchy, gross profits are considerable at everylevel. However, for the kilo-connection, high-yieldingalternatives are the greatest, and it is possible that monopolyat this level could be broken. BNDD appears to believe that themonopoly has already been broken, and that the industry is nowoperating as an oligopoly with ten or twelve firms. But,conceivably, an oligopoly or cartel could develop techniques forsupplying the total market as efficiently as a centralizedorganization. If satisfactory agreements can be reached, theamount of explicit communication necessary to guarantee avoidanceof frequent shortages or surpluses would be minimal. However, themarket becomes more unstable with a cartel, because there isalways an incentive for one firm to increase its sales at theexpense of another. If one firm does try to improve its position,the others are likely to follow. If all try to do so, oversupplydevelops, attempts to expand the market increase, prices decline,and profits fall. In the process, higher levels of thedistribution system become more visible to the authorities, andthe probability of punishment increases. A kilo-connection maythen find one of his high-yielding alternative opportunities moreattractive and leave heroin distribution. Thus, there is alwayssome incentive for the police to attempt to infiltrate thenetwork at higher levels. Arrests made at this level reverberatethrough the system, making arrests easier at all levels. It is far from clear, however, that such apublic policy is altogether sound. While it could have a highpayoff in terms of seizures of heroin and arrests, it would leadto considerable market expansion and increased heroinavailability. The elimination of monopoly would permit theentrance of new firms; a competitively organized industry willalways provide more goods at lower prices than will a monopoly.Market expansion would occur if lower prices increase the demandfor heroin, and, in fact, this may be occurring. Two very largeseizures by BNDD in May and June of 1970 reportedly had no effecton price. No panics occurred following the seizures, as one wouldexpect, and the short-term trend over the year was one ofdeclining prices. Theoretically, the best allocation of policepower is at the levels of the distribution hierarchy, where theincremental gains from their actions (in terms of reduced socialcosts) are equal to the incremental costs of the enforcementefforts. This clearly requires employment of more resources atsome levels than at others. While the payoff from attempts toinfiltrate higher levels may be large, this policy is also veryexpensive. And, again, it is possible that such a policy wouldlead to a larger, less organized trade. Use of police resourcesat lower levels has less potential for large payoffs but is lesscostly. It is much easier to interrupt the heroin traffic at theretail level, because firms engage in more transactions,concealment is more difficult, and information is more available. On the other hand, risks must be increasedconsiderably before it becomes no longer profitable for low-leveloperators to remain in the industry, because their opportunitycosts are low-i.e., they probably could not earn nearly so muchdoing something else. Police are continually eliminating theselow-level operators through arrest, but, given the high profitpotential, others still find it worthwhile to enter the businessbecause of their low opportunity costs, mistaken perceptions ofthe probability of punishment, or the low value placed on beingincarcerated for a given period. In addition, most street dealersand pushers are themselves addicts. Being in the business keepsthem near the source of supply, giving them an income sufficientto finance their own consumption and enabling them to buy theirown drugs wholesale. Clearly, if heroin demand becomes relativelyelastic at some point as prices rise, the police could eventuallybe successful in eliminating the industry. However, to accomplishthis, it is probable that society would have to allocate anextraordinary amount of law-enforcement resources. Society mightprefer to reduce the industry to the "optimum" size,where the costs imposed by heroin use are just equal to theadditional cost required to reduce it further. CONSUMPTION The consumption of heroin imposes costs on therest of the community, because most purchases are financedthrough criminal acts such as theft. Because of these involuntaryredistributions of existing wealth, the community spendsresources to prevent crime and to apprehend, try, punish, andrehabilitate criminals. This includes private expenditures onlocks, alarms, lights, and security guards and publicexpenditures on police, courts, and correctional systems. To theextent that these human and material resources would be employedelsewhere in the absence of heroin addiction, they are properlycounted as costs of addiction. Social costs also include themedical expenses and foregone productivity of individuals injuredin crimes and the lost productivity, medical expenses, andpremature deaths of addicts. Finally, one must also include thefear and anxiety, avoidance of normal activity, disruption ofcommunity life, and use of less efficient and more expensivemodes of transportation that are unquantifiable but nonethelessvery real costs of crime and drug addiction. This sectionexamines the direct cost of heroin consumption and estimates theamount of crime required to finance it. The most elementary question in determining thedirect costs of heroin consumption is the total cost of theheroin consumed that is, how much money do addicts need tosupport their addiction? But this calculation depends on severalunknowns: the number of addicts, the average number of days peryear heroin is consumed, and the average cost of heroin per day,with an adjustment for the amount of heroin "earned"from profits on sales to other addicts." This information isessential for determining the magnitude of the problem and thebenefits from any investments designed to control or reduce it. THE ADDICT POPULATION The actual number of heroin addicts in theUnited States is unknown and probably can never be determinedprecisely with present techniques of estimation. Addicts becomeknown to officials only through death, arrest, or participationin treatment programs. It is difficult to estimate the size ofthe addict population from the number of deaths or arrests,because each of these figures depends on other variables as wellas sum totals. For example, the ratio of addict deaths to addictpopulation will vary not only with the number of addicts but alsowith the probability that a decedent will be medically identifiedas an addict. Similarly, the frequency of addict deaths fromoverdose will vary with sudden changes in the concentration ofpure heroin in the local supply. The ratio of addict arrests tonumber of addicts can vary with the intensity of police effortsin certain areas. The ratio of addicts in treatment to totaladdicts can vary with the addicts' perception of the value oftreatment or the short-term availability of heroin. Because of these difficulties, most estimatesof the addict population are mere guesses. However, there are twomethods that may ultimately prove useful, although both havepronounced weaknesses at present. One is the "Baden"formula, developed in New York City by Dr. Michael Baden of theMedical Examiner's Office, and frequently applied elsewhere. NewYork is unique in having a register of local heroin addicts asreported by medical and police sources. The formula was computedby comparing the number of addicts on the registry to the numberof overdose deaths and the number of deaths among persons namedon the register." Baden found that 50 per cent of the heroinaddicts who die are on the Narcotic Addict Register. On thisbasis, he estimated that the total addict population numbersabout twice the registry total. In 1968, for example, the NewYork Register had 42,500 addicts listed; it was thereforeconcluded that the total addict population was approximately85,000. This method has several problems, of which itsoriginators were well aware and are quick to acknowledge. Theywere seeking a way of making a quick estimate of the totalpopulation that would be more adequate than the register alonewithout incurring expenses for research time. (It is ironic thatDr. Baden is sometimes castigated for defects that he was thefirst to point out.) First, it is assumed that addicts who are onthe register have the same probability of dying as those who arenot. If registered addicts are heavier users and thus moresusceptible to disease, such as malnutrition and hepatitis, theywould have a higher probability of dying. On the other hand, ifaddicts not on the register are less experienced users they maybe more likely to die of overdose. Either, both, or neitherhypothesis could be correct, and it is impossible to determinethe net effect. Secondly, since the register is cumulative overa five-year period, some on the list will no longer be addictsbecause of successful treatment, abstinence, or incarceration. Tothe extent that this is the case, the estimate will exceed theactual total by twice the size of the error in the register. Third, the probability that an addict is listedon the register is, in part, a function of his age and length ofaddiction. A thirty year-old addicted for ten years is morelikely to be listed than an eighteen-year-old addicted for oneyear. A sophisticated application of the technique requires atleast an age breakdown, and possibly other distinctions as well.Baden himself works with such distinctions, but others who usethe method often do not. Serious difficulties develop whenofficials attempt to use the Baden formula in other cities or atother points in time. Statistical analysis of one set ofcircumstances is rarely transferable to different situations. Inother words, heroin addicts in different places, for whateverreasons, probably do not die at the same rate. Furthermore,differences in diagnostic method change the probability of adecedent's being identified as an addict. For example, inWashington, D.C., during the eighteen months preceding July,1970, diagnostic drug screens were performed on only 6.3 per centof all autopsied deaths; during the last six months of 1970, drugscreens were performed on 51 per cent of all autopsieddeaths." This frequency can also vary between cities, and asmall variance, when using Baden's formula, would change theestimated population greatly, because the number of addicts whodie in any given year is likely to be only 1-2 per cent of thetotal register." And New York has by far the best registerof any city. The Bureau of Narcotics and Dangerous Drugs hasdeveloped a somewhat similar approach in estimating the totaladdict population. It multiplies the number of known users whocould be rearrested by the ratio of total heroin arrests to thenumber of known users included in these arrests." On thebasis of this method, BNDD unofficially estimates that there areat present 315,000 addicts nationally. This method also has several problems. First,known addicts are voluntarily reported to BNDD by local policedepartments. Reporting practices can vary considerably withlocality, as can intensity of enforcement efforts. Secondly, the probability of any addict's beingarrested in period 2 is assumed to be the same regardless ofwhether he had been arrested in period 1. This hypothesis isunproved. It may be that addicts already known to the police areheavy users and commit more crimes or are under greatersurveillance. Therefore, the probability of their rearrest wouldbe greater, and the estimate of the total addict population wouldbe less than the actual. On the other hand, if the addictsunknown to the police are younger, and therefore more recentlyaddicted, the probability of their arrest may be higher, becauseyounger addicts tend to commit riskier crimes, such as robbery.In this case, the estimate would be too large." Thirdly, it is difficult to determine thenumber of addicts reported in period I who remain active usersand are therefore eligible for arrest during period 2.Statistical adjustments must be made for the probability that aknown user will be in jail during period 2, will die, will becomeabstinent spontaneously, or will be in a treatment program. BNDDhas thus far adjusted satisfactorily only for the probabilitythat an addict will be in jail. Some of the problems involved in theseadjustments are shown by the difficulty of estimating theprobability of death. BNDD made its adjustments on the averageprobability that any individual over twenty-five will survive tothe next year. But the mortality rate for addicts is undoubtedlyhigher than that of other individuals of the same age. On theother hand, there may not be many addicts over forty, and thusthe mortality rate as originally calculated was biased upward bycalculating an average probability for all individuals overtwenty-five. Without knowing the true mortality rate, it isdifficult to make the proper adjustments to the estimates. Some addicts do mature out of addiction as theyage, but the number is not known. Even active addicts may haveweeks or months of abstinence, but again no numbers areavailable. Work on these problems is going on, and the resultswill probably reduce the estimate below the present 315,000.However, since reports from various urban areas indicate that thenumber of addicts is still increasing, we will use alternativeestimates of 250,000 and 350,000 for the total addict population. Some officials make a "best guess"estimate and then attempt to test the reasonableness of thefigure by comparing it with the total population. For example,the Narcotic Treatment Agency in Washington, D.C., has apopulation of 95 per cent black, 85 per cent male, and 85 percent between the ages of fifteen and thirty four. Assuming thatthe addict population not in treatment has the samecharacteristics, one can make an estimate of the penetration ofaddiction into the total population with these characteristics.If there are 15,000 addicts in Washington, 10,296 are black malesbetween the ages of fifteen and thirty-four. According to 1970Census data, there are a total of 83,158 black males betweenfifteen and thirty-four in Washington, D.C. Thus, 12.1 per centof this population is addicted under the assumption of 15,000addicts, and 8.2 per cent is addicted under the assumption of10,000 addicts. The problem with these projections is that 8.2per cent and 12.1 per cent seem equally 'reasonable" If anestimate approached 25 per cent or 30 per cent of a givenpopulation, one would suspect exaggeration. Penetrationprojections appear to have little value except as very roughassessments. DAILY EXPENDITURES FOR HEROIN Addicts vary in the amounts of heroin theyconsume per day and the per cent of time spent actively using thedrug. Some addicts can afford to increase their habits as theirtolerance to the drug grows; others cannot. There is also greatvariance in vulnerability to arrest and incarceration as well asin the frequency of "vacations" from addiction inhospitals or treatment facilities. These periods of treatmentalso serve to reduce the size using interviews with ex-addictsand police, developed a breakdown of the addict population of NewYork City." From their data, presented in Table 4-5, one canestimate that an average addict is an active user 70 per cent ofthe time, or 255 days per year per addict. The frequently quoted estimates of the dailycosts of supporting an addiction are often exaggerated. Many arederived from interviews with addicts who regard large habits asstatus symbols and commonly overstate the level of their own use.In general, the amounts of heroin consumed by addicts varywidely, and reports of these amounts are unreliable. To say thatan addict has a $50 habit does not mean that he will spend thissum day after day. Ideally, an addict would like to use as muchheroin as he needs to "get high." In fact, however, theincreasing difficulty of obtaining the necessary money to pay forincreasing dosages imposes an upper limit on most addicts'habits. But if an addict cannot consistently obtain large enoughdosages of heroin -to get high, he can use smaller amountswithout feeling acute withdrawal symptoms. In effect, the habitsize of a long-time heavy user is often not at the level ofeuphoria but only at a level sufficient to suppress withdrawal orto keep the withdrawal mild. Moreover, while there are manyaddicts with expensive habits, there are also many addicts in theearly stages of dependence whose habit requires only $10-15 perday. These factors should be kept in mind when interpreting anyestimates of the total cost of addiction. The price, and quality, of heroin needed by anaddict determine his cost per day. Retail prices were obtained byBNDD -for December, 1970, for several U.S. cities, and are listedin Table 4-6. The considerable variation in price is probably dueto differences in local supply and demand, risks taken bysuppliers, and, probably, nonrandom buying procedures. Theunweighted average price-except in Chicago, where it isextraordinarily high for unknown reasons-is about $0.55 permilligram. The average quantity used per day is probablyabout 55 milligrams of pure heroin." At $0.55 per milligram,this results in daily expenditures of approximately $30 per dayfor the average addict, representing the amount paid on thestreet by the addict who buys solely for his own consumption.Some earn their heroin through services rendered as a distributorof heroin-i.e., pusher; thus, the price paid by the ultimateconsumer includes the payment for that service. Heroin"earned" in pushing, therefore, means that feweraddicts have to steal from the community, or that some percentageof the addict population supports the rest by theft,prostitution, or legitimate work. The Hudson Institute studyestimated that 45 per cent of the heroin consumed is used bythose involved in its distribution and profit from its sale. Ifother factors remain the same, the total social cost of heroinaddiction will be less if the percentage of consumed heroin"earned" from pushing is increased. A rough estimate of the annual cost of heroinpurchases can be made using the information presented in thepreceding pages. The assumptions are that (1) addicts spend 70per cent of the . SOURCES OF FUNDS FOR HEROIN PURCHASES The high cost of heroin requires most addictsto resort to crime to finance their habits. Estimates of thevarious sources of funds for the support of heroin addiction canbe made with data obtained by the Hudson Institute fromex-addicts in New York City. As discussed previously,approximately 45 per cent of the heroin consumed by the addictpopulation is obtained by selling heroin. This does not mean that45 per cent of all addicts are pushers but that 45 per cent ofthe heroin used by addicts is obtained in exchange for servicesrendered in the distribution network. The remainder of the addictpopulation finance their own habits and those of pushers byvarious means, including robbery, burglary, shoplifting,prostitution, and legitimate work. Most addicts employ acombination of means, legal or otherwise, in their constant questto obtain funds." The breakdown of sources of fundspresented in Table 4-7 was developed from the Hudson material.These figures represent the funds used to purchase the 55 percent of heroin consumed that is not financed by renderingservices in the distribution network. It is assumed that shoplifting, burglary, andlarceny yield real property, and that pickpocketing, robbery, andconfidence games yield cash. Therefore, the total property stolenin these crimes can be roughly divided into 80 per cent realproperty and 20 per cent cash." It is assumed thatreal property is fenced at one-third its value, so that an addictmust steal, on the average, property worth $2.60 to obtain $ 1.00with which to finance his habit." The data needed to estimate the funds obtainedthrough property crime, prostitution, and legal sources used forheroin purchases can be summarized as follows: Number of addicts (N) 250,000; 350,000 Per cent of year in active use (T) 70 Average daily expenditure (X) $30 Per cent of heroin earned through pushing (d)45 Proportion of funds obtained through propertycrime (a) .62 Reciprocal of fencing discount (average) (f)2.6 Proportion of funds obtained throughprostitution (b) .31 Proportion of funds obtained through legitimatesources (w) .07 The estimates of funds obtained from each ofthe three alternative sources of funds are presented in Table4-8. Clearly, any of these data could be biased in eitherdirection and thus limit the usefulness of the estimates derivedfrom them. CONCLUSION The economics of heroin distribution has beenexamined for whatever assistance such analysis may bring tofuture policy considerations. Can heroin use be curbed? Can it beeliminated? What are the most efficient methods of attacking theproblem? In the marketing of any product, there are twosides to a transaction-supply and demand. Our examination hasshown that public policies dealing with the production of opiumand the domestic distribution of heroin-the supply side-willnever be completely successful in eliminating heroin use in theUnited States and the consequent street crime. Indeed, pastreliance on law-enforcement measures has accompanied an epidemicgrowth of the heroin-addict population. It is ironic that ournational policy, by resorting almost exclusively to criminalsanctions to eliminate addiction, has breda thriving illegal market that can be sustained only by criminalactivity. Two factors primarily impede public policydesigned to suppress the supply of heroin. First, the amount ofopium needed to supply the demand for heroin in the United Statesis only a minute portion of total world production. It isprobably impossible to curb all opium production, licit andillicit, everywhere in the world. Secondly, the profits earned indomestic distribution are so great that it is unlikely the riskscan be raised high enough to force dealers out of business. Asone former distributor has stated: "If you put me away,somebody else is going to stand in my spot."" Clearly, more effort and greater resources mustbe spent to curb the demand for heroin. For example, more addictsmust be treated and rehabilitated. Education to prevent drugabuse must be expanded and made more meaningful. Finally, theenvironmental factors that breed and sustain addiction must bemore successfully attacked. John Ingersoll, Director of theBureau of Narcotics and Dangerous Drugs, has stated before acongressional committee that law enforcement is the first-aidagency of society. It is not the curative, not the doctor, and itdoesn't eliminate causes of these problems. Our society hasgotten itself into an unfortunate state of affairs regardingdrugs because it has assumed that by passing laws and enforcingthem, the problem will go away. So it seems to me that while you can expectlaw-enforcement agencies to do the first-aid work, if you want acure, then we have got to go back to the basic causes and findout what can be done from that end. We have to look to improvedand increased rehabilitation programs. We have to find out moreabout drugs and why people use them, knowing of the debilitatingconsequences .42 No policy, of course, will. be successful if itaddresses only a part of the problem. There appears to be, forinstance, a causal relationship between strict law enforcementand the number of addicts in treatment programs. If theprobability of arrest is increased, more addicts are induced toenter treatment. Conversely, if more hard-core addicts entertreatment programs, pushers must seek out new, less reliableclientele; they become more visible and thus more vulnerable toarrest. Development of an effective policy combining efforts tosuppress supply and inhibit demand for heroin necessarilyinvolves close scrutiny of the economic system and the relativebenefits and costs of various alternatives. In choosing betweenpolicy alternatives, cost-benefit analyses can illuminate theprobable reduction in the social costs of addiction to be derivedfrom one policy as compared with another. If our public moniesare to be spent efficiently, it is imperative that such choicesbe illuminated by full-scale studies of this nature. NOTES 1. BNDD Staff. Interviews, November, 1971. Thisassessment is based on two other estimates: the total number ofaddicts in the United States, and the quantity of pure heroinconsumed by each addict per day. The accuracy of these estimateswill be analyzed later. But just one year ago, BNDD believed thatonly 5,000-6,000 lbs. of imported heroin was sufficient to supplythe U.S. market. The current estimate should be interpretedaccordingly; the actual total is probably somewhat less than10,000 lbs. 2. BNDD Intelligence Staff, The World OpiumSituation (unpublished paper), October, 1970, p. 13(hereafter cited as WOS). This assumes that the illicitproduction estimates are accurate, 3. Ibid., p. 16. 4. Select Committee on Crime, Hearings intoNarcotics Research, Rehabilitation and Treatment, U.S. Houseof Representatives, 92d Cong., 1st sess., Serial 92-1, 1971, p.358. 5. WOS) p. 6. 6. Ibid. 7. Ibid., p. 4. 8. International Narcotics Control Board,"Statistics on Narcotics Drugs for 1967." InternationalNarcotics Control Board (New York: United Nations, 1970), p. viii. 9. WOS, p. 5. This publication is thechief source of the data in this section. 10. It is extremely difficult to estimateillicit production and consumption. Except for Turkey, illicitproduction estimates were made on the basis of domesticconsumption. Some allowance for exports is included but isprobably subject to error. The BNDD staff considers the estimatesto be accurate within a confidence interval of 20 per cent. 11. BNDD Staff, interview, March, 1971. Indianopium is often adulterated with seed, leaves, and other foreignmatter. Indian yields are also higher because of additionallancing. 12. United Nations Survey Team, "The HillTribes of Thailand and the Place of Opium in Their SocialEconomic Setting," Bulletin of Narcotics, XX, No. 3(July-September, 1968). 13. WOS, p. 7. 14. G. Shulzin, "Cultivation of the OpiumPoppy and the Oil Poppy in the Soviet Union," Bulletin ofNarcotics, XXI, No. 4 (October-December, 1969). 15. BNDD Staff, interview, March, 197 1. 16. Select Committee on Crime, op. cit., note4, p. 68. 17. These figures are approximate. In fact, thenecessary land area could be considerably less, depending on thenumber of total addicts and the opium yield per acre. The11.2-23.2 square-mile estimate is obtained from the data in Table4-2. For example, if the yield per acre is assumed to be 8.07Ibs. (the approximate reported yield in Turkey), then the arearequired to produce 100,000 and 120,000 lbs. of opium isapproximately 19.4 square miles and 23.2 square miles,respectively. (If 1 acre yields 8.07 lbs., then 12,391.5 acreswill yield 100,000 lbs. This acreage is approximately 19.4 squaremiles.) On the other hand, if the true Turkish yield, assuspected, is approximately 14 Ibs. per acre, then the arearequired to produce 100,000 and 120,000 lbs. is approximately11.2 and 13.4 square miles, respectively. 18. WOS, p. 32. 19. WOS, P. 8. 20. If demand is price-elastic, the percentagereduction in quantity sold exceeds the percentage increase inprice. thus reducing farm revenues. 21. Mark Moore, Policy Concerning Drug Abusein New York State, Vol. III: Economics of Heroin Distribution (Croton-on-Hudson,N.Y.: Hudson Institute, 1970), pp. 67-73. 22. John Casey and Edward Preble, "TakingCare of Business: The Heroin User's Life on the Street," Internationaljournal of the Addictions, IV, No. I (March, 1967),12, 23. T. S. Schelling, "Economics andCriminal Enterprise," The Public Interest, No. 7(Spring, 1967), 61-78. 24. Ibid. 25. Select Committee, op. cit., p. 3. 26. R=pV, where R is the cost of risk to thefirm, p is the probability of punishment as perceived by thefirm, and V is the value, or cost, of the expected punishment tothe firm. 27. Select Committee on Crime, Hearings intoCrime in America: Heroin Importation, Distribution, Packaging andDistribution, U.S. House of Representatives, 91st Cong.,1970, pp. 52-91. 28. The annual cost of heroin consumption canbe stated by this equation: CH=365 [N (1-d) TX], where CH=net annual expenditures for heroin; N =number of heroin addicts; d =the percentage of all heroin consumed by theaddict population, which is obtained for services rendered in thedistribution network-i.e., pushing; * =average percentage of the year heroin isconsumed by addicts; and * =average cost of drugs per day to the addictpopulation. 29. Baden's formula is: N = D - n, where d A N=estimated total addict population; D =total number of deaths of addicts in givenyear; n = number of addicts on Narcotic Register in given year;d=number of deaths of addicts on Narcotic Register in given year;and N =actual total addict population. 30. Robert J. DuPont, "Profile of a HeroinAddiction Epidemic," in Select Committee on Crime, op.cit., pp. 4,167. 31. For example, the derived n inBaden's formula for New York City d has been used to estimate the number of addictsin Washington, D.C. The equation becomes: n N D, where A N =estimated total addict population in D.C.; n =number of addicts on New York City NarcoticsRegister; d= number of deaths of addicts on New York CityNarcotics Register in given year; and * =total number of addict deaths in Washington,D.C.; and * =actual total addict population inWashington, D.C. The problem here is that differences incapabilities for identifying narcotics n n n overdose deaths can make 7 vary among cities.If d in DC > d in New n York City, then N < N; alternatively, if inD.C. < n in New York City, d d then N > N. Clearly, similar problems arisewith efforts to use n for time d period I to estimate the addict population inperiod 2 with the total number of deaths in period 2. 32. BNDD Staff. Interviews. Included are onlythose important features of the method necessary for clear description.Their equation is: A t T = N - , where n A T =the estimated total addict population inperiod 2; N=the number registered with BNDD in period 1, who could bearrested in period 2; t =the total number who are arrested in period2; n=the number registered with BNDD in period 1, who arearrested in period 2; and T =the actual number of addicts in period 2. Once it is known how many addicts have beenarrested in period 2 (t), and what the number of these previouslyregistered with BNDD in period 1 (n) is, then N can be used toestimate T. 33. As discussed in the text, the BNDD methodassumes n = t But, if m N T. is the number of addicts arrested in 2 who werenot arrested in 1, and if M is the total number of addicts notregistered with BNDD in period 1, then n . m must hold for the method toyield true estimates. If n > m then N M N M A T < T; similarly, if n < mthen @ > T. N M If n = M a particularly useful featureof this method would be the fact N Mthat new entrants in thecurrent period do not bias the estimate of the total population. 34. Moore, op. cit., note 21, p. 66.These estimates were made on the basis of a relatively smallnumber of interviews and should not be interpreted strictly.However, this table provides the best available information onthese aspects of addict behavior. 35. This estimate, while lower than severalothers, may still be too high. First, the Hudson Instituteaverage of 55 milligrams includes an estimate that large-habitdealers (I 1 per cent of the total user population) use 180milligrams per day. While heroin dealers might have the income tomaintain such a large habit, it seems unlikely that they could beactive entrepreneurs and at the same time use such quantities ofthe drug. The Hudson estimate was also derived from interviewswith addicts, who reportedly exaggerate estimates of use. So,too, there may be less than 10 mg. of pure heroin per bag. 36.The amount of funds obtained from each of three alternativesources of funds (property crime, prostitution, legal sources)can be estimated with the following equation: C=365 [ U -d) NTX (af +b+w) where d, N, T, andX have the same meaning as in the equation in footnote 28. C --the gross -amount uf -funds ubtained-annually -from various -sources -for heroin purchases; a=the proportion of funds spent on heroin thatcomes from property crime; b= the proportion of funds spent on heroin thatcomes from prostitution; c=the proportion of funds spent onheroin that comes from legitimate sources-i.e., work, publicassistance, family, or friends; f =the factor by which the amount stolen must exceed the amountyielded by a property crime. (A stolen good must be transferredfrom the thief to a fence to a final consumer. The thief receivesonly a fraction of the market value of the good. To obtain agiven target yield, an addict can be expected to steal a givenamount, depending on the fencing discount, and the proportion ofvalue stolen that is property and not cash.) The amount of money annually spent by addicts for heroin can beestimated with the equation in footnote 26. The cost to victims of property crime committedby addicts can be estimated by this equation: Cv = 365 [ (I - d) NTX (af) where C, =cost to victims of property crime. 37. These estimates are also weakened by theinterview technique em- ployed and thus should not be considered aprecise reflection of addict behavior. 38. The value of property stolen cannot becounted totally when the costs to society are added. Somepercentage of the value of goods stolen accrues as a type ofsubsidy to people who, knowingly or unknowingly, purchase stolengoods because the price they pay is significantly below themarket price. This factor reduces the cost of crime to allsociety by the value of real property stolen multiplied by thereduced resale value (the fencing discount). However, in ascertaining how large anadjustment to make, it is difficult to compare the utility ofgains to the purchaser with the utility of the losses to thevictim-is it greater, less, or the same? In addition, from thepoint of view of the community, the loss to the victim may begiven more weight than the gain to the ultimate consumer. Theitem may, in fact, lose "value" because it is a stolengood. Objectively, although a stolen television set may stilloperate as well as before, the purchaser may feel that it isworth less than the market value because of the risk of holding astolen good. 39. '80 +.20 ($ 1) = $2.60 1/3 40. The net annual addict income from propertycrime can be estimated by the following equation: PC= 365 [ (1 - d) NTXa] where d, N, T, and X have the same meaning asin footnote 28 and PC= net annual addict income from propertycrime. The cost to the victims of the stolen propertyis determined by multiplying the net addict income from property crimes bythe reciprocal of the average fencing discount. 41. Select Committee on Crime, op. cit., note27, p. 238. Ibid., note 4, p. 367. CliffSchaffer's Home Page Contents | Feedback | Search DRCNet Library | Schaffer Library | Major Studies | DealingWith Drug AbuseWT02-B02-33IA086-000614-B045-281http://206.61.184.43:80/schaffer/Library/studies/dwda/staff5.htm 206.61.184.43 19970122021900 text/html 61219HTTP/1.0 200 OKDate: Wednesday, 22-Jan-97 02:18:52 GMTServer: WebSitePro/1.1f (S/N wpo-0deb)Allow-ranges: bytesContent-type: text/htmlLast-modified: Saturday, 28-Dec-96 07:11:03 GMTContent-length: 61001 Dealing With Drug Abuse - Federal Expenditures onDrug-Abuse Control Contents | Feedback | Search DRCNet Library | Schaffer Library | Major Studies | DealingWith Drug Abuse Dealing with Drug Abuse A Report to the Ford Foundation THE DRUG ABUSE SURVEY PROJECT STAFF PAPER 5 Federal Expenditures onDrug-Abuse Control by Peter B. Goldberg and James V. DeLong Availability of Information * Total FederalExpenditures * Federal Activities AVAILABILITY OF INFORMATION Comprehensive, reliable information on federalexpenditures on drug-abuse programs is difficult to obtain. Nodetailed program budget describing the allocation of federalresources in this area has ever been made public or possibly evencompiled. Although both the Office of Management and Budget andthe Council on Executive Reorganization have made efforts to puttogether information, the results have been closely held. Thefigures used in this paper are based on budget requests andamendments, accounts of congressional hearings and otherdocuments issued by the government, and interviews withgovernment officials. The accuracy of this information is sometimessuspect. Government cost accounting has never been known for itsrigor, and, since drug abuse is now receiving high-priorityattention at the highest levels of government, there is anincentive for agencies to find a drug-abuse rationale forprograms that may have only a peripheral relationship to thefield. There are also technical problems. The LawEnforcement Assistance Administration, the Department of Housingand Urban Development, and the Social and Rehabilitation Serviceof HEW all award block grants to states and cities. (Block grantsare funds that can be used for any specific projects chosen bythe recipients within a given area of activity.) It is only afterthe close of the fiscal year that the portion of these fundsspent for drug abuse can be determined. For these programs thereis no information on fiscal 1972 at the present time. On June 17, 1971, President Nixon announced anew drug abuse program, including a supplemental budget requestof $155,655,000 for fiscal 1972. Shortly thereafter, thePresident stipulated that there was to be a 5 per cent.across-the-board -reduction in government personnel as part ofthe anti-inflation effort. Some federal agencies are still unsurewhich of these directives will take precedence. There are obvious differences among budgetrequests, congressional authorizations, appropriations, andactual expenditures; however, these distinctions are not madeconsistently in this report. Generally, appropriations are usedfor fiscal 1970 and 1971 and budget requests are used for fiscal1972, but some amounts are agency allocations within largerappropriations. Usually, the figures are fairly close to theactual amounts that were or will be spent for the activities ineach year. However, in some areas, such as research, expendituresmay lag somewhat behind appropriations. Some agencies, such as the Department ofDefense and the Internal Revenue Service, have specific fundingallocations for drug abuse activities in fiscal 1972, but did nothave such allocations in fiscal 1971. Because of these problems, some of the figuresgiven here represent judgment and estimate rather than certainfact. TOTAL FEDERAL EXPENDITURES Table 5-1 shows federal expenditures for fiscalyears 1970, 1971, and 1972 broken down by agencies. Table 5-2shows the same expenditures broken down by functional categories.Table 5-3 shows therequested budget for fiscal 1972 before and after the President's supplement request. As the tables indicate, the government willspend about $417,601,000 on drug-abuse activities in fiscal 1972,almost double the amount spent in fiscal 1971. Several agenciesthat could not provide a breakdown of funds spent in fiscal 1971 could do so for fiscal 1972.To avoid undue exaggeration of the increase, we have made roughestimates of the fiscal 1971 totals. Table 5-4 compares the project estimate of thefiscal 1972 budget with the latestavailable official government estimates.' The Project's figuresare higher. The difference can be attributed to a number offactors, but probably the most influential is that the data forour estimate were compiled in September and October, 1971, ratherthan in June, and thus the agencies had moretime in which to survey their activities. This seems especiallyimportant for the Law Enforcement Assistance Administration. FEDERAL ACTIVITIES LAw ENFORCEMENT Four federal agencies have law-enforcementresponsibilities: the Bureau of Narcotics and Dangerous Drugs(BNDD) and the Law Enforcement Assistance Administration (LEAA)in the Department of justice; and the Bureau of Customs and theInternal Revenue Service (IRS) in the Treasury Department. Infiscal 1972, these agencies will spend $115,822,000 enforcinglaws against the illegal importation, manufacture, distribution,and possession of narcotics and dangerous drugs. As the product of a 1968 merger between theTreasury Department's Federal Bureau of Narcotics and theDepartment of Health, Education and Welfare's Bureau of DrugAbuse Control, BNDD has the widest mandate. It is primarilyresponsible for most of the federal government's national andinternational police operations. BNDD also works with state andlocal officials on cases of major importance to the totalillegal-distribution system. During fiscal 1972, BNDD will receive$66,689,000.' This will represent a doubling of itsappropriations in two years. Personnel has increased almost asrapidly-from 1,465 in fiscal 1970 to 2,319 in fiscal 1971 to2,718 in fiscal 1972. The number of actual agents has alsoincreased from 884 in 1970 to 1,437 in 1971.' (Data for fiscal1972 are not available.) Over 90 per cent of BNDD's money, or$61,971,000, will be spent on law-enforcement activities in 1972 .4 BNDD's principal predecessor, the FederalBureau of Narcotics, was often accused of over concentrating itsefforts against users and street dealers of narcotics and notbeing seriously concerned with the higher levels of distribution.In 1970, BNDD claimed that it had reversed this policy and wasconcentrating its efforts on the higher levels of the marketingstructure. Appearing before a House Appropriations subcommitteein March, 1970, Director John Ingersoll stated: The new operational plan is a systematicapproach to developing prosecutable cases and obtainingconvictions on specifically identifiable individuals and groupswho are responsible for most of the illicit drug traffic in thiscountry. The shift in emphasis of federal narcotic anddangerous drug law enforcement from the addict, abuser, and smalltime street peddler to the important illicit traffickers andillegal supply sources will undoubtedly result in fewer totalarrests. But those made should have a greater impact on thesupply of narcotics and drugs available for distribution to theconsumers in this country than a larger number of lesssignificant arrests.,5 Statistics on BNDD's output confirm this shiftin policy to some extent. One would expect that such a changewould result in fewer arrests per agent because of the increasedinvestigatory work required. Table 5-5 shows that this appears tobe the case. Consistent with this shift in priorities, BNDDhas begun analyzing the distribution systems for the variousdrugs and identifying organizations and individuals involved. Theagency claims that so far it has identified nine principal and129 secondary international drug-distribution systems and hasimmobilized 870 of the 2,150 individuals identified as havingmajor importance in them.' For several years, there has been aconflict between BNDD and the Bureau of Customs over operationsin foreign countries. In February, 1970, President Nixon declaredthat BNDD would be the accredited agency "in dealing withforeign law-enforcement officials on narcotics questions. Thisannouncement apparently resolved the dispute. During the last two years, there has been amajor expansion of BNDD's foreign operations. The Bureau had 13foreign offices in fiscal 1969, 16 in 1970, and 28 in 1971.During these three years, the number of agents assigned toforeign posts rose from 26 to 27 to 6111 Of the 50 new agentsrequested in the original 1972 budget, 15 will be assigned toforeign offices, and new offices will be opened in South Americaand the Far East.' From President Nixon's supplemental budgetrequest, $1 million will be allocated to BNDD for internationaltraining and technicalassistance activities." TABLE 5-5 BNDD OUTPUT MEASURES Fiscal 1969 Fiscal 1970 Fiscal 1971 Drugs removed from the domestic market Heroin (lbs.) 140 427 226 Cocaine Obs.) 73 197 427 Marijuana (lbs.) 8,825 17,401 12,723 Hashish (lbs.) N.A. N.A. 1,054 Hallucinogens (dosage units) N.A. 7,127,7423,697,737 Depressants (dosage units) N.A. 2,339,590319,006 Stimulants (dosage units) N.A. 7,196,48110,319,923 Arrests-BNDD-caused BNDD, direct 2,265 1,600 2,212 BNDD, foreign, cooperative 214 207 281 BNDD, state and local, cooperative 1,713 9002,247 TOTAL 4,192 2,707 4,740 Arrests per agent Number BNDD agents in the field 644 757 1,236 Average arrests per agent ' 6.5 3.6 3.8 SOURCE: BNDD Fact Sheet. One of the chronic difficulties of lawenforcement in the drug field is corruption, and the old FederalBureau of Narcotics had a substantial problem. In the words ofAttorney-General John Mitchell: There was considerable lack of integrity on thepart of many of the agents of predecessor organizations. . . .Some of them have been indicted. Others have had administrativeprocedures instituted against them, and a lot of them have left.I believe that it is being overcome." However, because there is so much money in thedrug trade, internal corruption will undoubtedly continue to be aproblem. Indeed, the pursuit of higher-level (and richer)traffickers will increase the stakes and the temptations. So far,BNDD has not been involved in any major scandals-a considerableaccomplishment. The Bureau of Customs is responsible for theprevention of smuggling. In fiscal 1972, the Customs budget forantidrug activities will be $40.5 million, $15 million of whichwill come from the supplemental budget request." Customsofficials state that they will actuallyspend about $52 million in this area during fiscal 1972. Thisestimate is based on a performance-measurement system that usesrandom time-sample analysis to determine the allocation of effortof Customs personnel. Based on this same measurement system,Customs estimates that $31,600,000 was actually spent on antidrugactivities during fiscal 1971.1' The results of Customs activity,as measured by the quantity of material seized and the number ofarrests made, is shown in Table 5-6. For all categories except dangerous drugs, thequantity of material seized in fiscal 1971 exceeded that of theprevious year, with heroin and cocaine showing the most dramaticincreases. Customs officials say that about 5 per cent of theirseizures are made as a result of tips and 95 per cent as a resultof "cold searches'@--situations in which suspicions werebased on conduct at the time of entry rather than on advanceinformation." The Law Enforcement Assistance Administration(LEAA) was created in June, 1968, under Title I of the OmnibusCrime Control and Safe Streets Act. Its stated purpose is tooffer "large scale financial and technical aid to strengthencriminal justice at every level throughout thenation."" LEAA is thus a major link between federalfunds and technical expertise and state and local narcoticslawenforcement. The major types of financial aid to states andcities are as follows: 1. Planning grants-allocated to statesaccording to population for the creation of statewide,comprehensive law-enforcement improvement plans. 2. Block-action grants-allocated to statesaccording to population to carry out specific improvement plans. 3. Discretionary action grants-awarded atLEAA's discretion for anticrime programs, with emphasis onspecial aid to cities. Some information on drug-abuse expenditures isavailable for the block-grant and discretionary-grant programs.Some of the planning funds are undoubtedly spent in this area aswell, but the amount is not obtainable. Block-grant funds awarded to state governmentsare normally spent in accordance with the comprehensivelaw-enforcement improvement plans formulated by the recipient.The amount allocated to drug-law enforcement in part reflects thejudgment of the states as to the severity of their drug-abuseproblems. The discretionary-grant program represents LEAA's ownallocation of resources to antidrug activities. The agencyemphasizes attempts to improve upon interjurisdictionallaw-enforcement techniques, particularly in metropolitan areaswhere city-suburban cooperation is important. To some extent, itseems to try to fill a gap left by BNDD, as that agency nowfocuses increasing attention on national drug-trafficking systemsrather than on smaller local groups. In fiscal 1971, the states allocated $3,172,879of block-grant funds to 26 programs designed to improvelaw-enforcement techniques and efforts, and LEAA used $2,713,206of its discretionary funds." Information on the fundinglevels for LEAA-financed, drug-abuse programs during 1972 willnot be available until after the close of the fiscal year, sincethe grantees of the block grants do not have to file detailedreports until then. LEAA has not, apparently, analyzed thecomprehensive plans to provide any prediction. Nor has the agencyyet finalized its own plans for the discretionary-grant program.(In the tables we have presented, it is assumed thatLEAA-financed, antidrug expenditures will remain constant in1972.) The Internal Revenue Service has long had amore general law enforcement role, in that tax laws arefrequently used against organized crime and other specialoffenders. Undoubtedly, the IRS has spent money on investigationsand prosecutions related to drug abuse in the past. However, the$7,500,000 proposed for IRS in President Nixon's supplementalbudget represents the first funds clearly earmarked for thispurpose. The money is to be used to hire 541 new auditors andinvestigators and to pay the incidental expenses of theirinvestigations." (The 5 per cent reduction in governmentpersonnel has thrown this plan into uncertainty.) Other federal agencies are involved in lawenforcement to a limited extent, as described below. The President's supplemental budget containedthe first specifically identifiable funds for drug-abuse-relatedactivities in the Department of Defense. It is not yet possibleto determine the proportion of these funds that will be used forenforcement purposes, but it will probably be small. TheDepartment already has its own enforcement system for violators.(The tables in this chapter do not include any estimate forDepartment of Defense law enforcement.) During fiscal 1971, the Department ofAgriculture conducted an experimental marijuana-eradicationprogram in eleven Midwest counties. The cost of this project($55,000) was assumed by BNDD. It has not been determined whetherthis program will be expanded or dropped in fiscal 1972, or, ifit is continued, which agency will fund the program. The federal government is also placingconsiderable emphasis on foreign crop eradication. In fiscal1970, the Agency for International Development (AID) gave $1million to Mexico to buy three light planes, five helicopters,remote sensing equipment, and chemicals and other eradicationequipment. Similar grants totaling $627,000 were made in 1961 and1965, without apparent effect." It is not clear whetheradditional sums have been spent since, but it seems probable. Similar emphasis is placed upon persuadingTurkish farmers to substitute other crops for opium. According togovernment officials, both loans and grants tied to this purposehave been made, and BNDD has stated that in 1970 AID had $3million to spend on it." In 1971, major U.S.-Turkey agreements weremade, whereby Turkey would phase out opium production over theensuing years." No monetary quid pro quo has beenpublicly announced, but presumably it is substantial. Morerecently, on September 28, 1971, the State Department signed aU.S.-Thailand Memorandum of Understanding that will make U.S. aidavailable to Thailand for the purpose of controlling drug trafficin that country." Again, no funding level has beenannounced. The United Nations has established a Fund forDrug Control, supported by voluntary contributions fromgovernments and individuals. Before the Fund came into being, theUnited States pledged an initial contribution of $2million." Presumably, this has been paid, but it is notclear which agency paid it or whether it is an annualcontribution. In the tables, it is allocated to StateAID forfiscal 1971 contributions to international organizations. It hasnot been annualized. It is difficult to know how to handle theseassistance funds. To carry them at zero is clearly an error, butany specific number is a guess. A recent newspaper report statedthat the total cost of the program in Turkey would be $35 millionover four years, and that the United States would pay $20 millionof it." Project staff believe it likely that the UnitedStates will also absorb at least part of the other $15 million insome form, and that cost overruns are always possible. Given allthe uncertainties, we have estimated State-AID expenditures at$10 million per year, starting in fiscal 1972. This is probably alittle conservative. TREATMENT AND REHABILITATION The principal federal agency concerned withtreatment and rehabilitation is the National Institute of MentalHealth (NIMH) within HEW, which operates four types ofdrug-treatment programs." For three of theseprograms-community Assistance, NARA inpatient, and NARAaftercare-funding levels are known: they were $42,445,000 forfiscal 1971 and will be $99,798,000 for fiscal 1972. Under thefourth program, the Community Mental Health Centers Act, drugusers are only one of a number of categories of people treated,and an accurate calculation of expenditures cannot be made. The Community Assistance Program has expandeddramatically in recent years. From a budget of $3.1 million infiscal 1970 and $21.3 million in fiscal 1971, it has grown to$76.8 million under the revised fiscal 1972 budget. In hissupplemental budget request, President Nixon asked for $67million more for NIMH than was contained in the original budget;of this, $49.8 million will be channeled into the CommunityAssistance Program. The increased emphasis on the CommunityAssistance Program reflects NIMH's belief that it is mosteffective and efficient to treat addicts in their homecommunities rather than in a central isolated facility. Treatmentis not confined to any one method. Different centers usedifferent approaches or combinations of approaches. The modalitychosen for any particular center is the result of the community'ssuggestion and NIMH's ratification. During fiscal 1971, 13,258 patients wereadmitted to the 23 operational centers. NIMH estimates that about10,000 remained enrolled. At the very end of fiscal 1971, 22additional centers were funded; these did not accommodate anypatients during that year but will add substantially to the totalcapacity in fiscal 1972. As funding more than triples in fiscal1972, it is reasonable to expect even more increases in thenumber of operational centers and enrolled patients. Under the Narcotic Addict Rehabilitation Act of1966 (NARA), NIMH operates both inpatient and aftercare civilcommitment facilities. Originally, there were two centralinpatient facilities, one at Lexington, Kentucky, and the otherat Fort Worth, Texas. These facilities were generally underused,and now, consistent with the emphasis on community treatment,NIMH has dissociated from Fort Worth and is in the process ofopening a series of smaller, geographically dispersed incareservice facilities. The central facility at Lexington will remainoperational and will serve patients for whom no local facilitiesare available. At present, about 700 people are in the inpatientphase of civil commitment. The second phase of civil commitmentis community aftercare on an outpatient basis. NIMH hascontracted for these services with 144 different communityprograms. These units are generally small. Together, they serve apopulation of about 1,250. The treatment at each of these centersis determined by NIMH personnel. Under the Community Mental Health Centers Act,NIMH is funding some 450 centers designed to treat people withbasic psychological problems. Many of these centers handledrug-abuse treatment under this general mandate. Information isnot available on the number of drug users served by these centersor the amount of money involved. (No estimate is made in thetables.) The Social and Rehabilitation Service (SRS) ofHEW, also funds rehabilitation programs through grants to statevocationalrehabilitation agencies. In fiscal 1971, an estimated$1,915,000 was spent for 1-000 "rehabilitations," and,in fiscal 1972, SRS expects to spend $3,093,000 for 1,600"rehabilitations." The criterion for rehabilitation isthe ability to secure and maintain employment." Because of the increased focus on drug-use inthe military, the Veterans Administration is accelerating itsdrug-rehabilitation program. In fiscal 1971, the VA inauguratedits first five drugabuse treatment units. Originally, the VA hadplanned to open 13 more centers in fiscal 1972 and another 14 infiscal 1973. However, the President's supplemental budget requestincluded $14.1 million to enable the VA to open all 27 new unitsthis year." Each of these units will be located in a VAhospital and will accommodate approximately 15 inpatients. Theprimary treatment modality will be methadone maintenance, withpatients inducted for four to six weeks in the hospital and thencontinued on an outpatient basis. VA officials say that theyexpect to treat about 6,000 patients under this program duringfiscal 1972. As of July 1, 1971, the Office of EconomicOpportunity (OEO) had 20 active grants budgeted at $12.3million." OEO concentrates its treatment and rehabilitationactivities on programs for young drug users and assistance tocommunity groups. OEO funded treatment modalities range fromtherapeutic communities to methadone maintenance. Some of theprojects also include an education component, but it is notpossible to extract the amount of money spent by OEO for thispurpose. For fiscal 1972, OEO has requested $18 million fordrug-abuse-related expenditures. The neighborhood health-centerconcept would receive increased attention under this plan,according to OEO. Some Model Cities funds from the Department ofHousing and Urban Development have been used to operatedrug-treatment and rehabilitation centers. Because the fundingmechanism is the block grant, the only information available fromHUD is on fiscal 1971 expenditures-no accurate estimate can bemade for fiscal 1972. The majority of these treatment andrehabilitation programs are directed toward young users. Servicesat the different centers range from outpatient counseling tocomprehensive inpatient care. In fiscal 1971, there were 21treatment and rehabilitation programs run in 13 states, theDistrict of Columbia, Puerto Rico, and the Virgin Islands at atotal cost to HUD of $9,343,000. The Job Corps, part of the Department of Labor,will spend $200,000 in fiscal 1972 on three drug-demonstrationprojects. "The purpose of the . . . projects is to developeffective program models for man-power training programs toprevent and control drug misuse by disadvantagedadolescents."" Total LEAA expenditures for treatment andrehabilitation in 1971 amounted to just over $16.6 million. LEAAestimates that it allocated over $4.5 million of its own fiscal1971 discretionary funds to treatment and rehabilitationprograms, and the states spent $12.1 million of the block-actiongrants for similar purposes. LEAA officials say that the funding rationaleis the relationship between drugs and crime. The medical andpsychological needs of addicts must be treated to eliminate theircriminal acts. These treatment and rehabilitation programscontain a strong crime-prevention component, most observable inthe treatment and rehabilitation centers run for predelinquentaddicts. Treatment varies from the use of antagonist drugs totherapeutic communities, and many of the centers offer bothinpatient and outpatient clinical care. The Bureau of Prisons runs two similartreatment and rehabilitation programs. First, under Title 11 ofthe Narcotics Addict Rehabilitation Act (NARA), inpatient andaftercare treatment are provided. The budget for fiscal 1972 is$2,118,924. The program has the capacity to treat 600 inpatientsfor an average of 18 months apiece. The actual population intreatment, as of August, 1971, was about 375." The Bureau of Prisons does not dispense anymaintenance drugs. Rehabilitation programs center on educationaland vocational training, individual, group, and familycounseling, and "milieu therapy." The Bureau also runsa "para-NARA" program, which serves drug-dependentpersons who, for one reason or another, do not qualify under NARATitle 11. This program, operationally similar to NARA, will bebudgeted at $655,955 in fiscal 1972, and the five centers willeventually treat a total population of 250. Four of the centersare now operational, and 104 people are enrolled. The fifthcenter is about to inaugurate operations with an initialpopulation of 39. These figures are exclusive of the Fort Worthfacility, which the Bureau of Prisons has just recently takenover from NIMH. It is expected that this facility will increaseNARA and para-NARA capacity by only 200. The additional budgetaryallotment required was not available. The President's supplemental budget requestincluded the first large-scale identifiable funds for Departmentof Defense drugabuse activities. The total request for thedepartment was $34,255,000, but a functional breakdown of thisbudget is not available. The Army will receive $19,699,000, theNavy $3,231,000, and the Air Force $11,295,000. Of the Army'sfunds, $18.2 million will be channeled into a new program-theAlcohol and Drug Abuse Prevention and Control Program. Theobjectives are defined as follows: Prevention of alcohol and drug abuse Identificaton of drug abusers Detoxification of drug abusers Rehabilitation of drug abusers, either shortterm in Army facilities or long term under the VeteransAdministration Suppression of illegal drug distribution Collection of statistics and dissemination ofinformation How much money is to be allocated for eachobjective is not known, but it is likely that the primaryemphasis will be on treatment and rehabilitation. The Navy andthe Air Force will establish similar programs, funded,respectively, at $2.8 million and $11.1 million. The remainder ofthe DOD funds will probably be used for research." RESEARCH The National institute of Mental Health is theprincipal vehicle for government research on drug abuse. Asconcern about the problem has mounted, so has the NIMHdrug-research budget. The growth curve is shown in Table 5-7,prepared for the House Select Committee on Crime by the directorof NIMH. Probably the most important of the "otherdivisions" mentioned in the table is psychopharmacology,which is concerned primarily with the use of drugs in thetreatment of mental illness. The supplemental budget presented by thePresident in June, 1971, increased the total amount fordrug-abuse research in fiscal 1972 to $30.7 million. Theallocation of this amount is not known. NIMH research covers a variety of drugs,including marijuana and the opiates, amphetamines, barbiturates,and hallucinogens. In fiscal 1970, the only year for which wehave figures, the distribution was as follows: Drugs $ in millions Barbiturates 5.3 Opiates 3.8 Amphetamines 2.8 Marijuana 2.3 Hallucinogens 1.8 Other .3 TOTAL 16.3 This total is higher than the total shown inTable 5-7, which notes only $15.6 million for 1970. Probably thematerial presented to Congress is correct, and the information inthe breakdown by drugs represents preliminary estimates. Drug research draws on the disciplines ofchemistry, pharmacology, sociology, psychology, psychiatry, andepidemiology, alone or in combination. There are no breakdowns bydiscipline, but NIMH does have a basic categorization of theareas within which it makes grants and contracts: 1. Systematic, controlled evaluation ofcurrently promising treatment-program techniques 2. Development of treatment agents/devices foruse in the treatment of drug dependence 3. Clinical studies of the effects of treatmentdrugs and abuse drugs 4. Surveys and instrument development todetermine incidence, prevalence, and patterns of drug abuse: a. among students b. among other groups (hippies, psychiatricpatients, etc.) c. New York City Narcotic Addict Register Psycho-sociological studies of drug abuse and the abuser to determine the motivation for use, environmental influences, effects on personality, characteristics of drug-using subculture, etc. 6. Legal aspects of controlled drugs to explore alternative types of legal control systems 7. Genetic studies to determine effects ofdrugs on chromosomes and offspring: a. marijuana b. LSD c. amphetamines and barbiturates 8. Use of animal models for studies of abusepotential of drugs 9. Exploration of mechanisms of action of drugson the brain at the biochemical, neurophysiological, andbehavioral levels: a. opiates b. marijuana c. amphetamines and barbiturates d. LSD 10. Improved chemical methods for systematicand reliable detection of drug abuse 11. Chemical studies of plant alkaloids todetermine presence of hallucinogenic properties; to determinegeographic origin of opium 12. Development of methods/preparation ofnatural and synthetic marijuana 13. Development of materials/methods forcampaign on prevention and education of drug abuse 14. Training 15. Fellowships and scientist developmentawards. 31 Many of these categories include only a smallnumber of projects. The Addiction Research Center (ARC) inLexington, Kentucky, budgeted at about $0.8 million per year, isNIMH's major facility for intramural drug research. It has twomajor functions -the investigation of the addiction potential ofvarious drugs before they reach commercial channels, and thedevelopment of antagonists to opiates. Basic research into thenature of drug action, abuse, and dependence is not a primaryfunction, although ARC has some highly respected researchers whohave done distinguished work in these areas." In the last two years, there has been a majorpush to do research on marijuana. The total expenditure has gonefrom $1.5 million in fiscal 1969 to $2.8 million in fiscal 1971.Fiscal 1972 data are not available. Much of the past expenditure($1.1 million in fiscal 1971) is done on contract, a procedure"utilized by the NIMH when it is important that thegovernment define precisely what needs to be done, how it shallbe done, and what the product will be." Between 1968 and1972, NIMH did not use contracts for research in any area of drugabuse except marijuana." The Social and Rehabilitation Service, also apart of the Department of Health, Education and Welfare, plans toallocate approximately $400,000 for research in fiscal 1972. Thebulk of this money will be used to investigate techniques bywhich the vocational and social services performed by this agencymay be better utilized to facilitate therapeutic programsdesigned for young drug abusers .14 The National Commission on Marijuana and DrugAbuse was officially established on March 22, 1971, for atwo-year period. It has a dual purpose: First, it is currentlyanalyzing the marijuana situation and will, in March, 1972,recommend any desirable modifications of public policy. Duringits second year, the Commission will explore some of the broaderaspects of drug usage under a mandate to investigate the causesof drug abuse. The budget for fiscal 1972 is estimated to beabout $1 million, allocated entirely to general expenses andresearch. The President's supplemental budget allocated$2.1 million to the Agricultural Research Service of theDepartment of Agriculture. The money will be used to developtechniques to detect and destroy illicitly grownnarcotic-producing plants without causing adverse ecologicaleffects." Two other federal agencies, LEAA and BNDD-bothwithin the Justice Department-conduct research programs,primarily to improve law-enforcement techniques. LEAA research funds come from the block-actiongrant and discretionary-grant programs discussed above and fromprograms conducted by LEAA's National Institute of LawEnforcement and Criminal justice (NILECI)." During the pasttwo fiscal years, the funding levels for research and educationwere as follows: Figures for fiscal 1972 are not yet available.The discretionary grants program has not been finalized, and moststates have not yet submitted their plans for the fiscal 1972block-action grants. In the tables, we assume that the fundingwill remain the same as in fiscal 1971. LEAA-funded research has emphasized two projectareas: investigation of possible relationships between drug useand aggressive behavior and crime, and evaluations ofLEAA-funded, community-based treatment and rehabilitationprojects. It can be expected that LEAA research programs willretain this thrust in fiscal 1972. BNDD research is limited to projects directlyrelated to law enforcement, such as the abuse potential ofparticular drugs or the market characteristics of thedrug-distribution system. In fiscal 1971, BNDD had a researchstaff of 20 and a total research budget of $1,383,000. For fiscal1972, BNDD originally asked for a research budget of $1,467,000;the increase, however, would have covered only the cost ofannualization of positions, and would not have resulted in anyadditional activities." The President's supplemental budgetallocated an additional $2 million to BNDD "for developmentand implementation of new technology for detection, surveillance,communications and automatic data processing as tools in theenforcement of drug laws."" Other federal agencies are conducting researchinto nonlawenforcement aspects of drug abuse. For the most part,however, the following programs are limited in scope andperipheral to the central goals and purposes of the agencyinvolved. The Job Corps has budgeted $120,000 for anational drug survey of 16 Job Corps centers in fiscal 1972, toobtain information about knowledge,attitudes, and patterns of drug use among different subculturalgroups of Job Corps enrollees." The Department of Transportation has beenconducting research on the effects of drugs on drivers anddriving. DOT says that in fiscal 1972 it will spend an estimated$250,000 on the following studies: Incidence of drugs in people admitted to auniversity clinic after auto accidents Investigation of a sample of 1,000 fatallyinjured drivers for drugs Incidence of drugs in drivers who are notinvolved in accidents Simulation studies of drug effects A study of the driving record of heroin addictsbefore and after addiction and while on methadone In fiscal 1972, the Veterans Administrationplans to spend $250,000 for a general research program concernedprimarily with the biological and behavioral aspects of drugaddiction and to be conducted in Veterans Administrationhospitals." The Food and Drug Administration (FDA) isinvesting a limited amount of funds in drug-abuse-relatedresearch. A budget breakdown is not available, but the agencyestimates that these projects will consume four and a halfman-years of time in fiscal 1972. Two of FDA's most importantactivities in this area are reviewing methadone-treatmentprograms for medical soundness and reviewing proposals to marketmethadone as a proven rather than an experimental drug. Finally, part of the Department of Defense'ssupplemental budget will be used for research activities. TheArmy will get $1.5 million for research, development, testing,and evaluation in fiscal 1972; the Navy and Air Force will begiven lesser. amounts." Information on specific projects isnot yet available. EDUCATION, PREVENTION, AND TRAINING It is not always possible to distinguishsharply between this category and other categories. For example,funds for BNDD programs to educate local law-enforcement officersare included under law enforcement; treatment and rehabilitationprograms undoubtedly include some money for training theagencies' own workers; and the line between prevention andenforcement is not always clear. Programs in this section includethe following types of activity: Efforts to alert the general public to thedrug-abuse problem and to explain its scope and significance Efforts to reach actual or potential drugabusers and to explain the effects and dangers of drug abuse Programs to train education workers NIMH programs to train rehabilitation workers(because of the scope of NIMH rehabilitation programs, thetraining activities are sufficiently large to warrant separation) Information services for persons interested inthe drug field In fiscal 1971, the Office of Education (CE)budgeted approximately $6 million for drug-education programs. Ofthis, $2 million was allocated to state departments of educationto train educational personnel. The other major OE endeavors infiscal 1971 were 26 community programs, 11 drug-educationprojects initiated by local school districts, and 20college-based pilot programs initiated and operated by studentsprimarily for fellow students but sometimes with acommunity-outreach component." For fiscal 1972, the Office of Educationoriginally requested a budget of $6 million to continue existingprograms." As a result of a supplemental request, however,OE will receive $13 million for drug-abuse-related programs. Themajor new undertaking will be a training program called"Help Communities Help Themselves": Eight regionalcenters will be inaugurated to train community people on how todevelop and maintain community education and informationprograms; in the first year, OE hopes to train about 2,500people. This project will cost about $6.5 million. For fiscal 1972, NIMH has budgeted $2,571,000for public information services, a nominal increase over thefiscal 1971 amount of $2,563,000. Part of this money will be usedby the National Clearinghouse for Drug Abuse Information, whichanswers general inquiries for information by sending out NIMHbrochures and fact books. More specific requests are answered byinformation specialists, who send out reprints of publishedarticles. The Clearinghouse has also developed a fairlycomprehensive standard bibliography as well as a computerizedinformation system that lists, indexes, and abstracts publishedarticles in the field and conducts searches in response toindividual requests. The NIMH and the Department of Defense andJustice are cosponsoring a special advertising campaign designedto counteract peer pressure to use drugs. This campaign, in thesecond of three years, has an annual cost of $150,000 equallydivided between the sponsors. In fiscal 1972, NIMH will spend $6.9 million ontraining, compared with $2.1 million budgeted in fiscal 1971.Part of this increase will be absorbed by the expansion of aprogram to develop educational materials and to train lawyers,ministers, and others who spend part of their time working withdrug-dependent persons." The Office of Economic Opportunity has awardeda $420,000 grant for fiscal 1972 for the inauguration of aNational Training Institute in Washington, D.C., to provide sixmonths of intensive training for former addicts working on localprojects, with follow-up training, if necessary." In fiscal 1971, $3,066,000 of HUD's ModelCities funds were used for 37 programs in the area of education,prevention, or training. Within this broad category, the stateshave programmed many diverse projects. Some have used their fundsto develop curricula for drug-education programs in the schools;others have funded workshops for teachers and counselors; stillothers have directed their efforts toward the general community.At least one program has been run for law-enforcement officers. The job Corps, within the Department of Labor,will spend $40,000 in fiscal 1972 to develop, collect, anddistribute educational material deemed appropriate and relevantto the job Corps population." This project will also helpJob Corps staffs improve their understanding of the problems ofdrugs and drug abusers. BNDD also operates a public-education campaign.In fiscal 1971, this division was staffed by 26 people at a costof $1,215,000. The education division responds to requests fromthe general public for information on the drug problem andpreventive programs. This division also provides materials andfilms upon request and arranges for speakers for national, state,and regional programs. In fiscal 1971, BNDD personnel made 1,500speeches to an estimated audience of 150,000. They also made 191radio and television appearances. These figures representsignificant declines from the preceding year, apparently theresult of a policy decision to place highest priority onaddressing groups of people capable of establishing ongoingdrug-prevention programs rather than the public at' large. Infiscal 1972, this division will again consist of 26 people but ata cost of $1,251,000. This budget increase, however, will coveronly annualization of positions." LEAA estimates that approximately $20.2 millionof its fiscal 1971 funds were spent on education, prevention, andtraining, more than was spent in any other drug-abuse category.The major objective of LEAA's program is "to providestudents and adults with the knowledge necessary to makeintelligent decisions concerning the personal use of addicting orhabituating drugs and other harmful substances." LEAA hasdeveloped the concept of a "concerned community" thatmust be made aware of the nature and magnitude of the problembefore it can respond. The agency stresses four programs: 1. Coordination of local and state publiceducation and information programs to attain maximumparticipation and efficiency 2. Implementation of health-informationprograms in every school at the earliest feasible grade level 3. Development of educational programs,seminars, and work- shops designed to provide accurate informationfor adults 4. Predelinquent counseling services throughthe use of neighborhood information centers." The funding level of these programs in fiscal1972 is not yet known. THE SPECIAL ACTION OFFICE In his special message to the Congress on June17, 1971, the President proposed the temporary establishment of aSpecial Action Office of Drug Abuse Prevention accountabledirectly to the President. Pending congressional approval, thePresident, through an executive order, instituted the position ofSpecial Consultant for Narcotics and Dangerous Drugs to fulfill,to the extent legally possible, the duties of the proposedSpecial Action Office. Under this revised organizational plan, itwould become the responsibility of the Special Action Office tocoordinate and direct all the drug-abuse activities of thevarious federal agencies, with the exception of those dealingwith the problems of law enforcement." The President hasrequested $3 million in fiscal 1972 for the staff andadministrative costs of the Special Action Office." NOTES 1. Latest White House estimate as reported inthe National journal, July 3, 197 1, p. 1417. 2. House of Representatives Document No.92-133, Amendment to Budget Fiscal Year 1972, Drug AbuseProblem, June 21, 1971, p. 4 (hereafter H.R. 92-133). 3. U.S. Congress, Hearings onAppropriations, House of Representatives, 92d Cong., 1stsess., 1971 (hereafter App. Hrgs. 1971), justice, Pt. 1,p. 333; H.R. 92-133; U.S. Department of Justice, Bureau ofNarcotics and Dangerous Drugs, Fact Sheets, unpublished,1971 (hereafter BNDD Fact Sheets). 4. This figure is arrived atby subtracting BNDD appropriations for research and for education, prevention, andtraining from the total requested budget. 5. U.S., Congress, Hearings onAppropriations, House of Representatives, 91st Cong., 2dsess., 1970 (hereafter App. Hrgs. 1970), Justice, Pt. 1,pp. 987-88. 6. App. Hrgs. 1971, Justice, Pt. 1, p.868. 7. National Journal, July 3, 197 1, p.1422. 8. These figures come from the BNDD FactSheets. At the House Appropriations Hearings in March, 1971,however, the agency stated that total staff of foreign officeshad risen from 34 to 70 in 1970. BNDD Fact Sheets; App. Hrgs.1971, Justice, Pt. 1, pp. 848, 868. 9. App. Hrgs. 1971, Justice, Pt. 1, p.848. 10. H.R. 92-133, p. 4. 11. App. Hrgs. 1970, Justice, Pt. 1, p.220. 12. Information supplied by the Bureau ofCustoms. 13. Ibid. 14. App. Hrgs. 1970, Treasury, Pt. 2, p.583. 15. Department of Justice, Law EnforcementAssistance Administration, A Program for a Safer, More Just America, p.3. 16. Information supplied by LEAA. 17. H.R. 92-133, p. 5. 18. App. Hrgs. 1970, Foreign Assistanceand Related Agencies, Pt. 2, p. 11. Mexico's total legitimate exports are about$1.1 billion, and the marijuana trade may be worth an additional$100 million in foreign exchange. Some experts have estimatedthat 500 kilograms of marijuana per day go from Mexico to theUnited States. This comes to about 400,000 pounds per year. Anaverage price of $25 per pound F.O.B. Mexican border does notseem unreasonable, based on many sources of information. Theexact figures depend, of course, on one's estimate of marijuanause and average price. A case can be made for almost any figurebetween $70 million and $120 million. 19. App. Hrgs. 1970, Foreign Assistanceand Related Agencies, Pt. 2, p. I 1; John Ingersoll,"New Horizons of Narcotic and Dangerous DrugEnforcement," Speech at the Law Enforcement ExecutiveConference, Williamsburg, Virginia, July 22, 1970, p. 8. 20. U.S., Congress, House of Representatives,Select Committee on Crime, Narcotics Research, Rehabilitationand Treatment, Hearings, 92d Cong., Ist sess., 1971, pp.70-73. 21. U.S., Department of State, U.S.-ThaiMemorandum of Understanding, September 28, 1971. 22. App. Hrgs. 1971, Justice, Pt. 1, p.372. 23. Washington Evening Star, November 4,197 1. 24. NIMH's Division of AdministrationManagement and Financial Management provided much of theinformation in this section. 25. Information supplied by SRS. 26. Veterans Administration, Alcohol and DrugDependence Service, Progress Report, August 19, 1971, p.1. 27. Office of Economic Opportunity, DrugRehabilitation Projects Status Report, July 1, 1971. 28. U.S., Department of Labor, Job CorpsDrug Task Force Projects, 1971, p. 1. 29. Information supplied by the Bureau ofPrisons. 30. H.R. 92-133, p. 3. 31. National Institute of Mental Health, Centerfor Studies of Narcotic and Drug Abuse, Memorandum, ProgramDevelopment Goals with Grants and Contract Supported ActiveDuring FY 1969, August 13, 1969. 32. App. Hrgs. 1970, U.S., Department ofHealth, Education and Welfare, Pt. 1, pp. 448-50. 33. U.S. Congress, op. cit., note 20,pp. 474, 476-77. 34. Information supplied by SRS. 35. H.R. 92-133. 36. Information on LEAA supplied by LEAA. 37. App. Hrgs. 1971, justice, Pt. 1, p.845. 38. H.R. 92-133, p. 4. 39. U.S., Department of Labor, job CorpsDrug Task Force Projects, memorandum, August 31, 197 1, p. 1. 40. Veterans Administration, Alcohol and DrugDependence Service, Progress Report, August 19, 1971, P.3. 4 1. H.R. 92-133, p. 3. 42. Congressional Record, July 26, 1971, p. E8287. 43. App. Hrgs. 1971, Office of Educationand Related Agencies, Pt. 1, pp. 975-76, and information suppliedby the Office of Education. 44. Information supplied by NIMH. 45. Office of Economic Opportunity, DrugRehabilitation Projects Status Report, July 1, 1971, P. 3. 46. U.S., Department of Labor, Job CorpsDrug Task Force Projects, p. 1. 47. App. Hrgs. 1971, justice, Pt. 1, p.845; App. Hrgs. 1970, Justice, Pt. 1, pp. 924, 979, 998. 48. Information supplied by LEAA. 49. See Message from the President to theCongress of the United States June 17, 1971. 50. H.R. 92-133, p. 3. Contents | Feedback | Search DRCNet Library | Schaffer Library | Major Studies | DealingWith Drug Abuse WT02-B02-34IA086-000614-B046-45http://206.61.184.43:80/schaffer/Library/studies/dwda/staff7.htm 206.61.184.43 19970122022004 text/html 126734HTTP/1.0 200 OKDate: Wednesday, 22-Jan-97 02:19:50 GMTServer: WebSitePro/1.1f (S/N wpo-0deb)Allow-ranges: bytesContent-type: text/htmlLast-modified: Saturday, 28-Dec-96 07:10:28 GMTContent-length: 126515 Narcotics Addiction and Control in Great Britain Dealing with Drug Abuse A Report to the Ford Foundation THE DRUG ABUSE SURVEY PROJECT STAFF PAPER 7 Narcotics Addiction and Control inGreat Britain by Edgar May Background * The Clinics * Law Enforcement *Research * The Statistics * Results * Personal Observations After a decade of spiraling narcoticsaddiction in England, the trend was reversed in 1970. The British narcotics problem admittedly isminor when compared with that of the United States. England hadnever counted more than 3,000 narcotics addicts; estimates in theUnited States range from 150,000 to 250,000. However, whileAmerican drug experts warn of a continuously growing number ofaddicts, Britain's Home Office recently reported a drop of almost8 per cent, the first since the drug problem became a seriousnational concern. The slowdown had already begun in 1969, whenthe annual increase of addicts was held to a trickle, one yearafter the government tightened its narcotics policies by limitingthe prescribing of heroin to staff physicians of government-rundrug clinics. Previously, any general physician was permitted toprescribe heroin. Until the clinic system had been operating fora year, the number of narcotics addicts in England doubled every-sixteen months. The reversal of this trend has been accompaniedby a significant drop in new addicts. In 1968, a total of 1,476previously unknown cases were reported. In 1969, the figure was1,030, and by 1970 it had dropped to 711. These encouraging figures, however, concernonly a part of the British drug-abuse problem, albeit thetoughest and the one over which there is the most public concern.But addicts and abusers of amphetamines and barbiturates are notincluded in this count. Furthermore, there is a far greater andincreasing army of marijuana and hashish users, for which thereis no accurate tally. But, while the latest statistics may give theEnglish drug scene a more optimistic appearance than it deserves,the bizarre anecdotes that have been published in both theEnglish and American press may have colored the past picture withmore despair than is justified. In the twitching kaleidoscope that isPicadilly Circus, the scene is as harsh and distorted as theelectric letters that flash their spasmodic messages from highabout the throng. The pallid young addicts, staggering out ofdoorways to panhandle enough for a fix, casting furtive glancesat passersby while pills or other drugs are exchanged . . . a jabof a needle in the toilet of the Underground ... a hypodermicprotruding between the toes of a grimy, infected foot . . . aspurt of fresh blood on a soiled shirt . . . a young girlcollapsing in a doorway after taking a barbiturate injection.It's all there and more. These scenes may have become part of thetourist attractions of London's Times Square, but they don'treflect accurately the addiction problem in England. Although itis risky to offer findings in the complex and often-disputedfield of drug addiction, some basic trends are clear: Heroin addiction is no longer the major"hard" drug problem in England. The rising tide of newheroin addicts has been stopped and, in fact, has significantlyreceded. The quantity of heroin prescribed in government clinicscontinues to decline. Methadone is the most frequently used drugin England today and is replacing heroin. But the drop in heroinis not fully matched by the rise in methadone. New addicts tendto be addicted to methadone rather than heroin, but the number ofnewcomers addicted to anything is smaller than in previous years. Methadone maintenance generally is notpracticed in England as it is in the United States, in that farmore English addicts inject methadone than take it orally. British hard-drug users often are polyaddicts,injecting a variety of drugs, obtained both legally andillegally. The most recent craze is the injection ofbarbiturates, a particularly damaging habit that has raised theconcerns of all those working in the British drug field. Although the backbone of the English drugprogram is the government-sponsored clinic, where addicts obtainfree drugs, the phrase "British clinic system" ismisleading. There is very little system to the clinics beyond thefact that they all prescribe narcotics. Clinics vary widely inservices offered, treatment approach, staff, and facilities.Nevertheless, the clinics are credited widely with curbing theheroin problem, while the degree of their contribution to theproblem of methadone addiction is debated. Furthermore, clinicsare considered to have had an impact on improving the totalhard-drug picture, but evidence for this generally is subjectiverather than objective and statistical. Although there is some black-market activityin all drugs, it appears to be on neither a major nor a veryprofessional scale. No one interviewed claimed that there was avast, hidden opiate-addict population supplying itself from theblack market. No one in England saw any correlation betweendrug addiction and a rise in crime. Finally, the commonly held view in the UnitedStates that heroin addiction automatically turns the user into acompletely antisocial, unproductive misfit is simply not sharedin England. Many English addicts hold regular jobs. Estimates ofemployment of all known addicts range from 40 to 50 per cent. But perhaps to find the most glaringdifference between the two countries, you have to go back to thehurlyburly of Picadilly Circus. There, in a locked cabinet on amedicine shelf at Boots the Chemist, which attracts adisproportionate number of addicts because it is open all night,you can find heroin tablets in small bottles. A printed-in-redretail price list says: Heroin 100 tablets 18 S. At the 1970 rate of exchange, this is $2.16.On New York's streets, the retail price for the same amount ofheroin can run as high as $1,000. BACKGROUND Unlike the United States, England hasconsistently treated drug addiction as a medical problem. Evenwhile moving toward more restrictive policies in the drug-abusefield, the nation has never wavered from this medical point ofview. "The addict should be regarded as a sick person, heshould be treated as such and not as a criminal, provided that hedoes not resort to criminal acts,"' said the BrainCommittee, which formulated the first significant changes in thecountry's drug laws seven years ago. Hard-drug abuse in England, also unlike theUnited States, became a problem only in the last ten years or so,as Table 7-1 clearly indicates. In 1954, the first yearnationwide heroin statistics were available, there were only 54identified heroin addicts. The majority of the 335 known drugaddicts that year, a total of 179, were addicted to morphine, andmost were women. Also, the majority of these addicts had becomeaddicted after receiving a narcotic to relieve pain related to alengthy illness. Among the few nontherapeutic addicts, a highproportion were doctors and nurses 'who had experimented withnarcotics and subsequently became hooked. Today, of course, the numbers, the reasons foraddiction, and the average addict age (see Table 7-2) haveall changed. For example, only 2 per cent of the reportedaddicts in 1968 were classified as therapeutic. Among heroinaddicts that year, 32 per cent were under twenty years ofage. Men outnumbered women by more than 3 to 1. TABLE 7-1 NUMBER OF KNOWN ADDICTS, SEX, AND DRUGS USED Number SexDrugs used* Year Of known Meth-Mor- Co- Peth- addicts MF Heroin adone phinecaine idine 1945 367 144223 1950 306 158148 1955 335 159176 54 21 179 6 64 1960 437 195242 94 68 177 52 98 1961 470 223247 132 59 168 84 105 1962 532 262270 175 54 157 112 112 1963 635 339296 237 55 172 171 107 1964 753 409344 342 61 162 211 128 1965 927 558369 521 72 160 311 102 1966 1,349886 463 899 156 178 443131 1967 117291,262 467 11299 243 158 462112 1968 2,7822,161 621 21240 486 198 564120 1969 2,88121295 586 1 @417 11687 345 311128 1970 2fi6l2,071 590 914 1,820 346 198122 * Alone or in combination with other drugs. SOURCE: Drugs Branch,Home Office. England differs from the United States againin that its addicts today are not as a rule from disadvantagedfamilies, are not members of minority groups, and do not"turn on" to blot out the economic dispair of theghetto. "On the contrary," says Dr. David V.Hawks, a key staff member of the Addiction Research Unitof London's Institute of Psychiatry; "those notified in the1960's were often construed as 'middle class dropouts' whoseaddiction, far from being explicable in terms of some materialdisadvantage, appears to have been motivated by the deliberaterejection of middle-class norms and opportunities." TABLE 7-2 AGES OF ADDICTS KNOWN TO THE HOMEOFFICE 1959 1960 1961 1962 1963 1964 1965 1966 1967 1968 1969 1970 Under20 All drugs - 1 2 3 17 40 145 329 395 764 637 405 Heroin* - 1 2 3 17 40 134 317 381 709 598 365 20-34 All drugs 50 62 94 132 184 257 347 558 906 1,530 1,789 1,813 Heroin 35 52 87 126 162 219 319 479 827 1,390 1,709 1,705 35-49 All drugs 92 91 95 107 128 138 134 162 142 146 174 158 Heroin 7 14 19 24 38 61 52 83 66 78 101 95 50 and over Alldrugs 278 267 272 274 298 311 291 286 279 260 241 253 Heroin 26 27 24 22 20 22 16 20 24 20 46 50 Age unknown Alldrugs 34 16 7 16 8 7 10 14 7 82 40 32 Heroin 1 43 26 18 * Beginning with 1969, this figure includesaddicts to heroin and/or methadone. SOURCE: Drugs Branch, Home Office. This does not mean that the poor have escapedheroin addiction. They have not. But they aren't-by any count-inthe majority. The basic guidelines for Britain's drug-abusepolicy were established in 1926, a dozen years after Americapassed the Harrison Act, which set the stage for the U.S.addict-criminal doctrine. A committee chaired by Sir HumphreyRolleston, a prominent English physician, turned the problem overto doctors and steered it away from the police. The Rollestoncommittee said that doctors should be allowed to prescribenarcotics to wean patients off these drugs, to relieve pain aftera prolonged cure had failed, and in cases where small dosesenabled otherwise helpless patients to perform useful tasks andlead relatively normal lives. The Rolleston Committee's findings were thebasis of British drug policy for almost forty years. They werereaffirmed in general in 1961 by the Interdepartmental Committeeon Drug Addiction, chaired by Sir Russell Brain. However, theaddiction statistics began to move upward, the Brain Committeewas reconvened, and a second report was issued on July 31, 1965.It recommended the first significant restrictions on theprescribing of heroin and cocaine. The report succinctly stated the motivationand fears behind England's drug policies and their sharpdifferences with those of the United States: We have borne in mind the dilemma which faces the authorities responsible for the control of dangerous drugs in this country. If there is insufficient control it may lead to the spread of addictionas is happening at present. If, on the other hand, the restrictions are so severe as to prevent or seriously discourage the addict from obtaining any supplies from legitimate sources, [they] may lead to the development of an organized illicit traffic. The absence hitherto of such an organized illicit traffic has been attributed largely to the fact that an addict has been able to obtain supplies of drugs legally. But this facility has now been abused, with the result that addiction has increased. The Brain Committee recommended the followingchanges: 1. "All addicts to dangerous drugs should be notified to a central authority." (This authority later became the Chief Medical Officer of the Home Office.) 2. "To treat addicts a number of special treatment centers should be established, especially in the London area." 3. "There should be powers for compulsory detention of addicts in these centers." (This recommendation later was rejected by the Minister of Health.) 4. "The prescribing of heroin and cocaine to addicts should be limited to doctors on the staff of these treatment centers." 5. "It should be a statutory offence for other doctors to prescribe heroin and cocaine to an addict." The government accepted these recommendationsand incorporated them in the Dangerous Drugs Act of 1967. InFebruary, 1968, the compulsory notification of addicts went intoeffect. By April of that year, heroin and cocaine prescribing wasrestricted to doctors in the newly created treatment centers. During the almost three years that passedbetween the committee's report and the effective date of itsrecommendations, harddrug addiction soared. From 1964, the latestyear for which a full year's statistics were available to thecommittee, to 1967, heroin addicts alone increased fourfold, from342 to 1,299. A year later, the heroin-addict figure reached2,240. The committee's concern that"insufficient control may lead to the spread ofaddiction" was more than confirmed. Although it is unjust toblame the British medical profession alone for the sharp rise inaddiction, the fact is that general over-prescribing and theactivities of a few medical charlatans fueled the craving forheroin. Some addicts were receiving prescriptions fromgeneral practitioners for as much as 20 or more grains of heroina day (1,200 milligrams). Very few addicts used that amountthemselves (a dosage, incidentally, that would kill almost anyAmerican adult). Most beneficiaries of overprescribing doctorssold their surplus and, of course, addicted others. What issurprising is that the Disciplinary Committee of the GeneralMedical Council, the policing arm of the British medicalprofession, permitted this situation to continue as long at itdid. The problem of overprescribing doctors, withstrong hints that their conduct was ethically questionable, wasdiscussed in print as early as 1965 in the public report of theBrain Committee: From the evidence before us we have been led to the conclusion that the major source of supply has been the activity of a very few doctors who have prescribed excessively for addicts. Thus we were informed that in 1962 one doctor alone prescribed almost 600,000 tablets (6 million milligrams or 6 kilos) of heroin for addicts .3 The same doctor, on one occasion, prescribed 900 tablets (9,000 milligrams) of heroin to one addict and three days later prescribed for the same patient another 600 tablets (6,000 milligrams) "to replace pills lost in an accident." Two doctors each issued a single prescription for 1,000 tablets (10,000 milligrams). Overprescribing was so extensive during theyears after the Brain Committee report and before the opening ofthe clinics that pure, British-manufactured heroin was readilyand relatively inexpensively available on the black market, whereimported, illicit heroin was virtually unknown. While prices forall consumer products rose during this period, black-marketheroin-the overprescribed surplus-held the line against inflationand stayed at one pound sterling a grain. This meant that, for$2.40 a day, an addict could support a heroin habit. (Today,incidentally, British manufactured heroin is both relativelyscarce and expensive on the black market, with a sixfold increaseto six pounds, or $14.40 a grain.) One psychiatrist, reviewing the yearsimmediately preceding the opening of the clinics, felt thatgeneral practitioners were overprescribing to such an extentthat, for every two addicts receiving prescriptions, at least oneother was maintaining his habit from these supplies. Anotherpsychiatrist believed that about a third of the reported addictswere not bona fide addicts at all but were merely sometimeheroin users who conned doctors into issuing regularprescriptions that they would then sell. But a few doctors clearly had not beensweet-talked by addicts into writing too-generous prescriptions.They had purposely turned the narcotics problem into a lucrativeenterprise with the simple stroke of a pen. They wroteprescriptions for pay-at a going rate of one pound to two poundsper script. These were the junkie doctors whose names can befound in almost every London clinic's case records. One of them, a dermatologist with a passionfor gambling, ended his prescribing days issuing orders from ataxi parked in front of the Baker Street Tube Station. He wasnabbed on a technicality-failing to keep proper narcoticsrecords-spent a short period in jail, and finally had his licenseto practice revoked by the General Medical Council after numerouscomplaints of his activities from druggists and Home Officeofficials. Another was reported to have issued prescriptions to140 addicts with a daily average of 6 to 8 grains at the heightof his narcotics enterprise. He is also without a medical licensetoday. He went to jail for conspiracy to commit murder. While no one knowledgeable about the Englishdrug scene will say that the nation would not have had ahard-drug problem had it not been for overprescribing doctors andoutright charlatans, there is consensus that overgenerousprescriptions, whatever the doctor's motivation, helpedsignificantly to create the chaotic drug scene that thegovernment clinic program was expected to remedy. THE CLINICS In 1970, a monthly average of 1,154 drugaddicts obtained government-paid-for heroin and/or methadone anda little cocaine from clinics scattered throughout England andWales. Recently, the clinic figures have remained relativelystable, fluctuating by fewer than 100 addicts every month. Thenumber of new addicts registered with clinics dropped from amonthly average of 66 to 41 in 1971. (See Table 7-3.) Nevertheless, it is risky to conclude thatthis relative stability in clinic enrollment reflects containmentof drug addiction in England. Some clinics appear to have set aquota of addicts and simply do not accept, or cannot accept, morebecause of staff or facility limitations.The slow reduction in new addicts, however, is a hopeful sign. There are 14 clinics in London, which has fourfifths of the country's addicts. Elsewhere, an addict may obtaindrugs at 13 special facilities or at some 42 hospital outpatientdepartments These are prepared to service an occasional addict aspart of their regular outpatient program. The special clinics vary in every conceivableway-in type of facility, size of patientload, size of staff, treatment approach, and prescribingphilosophy. There is no central authority over the clinics toprovide specific guidelines for staffing or determine treatmentor prescribing policies. Because of this, it is a mistake torefer to the English "drug clinic system." There is nocommon "system" beyond the fact that addicts may obtainheroin and methadone from government-supported clinics. Each clinic director is doing "his ownthing," based on his own particular approach to drugaddiction. He works with the facility, staff, and budget he wasable to get from his own hospital and Regional Hospital Board,the governing body that supervises medical care for a given area. These various approaches have not beenevaluated comparatively for cost or effectiveness. The addicts,however, are usually in agreement about which are the"best" clinics in a less than scientific rating system,which might be called the "Santa Claus" scale. It rankscandidates on their drug-prescribing generosity. The lack of central direction is the resultnot of careless management but rather of design. Americans oftenhave the impression that the British National Health Service is amonolith that dictates everything from aspirin dispensing toappendix removing, but the fact is that the government's Ministryof Health has approached physicians both within and outside ofthe National Health Service with the circumspection of animpresario dealing with a diva. After the government accepted most of thesecond Brain Committee recommendations and prepared the necessarylegislation to implement them, the Department of Health andSocial Security issued a memorandum to Regional Hospital Boardsand hospital governing groups.' The Ministry directed its memoparticularly at mental hospitals and psychiatric departments ofgeneral hospitals. As a result, today the clinic directors arepsychiatrists, most of whom follow a general psychiatric practicein addition to their interests in the drug field. The Health Department memorandum included alist of the known addicts in each Regional Hospital area. Sincemost addicts were in the London area, it asked city hospitalswith psychiatric departments to plan for drug clinics. At thesame time, the Health Department asked hospitals to set upinpatient beds for withdrawal treatment and to assess addicts whowould obtain their drugs as outpatients for the required dosage.Today most clinics have such beds available to them.Significantly, the "how" of operating clinicswas not described. The decision to supply an addict with drugsand whether to seek to substitute other drugs, the assessment ofdosage, and the method of supply rest with the clinician. It isto be expected, however, that where possible, the dosage will bedetermined by assessment during inpatient observation and thatthis will usually be offered, though continued treatment cannotbe made conditional on acceptance. [This in-hospital assessmentis rarely done today, and it is clear that most clinic directorsreject this Health Department "expectation."] Theorganization of services will depend on the method of supplyingdrugs that is adopted by clinicians. It is, however, desirable inany area that there should be a fairly uniform approach;otherwise, the organization of services and the sharing of theload will be obstructed because addicts will gravitate to thoseclinics where they think drugs are easiest to get. While directadministration of drugs by the medical staff of the treatmentcenter is not excluded, supply by the hospital or by retailprescription is likely to be more generally practicable. The clinics have certain statistical reportingobligations, both to the Health Department and the Home Office.There is an exchange of views and information among clinicdirectors and other medical staff members at periodic meetingscalled by the Health Department. A department official told methat these meetings generally are held every two months, but therecords show that such sessions are usually held on an irregularbasis. Minutes of the meetings indicate that not all clinics arerepresented at every meeting and not every clinic directorattends regularly. FACILITIES The differences between clinics is apparentfrom inspection of their physical facilities. In the naval-basecity of Portsmouth, the clinic is in a large general hospitaltucked behind a door marked "Dental Waiting Room." InEast London, the center is in its own building on the grounds ofa mental hospital. In the Denmark Hill area, it is part of thehospital's general outpatient department. If you visit St. Giles Clinic in the Church ofEngland Community Center, you are reminded of an Alec Guinnessmovie. Dr. James H. Willis, a young psychiatrist, holds courtresplendent in a white medical coat, seated behind a large woodentable in a room marked "Lecture Hall." He is flanked bytwo pianos and a bass fiddle. Above and behind his head, a brassplaque reads: "The trustees of St. Giles Center gratefullyacknowledge the generous support given by the Rotary Club ofCamberwell." It is doubtful that the Rotarians would rushto support the effort now going on in the lecture hall. It islack of such support that has prevented Dr. Willis from using anew $192,000 building specifically constructed for his drugclinic by the two hospitals and the Regional Hospital Boardsponsoring it. The building, which includes eight single roomsfor inpatient assessment, stood empty for more than a year afterit was completed. Public protest -exploited by localpoliticians-forced the hospital to rescind its decision to bringyoung addicts into the middle-class neighborhood of St. Giles. In his churchly retreat, Dr. Willis has nofacilities even for basic medical examinations, and patientsleave urine specimens in the center's men's room. STAFFING A most basic difference among clinics is inthe kind and size of staff that operate them. One of the mostsignificant contrasts is between St. Clement and Lambeth HospitalClinics. The staffing patterns are as follows: LAMBETH (96active patients) Doctors: 1 31/2 days a week 1 21/2 days a week I 1 1/2 days a week Social worker: 1 21/2 days a week Nurse: 1 full time Secretary: 1 ST. CLEMENT (71active patients) Doctors: 1 full time 1 1 1/2 days a week I psychiatric intern 1 1/2days a week Social workers: 2 full time Nurses: 10 full time Secretary: 1 The nurses at St. Clement function like socialworkers: they counsel patients and make home calls both topatients and to their families, relatives, or close friends. The Lambeth Clinic, run by Dr. Thomas H.Bewley, a wellknown author of medical articles on the Englishdrug scene, is far closer to the English clinic prototype. The besieged Dr. Willis at St. Giles,incidentally, was even worse off when it came to staffing. With75 active patients and 64 inactive patients, the clinic includedthree doctors, two full time and another one-third time. Althoughthere were two slots for social workers, both were temporarilyempty. Dr. Willis has no nursing help. His only other assistancecomes from a secretary and a hospital porter, who acts asfactotum around his piano-flanked emporium. St. Clement, in terms of staff time for theaddict, is clearly exceptional. It was originally intended as aday hospital where an addict would come for the entire day,returning to his home only at night. The original staffingpattern was retained when the clinic was turned into what can bedescribed more accurately as a day center that addicts of theclinic may or may not attend. There is a ping-pong table, artclasses, and a "fixing room" where addicts can injectthemselves. Individual and group therapy sessions also are heldin the day center. Among all London clinics, the amount ofsocial-work time provided to addicts varies from 475 hours perweek (St. Clement) to none, according to a questionnaire filledout by the clinics themselves. Because of the difference in staff timebetween St. Clement and Lambeth, the addict's relationship tothese clinics is vastly different. At St. Clement, each socialworker and nurse has about ten cases. They know each addict byhis first name, and the easy, relaxed relationship that comeswith familiarity is evident. One addict, for example, came in toshow his nurse pictures of his recent wedding and to thank herfor her congratulatory telegram. At Lambeth, the lone social worker, whoprovides twenty hours a week, has a caseload of 30 addicts out ofthe 96 active with the clinic. Of the 30, she estimated that shehas what she called "a deep relationship" with ahalf dozen. "They get a good half hour a week." Of the clinic's work, she said: "We'recontaining it, regularizing it a bit; but, we're not treating it.I think I do first aid a lot." At St. Clement, staff members were slightly,but not much, more encouraging. Not only did this clinicrepresent the most concentrated staff effort with addicts, butits patients resemble American ghetto addicts more closely thanany other London group. St. Clement is a 128-bed mental hospital inEast London, an area that in terms of income and class-but notcolor-can be compared to New York's Harlem or Bedford-Stuyvesant.The addiction clinic of St. Clement serves patients from thesurrounding neighborhoods, the bleak row houses that bring tomind a Charles Dickens novel. Eighty per cent of St. Clement'saddiction clinic customers are East End boys; the other 20 percent come from the far more affluent middle- and upper-class WestEnd. While an estimated 10 per cent of the East Endpopulation is colored (i.e., Negro, Indian, Pakistani), only oneof the clinic's 100 patients is half-Negro. This appears toreflect accurately the fact that in England few"colored" are involved with narcotic drugs. The clinic is located on the hospital groundsin a separate pre-fah building constructed especially for thisuse at a cost of 14,000 pounds, or $33,600. The annual operatingcost for salaries and drugs is estimated by its director to beabout the same amount. Psychiatrist John Denham is both clinicdirector and head of the St. Clement Hospital. Much of theday-to-day operation of the clinic fell on Dr. Margaret Tripp,the full-time psychiatrist who served at the clinic from thesummer of 1968, when it opened, to 1971. Neither Dr. Denham nor Dr. Tripp makes anygrand claims for the clinic, even though they, and it, havereceived considerable publicity in U.S. media (Look magazine,various television and radio networks). Dr. Denham has a thickfile of letters in response to this publicity requestingpermission to visit and interview him. He does not trade on thisnotoriety. As is true of virtually all other clinics, St.Clement's heroin dispensing is dropping monthly-from 214 grams inMarch, 1969, to 73 grams in May, 1970. Methadone, both ampoulesfor injection and oral, has increased at St. Clement, but not inproportion to the drop in heroin. Dr. Denham attributes thisheroin reduction to the use of methadone, to more conservativeprescribing, and to greater expertise among clinic doctors. Hereadily admits to the confusion that apparently hit every clinicin the opening period of 1968. "A drug addict presentedhimself and said he needed six grains of heroin a day. We knew hecould do with two, but that he would settle for four. It was ashaphazard as that.29 The same kind of candor is evident in a paperpublished by Dr. P. H. Connell, another of the early pioneers indrug-addiction control in England.' Reporting on 107 narcoticsusers attending a London clinic between March, 1968, andFebruary, 1969, Dr. Connell acknowledged that some of thesepatients had become addicted to drugs by the clinic. REGISTRATION How do you begin obtaining free drugs? Some of the addicts interviewed are convincedit is getting harder to get on the rolls. Some say that, for anew addict to get on, be has to buy black-market narcotics for awhile and then show wicked withdrawal symptoms. Doctors discount the severity of thesestatements but acknowledge that they are getting moreconservative. Interclinic monthly heroin and methadoneprescription quantities are distributed among the clinics, andthis may have developed a touch of competition to stay in therange of low prescribers. At St. Clement, for example, a monthlygraph is kept showing its standing against the all-Londonaverage. Doctors agree that identifying an addict andprescribing the correct quantity of drugs is the toughest part oftheir jobs. They use words like "haggling" and"bargaining" sessions to describe the difficulties ofdeciding how much an addict should receive. The Health Department's suggestion ofin-hospital assessment before prescribing to addicts generally isnot part of the procedures of the London clinics. An occasionalapplicant may be sent for observation for several days, but thisis the exception and not the rule. In Portsmouth, however, Dr. Ian Christie willnot accept a new patient unless he agrees to three days ofhospitalization to determine the kind and size of his habit, or,for that matter, if indeed he has one. In London, addicts arriving at a clinic forthe first time, or to reapply, usually are given at least twointerviews. The first may be with a nurse or social worker andthe second with a clinic psychiatrist. After acceptance, addictsgenerally report once every week to their psychiatrist or socialworker. Some are requested to come in several times a week, whileothers, who may be more stable, are permitted to report every twoweeks. Before acceptance, one, and sometimes several,urine tests are scheduled, usually two or more days apart.Drug-positive urine tests play a key role in the decision-makingprocess. Urine tests, incidentally, are not regularlyscheduled for every addict after he has been accepted by aclinic. Their frequency varies from clinic to clinic. At St.Giles, Dr. Willis formerly demanded only sporadic urine tests.Now, however, every patient gives a sample at each clinic visit.In other clinics, it appears that tests are made when there issome suspicion of other than clinic-prescribed drug use. A key step in the preacceptance interviewprocedure is the completion of a form outlining the addict'sbiography, his drug history, and his physical characteristics.This is sent to the Home Office, where it is compared with themaster list of registered addicts. The procedure helps toidentify previously unknown addicts and to prevent duplicateregistering at two or more clinics. Have addicts succeeded in getting on the rollsof two different clinics? Yes, but how many or how often isdifficult to document. At St. Clement, Dr. Denham does notremember a case where the Home Office check produced duplicateregistration. However, he does recall an incident indicating thatthe problem is real. Not long after the clinic opened, a boy,while stoned, told his fellow addicts that he was obtaining drugsfrom two clinics. This came to the attention of the staff, and anurse was sent to the clinic closest to St. Clement. Sevenaddicts were identified as St. Clement boys and five othersconfessed to duplicate registration. At the time, thisrepresented 12 per cent of the St. Clement caseload. "Did that surprise you?" I asked Dr.Denham. "At the time, it annoyed me." Dr. Connell, in his study of 107 drug users,also found that four had been attending other clinics, where theyrequested help without, of course, acknowledging the duplication. From observation, it appeared that a seasonedaddict with a long Home Office or clinic record, or both, hadmuch less difficulty in re-registering at a clinic than aprevious "unknown." Dr. Bewley permitted me to sit inon a series of interviews with addicts applying to the Lambethclinic. All had been previously interviewed by the clinic'spart-time psychiatrists, who also sat in on these secondinterviews. My notes for this session are as follows: 1. Male, out of prison since May 1. Was withLambeth a year ago, had received 200 mg. daily of heroin andmethadone; long criminal record, most recent possession ofburglar tools, cannabis; told to return for urine test.Dr. Bewley indicated he probably will be reregistered with 20 mg.methadone a day as starter. 2. Male, long criminal record, now underthree-year suspended sentence; long drug history, longest periodoff drugs was six weeks; told to come back for urine test. Dr.Bewley indicated he probably will be put on clinic rolls. 3. Male, 23, in and out of series of buildingindustry jobs; said he started with drugs at 16, shooting heroinand methadone at 20; said now buying six ampoules of methadone aday on black market at $1.20 per ampoule or $7.20 for day'ssupply; no criminal record; first urine test showed methadone;told to come back after weekend for another urine test. Bewleyestimated there was a 50-50 chance he would not be back. If hecomes and test is positive, he probably will be accepted. Dr. Connell, in his study of the previouslycited 107 drug users at a London Clinic, found a large dropoutrate between urine tests. "Refusal to prescribe at firstattendance, whilst awaiting results of urinalysis, led to a highincidence of failed reattendance. Thus 92 per cent prescribedheroin reattended, whilst only 35 per cent prescribed no drugsreturned." This was true, even though 22 out of 36 who hadbeen given no drugs had positive urine tests. This led Dr. Connell to conclude: "Inview of the essential need for accurate diagnosis, it seemsinescapable that a prescribing method of management should not beadopted until firm evidence of daily use is obtained by, say,three consecutive positive urines collected on different days andover a period of ten days or more to take into account the factthat methadone is excreted more slowly than morphine." 4. Female, 23, no previous history withclinic; arrested four times, shoplifting, abuse of floor walker;said she was taking 130 mg. heroin daily obtained from blackmarket. She was turned down. The psychiatrist who first interviewed thegirl acknowledged, as did Dr. Bewley, that much of thisdecision-making process is guesswork. Will this girl now go outand steal enough merchandise to fuel what may be a drug habit?Will she overshoot herself to convince Lambeth or another clinicthat she really is addicted? No one could answer these questions. DRUG DISPENSING None of the London addicts receives his drugsfrom the medical staff in the clinics. Rather, a prescription ismailed directly to the druggist of theaddict's choice. Only on rare occasions does the addict receive aprescription personally-for example, if it is clear that the postoffice cannot deliver it in time to fill an immediate need. Each prescription form is filled out by theclinic physician, generally for a week's supply. Prescriptionblanks are kept under lock and key, for there is a black-marketprice on blank National Health Service prescription forms. Although a week's order may be on oneprescription, the addict must collect his supplies from thedruggist daily. On Saturday, he generally receives two days'supply because of Sunday closing. Black-market prices for drugs,incidentally, are highest on Sundays, because of weekend demandsby occasional users and addicts who have shot up their two-daysupply on Saturday. Drugstores are monitored periodically by thepolice. However, these reviews generally are confined to thelarger distributors of drugs. The Scotland Yard Drug Squad hasfour detectives specifically assigned to inspecting drugstores. Drugstores keep detailed records of bothincoming and outgoing drugs. I examined this procedure in BootsPicadilly, the all-night drugstore in London's famed square.Dangerous drugs are kept in a special locked cabinet. Eachprescription is double checked and, of course, recorded. Onepharmacist will make up the order and initial the package, whichis checked by a second pharmacist. This particular store served36 addicts daily at the time of this review. Retail prices are standardized. Heroin is abargain compared with the various forms of methadone. The 1970retail prices were as follows: Heroin 100 tablets (10 mg. each) 1000 mg.$2.16 Methadone 100 ampoules (10 mg. each) 1000 mg.7.50 Methadone linctus (syrup) 5 bottles (200 mg.each) 1000 mg. 7.80 Since addicts come under National HealthService coverage, the drugs are free except for a small-25cents-weekly service charge. Disposable needles and syringes areprovided directly to addicts by some clinics or are supplied bythe drugstore. I was able to locate only two clinics inEngland that provide drugs administered directly by the staff.These are in Southampton and Portsmouth. I visited the Portsmouthclinic, directed by Dr. Ian Christie, in St. James Hospital.Because of the small number of patients, significant conclusionscannot be drawn from the in-clinic, drug-administering approachat this hospital. Seven addicts, six receiving methadone and oneheroin, come to the clinic twice a day for their injections.These are given by hospital nurses in early-morning andlate-afternoon sessions in the hospital's dental department.Injections are given in the deltoid muscle. The methadone addictsI interviewed said that they do not get a "flash" fromthe methadone intramuscular injection as they did from heroinwhen they administered it intravenously themselves in preclinicdays. Although all addicts mentioned theinconvenience of coming twice a day to the hospital-which is notcentrally located-only one complained vociferously about it. Hesaid he had to take a cab from work daily in order not to misshis second injection, at the 5:15 afternoon clinic. His employerwas unaware of his addiction and, he said, probably would firehim if he found out. In addition to the twice-daily clinicpatients, Dr. Christie has four others receiving methadonelinctus which he provides via prescription and two heroinaddicts-a husband and wife with a long history of addiction-whoalso receive prescriptions and administer the drug themselves."This probably was a mistake," Christie said. None of those receiving any drug is providedwith any rehabilitation services. "if they chose drugs, theyget drugs," Dr. Christie said. He gives each addict alternatives: hospitalin-patient withdrawal ("Everyone who has tried that methodhas relapsed"); in-hospital assessment with subsequentin-clinic daily drug taking; and, finally, entry into atherapeutic community, called the Alpha Unit. PRESCRIPTION TRENDS Since the clinics began operating in 1968, thequantity of heroin used by English addicts has been greatlyreduced. In the clinics, the monthly total grams of heroin havedropped from 2,177 in January, 1969, to 1,131 in December, 1970(see Table 7-4). Furthermore, while in 1968 the vast majorityof English addicts were taking heroin, today the majority aretaking methadone alone or in combination with heroin. Whateverthe opiate, the daily amount each addict takes is generallysignificantly less than the preclinic daily quantity. Statistics show that only 10 per cent, or 140,of all known addicts receiving opiates were receiving heroinalone on December 31, 1970. However, this may be somewhatmisleading, not only because the reporting procedure may be lessthan perfect, but because prescribing physicians frequentlychange both the quantity and the kind of drug prescribed. It is important to remember that methadone inEngland most frequently is provided for intravenous injection (asis heroin), and not for oral consumption, as is common in theUnited States. More than twice as much methadone is prescribedfor injection as orally. Most important, injected methadone has agood "rush" -oral methadone does not. Most clinics have adopted the policy of movingfrom heroin to methadone. Often, this is done gradually by givinga combination of heroin and methadone for a certain period andthen shifting to methadone only. Finally, an attempt is made toshift to oral or linctus methadone. Psychiatrists agree that thehardest task beyond total drug abstention-is to convince theaddict to give up the needle. This prescribing trend is reflected in theindividual clinics. Here are some samples: Larnbeth-8 on heroin alone, 12 on methadoneand heroin, 76 on methadone alone St. Clement-36 on methadone and heroin, 35 onmethadone St. Giles-54 on heroin or methadone andheroin, 1 1 on methadone for injection, 10 on methadone oral Charing Cross-2 on heroin, 10 on methadone andheroin, 45 on methadone for injection, 33 on methadone oral Portsmouth-3 on heroin only, 6 on methadonefor injection, 4 on methadone oral The shift from heroin to methadone is furtherindicated by the fact that clinics today infrequently interview anew heroin addict. The head nurse of the largest London clinic,Charing Cross, could not recall the last time a new heroin addicthad been interviewed; all the new cases were methadone addicts.In Portsmouth, Dr. Christie said, no one addicted to heroin hadapplied for help in the previous year; all the newcomers weremethadone addicts. METHADONE MAINTENANCE Directors of government clinics do notpractice the Dole Nyswander methadone-maintenance technique,emphasizing blocking the effect of heroin. Significantly, fourclinic directors expressed doubts about the effectiveness of theblocking method. Dr. Christie, for example, believes thatmethadone blocks heroin in American addicts because they areaccustomed to receive low and diluted doses of the latter drug."When an addict takes only four or five $5 bags a day, whichdon't contain more than 20 milligrams of heroin, then itworks." The others agreed that an addict who takes largedoses of heroin daily cannot be blocked with methadone. However, a private London clinic, run by Dr.Peter A. L. Chapple, has experimented with themethadone-maintenance approach known in the United States. Thisis the National Addiction and Research Institute, which has atleast as many active patients as the biggest government clinic.Dr. Chapple prescribes only oral methadone. He is not licensed toprescribe heroin in his clinic, and he is opposed to prescribingmethadone for injection because it perpetuates the needle cult.In 1969, he prescribed oral methadone to 106 patients, 70 percent of whom were receiving blocking dosages (between 100 and 200milligrams a day). There are no scientific data availableindicating whether these addicts actually were blocked from theeffect of heroin. Recently, however, Dr. Chapple said that he hasbeen trying to reduce the dosages of oralmethadone. "It probably was a mistake to go as high as 200milligrams a day," he added. The maximum is now 100milligrams a day, while younger addicts are more likely to bearound the 30-milligram-per-day level. Dr. Chapple said he hasshifted from giving a blocking dose because there is less heroinaround. He said he wanted to satisfy the drug hunger and notnecessarily to block heroin. *Interclinic statistics kept only sinceSeptember, 1969. SOURCE: Department of Health and SocialSecurity. He acknowledged that it is very difficult towork with younger addicts using oralmethadone, largely because of their delinquent and erraticbehavior. Last year, a young addict died as a result of takingbarbiturates while also taking oral methadone. (Dr. Connell, inhis examination of 107 addicts at a government clinic, alsorecorded an oral-methadone overdose death. This involved anaddict on 100 milligrams a day who obtained the next day's supplyshortly after midnight and drank both within hours of eachother.) If England's drug doctors do not subscribe tomethadone maintenance, why have they shifted so dramatically tomethadone from heroin? First, the very creation of the clinicapproach was prompted by what England viewed as a growingheroin epidemic. There was public and political pressure to haltthe rise in heroin addicts. The monthly distribution of a dossiershowing the amounts of heroin prescribed by each clinic made itclear to each clinic director where he stood among his peers inthis respect and undoubtedly created pressure to bring thequantity down. Secondly, there is general agreement amongclinic physicians that methadone has a longer-lasting effect thanheroin. Thus, the addict needs fewer injections a day. Thirdly, methadone for injection is consideredsomewhat more sterile than heroin, since it comes in liqui4 form,so that the addict merely transfers the ampoule content directlyinto his syringe. With heroin, he mixes a 10-milligram pill withwater, usually unsterile and sometimes from a tap or even atoilet bowl, to dissolve the pill before injecting. Finally, methadone for injection is viewed bya number of doctors as the bridge to oral methadone. Breaking theneedle cult is considered an important success step in thedrug-treatment program in England. Unfortunately, addict performances on heroin,methadone for injection, and oral methadone have received nodetailed scientific comparison in England.Furthermore-surprisingly, to an outsider-methadone continues tobe available outside of the drug clinics. There is nothing toprevent general practitioners from prescribing it. A few, infact, do. (Scotland Yard Drug Squad detectives, who monitordrugstores, say that about six London doctors prescribe methadoneon a regular basis.) Ironically, the second Brain Committeeforesaw the possibility that a substitute drug might becomepotentially as dangerous as heroin. When the committee urged andachieved prescribing restrictions on heroin, it said: "If,in future, circumstances should change, and other drugs ofaddiction should take the place now occupied by heroin andcocaine, it would be necessary promptly to amend the 'restricted'list accordingly." A number of leading professionals haveurged that methadone be placed on the "restricted"list, but this has not been done. The clinic shift from heroin to methadone,plus the absence of prescribing prohibitions on generalpractitioners, undoubtedly had led to a new metbadone-addictionproblem. The key issue is how big a problem it is. The over-allclinic drug-dispensing statistics indicate strongly thatconsiderably lower quantities of combined heroin and methadoneare being prescribed today than the largely heroin-onlyprescriptions at the beginning of the clinic era, but exactly howmuch lower is impossible to show, since methadone statistics werenot reported until September, 1969. However, it appears that there has not been asimple switch from a heroin to a methadone problem. Doctorsinterviewed are concerned about rising methadone cases but do notsuggest that they are replacing heroin cases on a one-for-onebasis. That is, the methadone increase is moving at aconsiderably slower pace than the sharp drop in heroin addiction,although no one can document the relative rates of change. The police, however, are less inclined to makedistinctions. In a 1970 report, Scotland Yard said: There has been a transference of addiction in as much as the treatment centers have succeeded in reducing the amount of heroin prescribed to addicts, thereby reducing the availability of this drug on the "illicit market." But, in so doing, they have increased the prescribing of methadone to counterbalance this reduction; consequently, there is now far more methadone available on the "illicit market." DRUGS OUTSIDE THE CLINICS How many other drugs do addicts take tosupplement those prescribed by the clinics? While evidence in this area is bothfragmentary and sometimes disputed, there is agreement thatEnglish addicts often supplement the clinic-prescribed drug diet,with a wide assortment of chemicals that affect both the mind andthe body. These include black-market methadone or heroin,amphetamines, barbiturates, tranquilizers, and marijuana, or, forthat matter, a smattering of all of them. In short, the addict inEngland more often than not is a polydrug taker. The most significant evidence comes from awide-ranging study conducted by two staff members of theAddiction Research Institute. Between March and November, 1969,they interviewed in depth I I I heroin users attending the Londonclinics, representing about 10 per cent of all clinic patients inEngland.' The results showed that only a small proportion ofEnglish addicts can be considered "stable" in theirdrug-taking habits. Several clinic directors expressedreservations about the study, claiming that it did not representa true cross-section of their population since it included onlyactive heroin addicts. At the time of the interviews, they said,many of their patients, particularly the more promising ones, hadalready been weaned off heroin and onto methadone only. Thestudy, however, did include 91 (of the 111) who were receivingheroin in combination with methadone. Eighty-four per cent reported to interviewersthat in the month prior to the interview they had used drugsother than those prescribed for them by the clinics. Among theseother drugs, the largest number reported using barbiturates andtranquilizers (75 per cent), which, in the majority of cases,were prescribed by private physicians. This is an importantindication that extracurricular drug taking did not necessarilymean adding larger doses of illegally obtained narcotics. The range of drugs used is demonstrated inTable 7-5. These statistics show that the one additional drug all1 1 1 heroin addicts had used was marijuana or hashish (cannabis). An interesting sidelight brought out duringthe interviews was that 37 per cent had on occasion sold, lent,or exchanged at least some of the drugs the clinics prescribedfor them. In addition, the study confirmed the worst fears ofphysicians about the unsterile proceduresthat are an important risk when addicts administer drugs tothemselves. The report speaks best for itself: All subjects were using heroin by injection. In the week prior to interview 28 (25%) subjects had injected themselves at home only, a further 17 (15%) had injected themselves at their clinic or at a day center as well as at their home, 46 (41 %) had injected themselves at some time during the week in a public toilet as well as at home, clinic, or day center, and 20 (18%) had injected themselves in a "public place"-e.g., shop doorways, in the street ' or in telephone kiosks-in addition to any of the above places. Sixty-two (56%) had injected themselves whilst other addicts were present and also injecting themselves. The majority of subjects ( 101, 91 %) used a disposable syringe for their injections and of these 67 (66%) regularly used their syringes more than once. Seventy-two subjects (68%) did not clean their arms prior to injection. Although the most frequent method for preparing an injection was to dissolve heroin in sterile water, 54 (49%) had at some time during the week used ordinary unboiled tap water, and 12 (11%) had used water from a lavatory basin. Nine subjects reported sharing a syringe with another addict during the week. If injection practices are defined as sterilewhen normal medical procedure is followed(i.e., using a new disposable syringe for each injection or usingan adequately sterilized glass syringe, not sharing a syringe,cleaning the arm prior to injection, and making up the injectionwith sterile water) then in the total sample, 12 subjects (11%)are using sterile injection practices. In the week prior tointerview all others had engaged in some non-sterile practice. This kind of unsterile drug taking often ledto medical complications. Thirty-nine per cent had been inhospitals for treatment of septicaernia, hepatitis, abscesses, oroverdose. Of all addicts interviewed, 40 per cent reportedhepatitis and overdose and 46 per cent reported abscesses treatedboth in and outside of hospitals. Although this report indicated no particulartrend in polydrug taking, since the clinics began doctors haveseen definite increases in two drugs: methylamphetamine (speed)and barbiturates. In 1968, methylamphetamine was injected byaddicts with such frequency that authorities asked itsmanufacturers to agree to withdraw it from the retail market andrestrict its distribution to hospital pharmacies. Within weeks ofits disappearance from retail drugstores it disappeared among theaddict population. Misuse of barbiturates. by addicts became anacute problem in 1969. Some physicians, however, feel that it hasslowed somewhat since the last part of 1970. Addicts injectbarbiturates even though they are not manufactured, so that theywill dissolve completely in water. The undissolved particlesresult in collapsed veins and serious abscesses on addicts' armsand legs. Addicts I've interviewed said that they resorted tobarbiturates when they couldn't get enough heroin or methadonefrom the clinics. This, like all addict testimonials, is open toquestion. The degree of barbiturate abuse-particularlyby injection-is another aspect of the English drug scene that isleft largely to conjecture. A study in 1969 of a small sample ofheroin addicts -again conducted by a team from the AddictionResearch Unit-showed that among this sample the problem washuge.' Sixty-five heroin addicts were interviewed in May, June,and July of 1969, and 80 per cent were found to have injectedbarbiturates. Almost all of them-62 of the 65-had takenbarbiturates either by injection or orally. Of course, some hadused the drug only to help induce sleep. However, 65 per centacknowledged they had taken it for no medical reason and only for"kicks." A few addicts will take barbiturates with themto the clinics, although they may have obtained them from ageneral practitioner or bought them illicitly. I observed anespecially bizarre scene in one of the clinics. There were two chairs in the room, a steelsink, a length of rubber hose to use as a tourniquet, somecotton, and a supply of paper towels. The walls and the chairswere stained with dried blood; in general, the physicalappearance of the room was far from the kind of antiseptic clinicpresented by the likes of Drs. Kildare and Ben Casey. Thecharacters on this stage were two young addicts, both unsteady ontheir feet from drugs taken earlier. One took a syringe from hispocket, washed it out with tap water from the sink, pulled afolded piece of paper from another pocket, removed a barbituratecapsule, broke it in half over the syringe, and emptied itscontents into the tube. Once the white powder was in the syringe, headded tap water, shook the contents vigorously for severalseconds, and handed the syringe to his friend. Since his arms andankles were marked with sores, however, it took several minutesto locate a usable vein. Finally, he settled on a spot abouteight inches below the knee. (The other addict, incidentally,shortly afterwards injected himself in the sole of his foot.) A third addict, more stable, helped the firstboy out of the clinic by steadying him with an arm around hisshoulders. But once outside the clinic, the boy sagged andcollapsed on the grass. A few addicts nearby helped to drag theboy out of the sun to a tree, where they sat him up against itstrunk. I was not alone in observing this sequence; aclinic psychiatrist watched the entire scene with me. No effortwas made to assist, dissuade, or reprimand the addicts. We wereboth spectators, like a couple of medical students watchingsurgical techniques from behind a glass partition. LAW ENFORCEMENT Although the English have consistently vieweddrug addiction as a medical problem, this does not mean that thepolice have been dismissed from the drug scene. Possession,selling, and importing most dangerous drugs are against the law. An addict can go to a government clinic and,after convincing doctors of his addiction, obtain free heroin,but this does not mean that anyone can walk around London with apocketful of "horse" or any other opiate. Possession ofheroin, methadone, and similar dangerous drugs is illegal withouta prescription. In the case of heroin, the only source of such aprescription is a government clinic. Marijuana and hashish are illegal, period.There are no prescriptions given for these drugs and no medical"cover" exists to protect the owner of them. InEngland, they are clearly the number-one illegal drug, and theiruse continues to rise along with the arrest statistics of thosewho are caught with them. From 1968 to 1970, the number of cannabisoffenses more than doubled from 3,071 to 7,520. In 1970, cannibisseizures amounted to 11/4 tons. Unlike the United States, Britain has nonational police agency for drugs. For that matter, if there is noequivalent to the U.S. Bureau of Narcotics and Dangerous Drugs,neither is there one for the Federal Bureau of Investigation.Scotland Yard is essentially a London agency, and, when aScotland Yard man is found looking for clues on some fog-shroudedEnglish moor (usually in a paperback detective thriller), he isthere on loan from London. In short, there is no national policeforce. Drug squads have been created largely becauseof need or, sometimes, because of the personal interest of anindividual police officer. These squads have no nationwideresources available to them either from an enforcement or from atraining point of view. Drug-squad members, including thehigher-echelon officers in charge of them, are largelyself-educated about drugs. Even Scotland Yard's Drug Squad islikely to have a director today who next month or next year maybe shifted to a completely different area of police work. However, this does not mean that expertise hasnot built up. There is no better example of expertise constructedlargely out of self-developed personal interest than DetectiveSergeant Alan Russell, who heads the drug squad in Portsmouth. Ifa national police drug force ever should be established, as someare urging, Sergeant Russell should have a prominent role in iton the basis of his record in Portsmouth. Russell has an excellent, and unpublicized,working relationship with Dr. Christie of the Portsmouth drugclinic: Christie doesn't squeal on addicts and Russell doesn'tgive away police plans, but it is clear from the way the two menspeak of each other that each has developed a warm respect forthe other's approach to addiction. The addicts appear to respectRussell as well. When the residents of Alpha Unit, thetherapeutic community directed by Dr. Christie, decided to holdan open house, they invited Russell even though he had arrested anumber of them on past occasions. Because of the Christie-Russell liaison-andaddicts corroborate it-there is virtually no black market inheroin or methadone in the Portsmouth area. In 1969, Russell'ssquad arrested two persons for possessing heroin, and thisinvolved only minute traces found in a syringe. During the entireyear, there were 12 to 15 methadone-possession arrests. Russell, however, regards opiate addiction asonly a small part of his concern. "Dependence on opiatedrugs is only the tip of the iceberg," he says. "Youhave millions of people in this country who are dependent onbarbiturates and amphetamines." In the greater Portsmouth area, with apopulation of about 500,000, he estimates that there are as manyas 1,500 users of marijuana, barbiturates, and amphetamines, someof whom may dabble with all of these drugs. This estimate is inmarked contrast to the very low numbers of hard-drug addicts-14in the clinic and 17 in the Alpha Unit therapeutic community. Possibly in part because of his respect forDr. Christie, Portsmouth's chief drug police officer has a verypositive attitude toward the clinics. "Make no mistake aboutit-and some people tend to forget it-a few years ago this countryhad a serious heroin problem." In London, there is considerable criticism ofthe clinics among members of Scotland Yard's Drug Squad, althoughnot a single police officer whom I interviewed was willing toscrap the clinics. Several officers thought that some clinicdoctors were still being conned by addicts into issuing largerprescriptions than required. However, all the officers agreedthat overprescribing had been reduced drastically since preclinicdays. As an example that the problem has not beeneliminated entirely, they cite a case in 1969: A member of thesquad searched the apartment of a longtime addict who had beenreceiving drugs from one of the central London clinics before hisdeath. The search uncovered a horde of heroin-900 tablets or9,000 milligrams, worth more than $2,100 on the British blackmarket and easily three times as much on the U.S. market.Although there was no evidence that the addict had been sellingfrom this cache, the police felt strongly that it corroboratedtheir overprescribing charge. Furthermore, police are annoyed that there isno limit on the amount an addict with a clinic prescription maycarry. Recently, they stopped an addict with 40 grains (2,400milligrams) of heroin. He told officers he had been reducing hisprescribed quantity, and no arrest was possible, even though thepolice strongly doubted his story. Yet, such dramatic anecdotes are theexception. A review of squad arrest records shows that, from thebeginning of June to September 7, 1970 (the date of theinterview), there hadn't been a single heroin arrest and only twomethadone-possession arrests. (These were not the only Londondrug arrests; for, although the squad is the only police unitconcerned solely with drugs, other London policemen make drugarrests in the course of their regular activities.) Some members of the drug squad frankly admitthat they would be in trouble if heroin were completely outlawed.None is campaigning for such a move. One top drug-squad officer,a critic of the present clinic approach ("They sustainaddiction . . . there is no place in England where a drug addictcan be cured") is not interested in abolishing them, either.He would like to see all drugs administered by the clinics in theclinics. Instead of fourteen separate clinics in London, he wouldlike four open on a twenty-four-hour-a-day, seven-day-a-weekbasis. Scotland Yard detectives acknowledge that theclinics have reduced not only the quantity of heroin prescribedbut the amount available on the black market. Cocaine, they say,has also been reduced dramatically. Like their colleagues inPortsmouth, however, they are often more concerned about theother drugs that are available on the black market. The lead drug, of course, is marijuana. Theyclaim that large scale trafficking is mainly carried on byEngland's new immigrant population, primarily the Pakistanis.Marijuana comes into England frequently by parcel post directlyfrom the producing countries. Students also bring it in from suchwell-known drug centers as Morocco. LSD most often comes from the United States,even though in 1969 English police raided and closed downat least two illicit laboratories producing LSD for both localconsumption and export. There appears to be little organizedimportation of heroin. What there is generally comes from HongKong and is imported by Chinese sailors and distributed byinhabitants of the small Chinese community in London. Addictsgenerally are not fond of Chinese heroin because of its uncertainstrength and, since it comes in powder form, the necessity toheat it in a spoon-in the U.S. mode-before mixing it forinjection. Police acknowledge that one can buy a varietyof illicit drugs in the network of side streets in and aroundPicadilly Circus and in some other areas of London where youthcongregate, often in or around the late-night clubs. However,these illicit business enterprises are small and unorganized,particularly in the hard drug line. Black-market prices in 1970, according to theaddicts and confirmed by clinic physicians and police, are asfollows: Heroin (British-manufactured) $14.40 a grain(60 mg.) Heroin (Chinese) $3.60 a packet (30-60 mg.) Methadone $7.20-$12.80 a grain (60 mg.) Barbiturates 25 cents a capsule There is no evidence anywhere that largenumbers of hard-drug users are supplying themselves from thisblack market. Furthermore, there is no evidence at all thatheroin manufactured in France-the principal source of supply forU.S. addicts-is being smuggled into England. The market justisn't big enough to make such an enterprise profitable. Scotland Yard does keep track of internationaland particularly European illicit-drug activity. Its principalsource for this information is not Interpol but the Europeanoffice of the U.S. Bureau of Narcotics and Dangerous Drugs. Thedrug-squad detectives express a great deal of respect for theirAmerican colleagues and are quick to admit that, if they needinformation or have a common problem, they will call Paris ratherthan Interpol. Often, they say, an American narcotics agent willarrive on the next plane. In 1970, the BNDD for the first time assigneda permanent man to the embassy in London, as part of its over-allEuropean expansion of manpower. A London slot was created becauseof the LSD traffic from the United States to England and themarijuana and hashish flow from England to the United States. John T. Cusack, the BNDD's European regionaldirector, is not enthusiastic about the English clinic approach.Of all police officers interviewed, he was the most stronglynegative about the clinic program. "The clinics arenot going to work giving away heroin. They are going to sustainand create some addicts," he said. He had three principal objections: " [I]It fools society. It kids all of us that it's doing a jobwhen it isn't doing a job. [21 The addicts will take what theycan get from the clinics and then they will get some more fromthe outside. [31 The clinics flirt with a conflict of theHypocratic oath of the medical profession. They sustain amedical-psychiatric sickness." (This argument is also madeby some British physicians, like Dr. Ian James, a British prisonpsychiatrist.) Cusack, however, is not athrow-them-all-in-jail police officer. He wants medical treatmentfor addicts and believes that governments don't spendanywhere near what they should on hospital care for addicts."I feel so strongly about it that I'd like to sweep up allthe addicts off the New York streets and put them into hospitals.It's incredible to me to leave addicts on the street. It's abig, expensive job to bring them in, but we don't let our mentalpatients run loose, do we?" If Cusack strongly disagrees with the Englishclinic philosophy, his London police colleagues sharply differwith their American counterparts over one vital aspect of thedrug problem: the connection between crime and addiction. Noone in England-from the toughest London detective to the mostliberal-prescribing clinic physician-suggested to me thatnarcotics addiction increases criminal behavior. This doesnot mean, of course, that drug addicts are crime-free. On thecontrary, a significant number of addicts engage in criminalbehavior, and some criminals are addicts. But in England there isno cause-and-effect relationship. Scotland Yard says it in writing. In a 1970report, its drug expert wrote: "There is no concreteevidence to connect any particular criminal activity with thosedependent on the 'hard' drugs (e.g., heroin) but without doubt,the increasing demand for the amphetamine-type drugs leads tothefts from chemists' premises, hospitals, and, in a smallerdegree, to thefts of prescription forms." Study after study documents the fact thatsticking a needle into his arm doesn't propel a man into therobber and burglar fraternity. More likely, he will have beeninitiated long before. What these studies do show is that addictsoften have a whole series of antisocial "hang-ups," ofwhich addiction is just one more on the lengthy list. In the previously cited 1970 study of 111heroin addicts attending London clinics, 51 per cent reported aconviction for a nondrug offense before their first use ofheroin. Thirty-six per cent reported such a conviction sinceusing heroin. A 1967 study of 50 addict-criminals in Londonprisons again indicates that a track record in court and prisonoften is established before track marks on the subject's arms.'Brixton Prison psychiatrist Ian James found that 22 addicts had ahistory of juvenile-court conviction and 16 had adult-courtconvictions prior to heroin addiction. In all, "Threequarters had a history of court convictions predating theiraddiction to narcotics, and there was usually a story of personaland social maladjustment dating from adolescence (educationaldropout, employment instability, sociopathic conduct,etc.)." Ten of the subjects had been convicted onlysince they became addicted, but only two were in prison for theirvery first conviction. Dr. James found, too, that, if onediscounts drug convictions, fewer convictions for crimes wererecorded after addiction than before. Although it is risky to draw conclusions aboutUnited States addicts based on English findings, one youngAmerican doctor did suggest that what was true about preaddictiondelinquency in Britain may be even more valid in the UnitedStates. Dr. Michael Paris, formerly on the staff of the FederalHospital for Addict Rehabilitation at Lexington, Kentucky, workedwith Dr. Bewley in 1970 in his London clinics. Asked to compareU.S. and British addicts, he said that the Americans he saw atLexington had bad at least twice as much antisocial behavior intheir early teens as the London addicts. In the first study of heroin users in aprovincial town, investigators found a reduction rather than anincrease in crime after addiction began. Twenty of 37 heroinusers had been convicted of breaking the law." The crimes not involving drugs were generallypetty in nature, such as stealing two pints of milk, minorshopliftng, and taking and driving away a motor vehicle. Of theten people who had been convicted of nondrug offenses, three hadcommitted them before using any drugs at all, and seven betweenfirst trying drugs and first trying heroin. There was only oneperson who was convicted of a nondrug offense after heroin usebegan, and this person had already been convicted of such a crimebefore the onset of heroin use. These findings prompted investigators tosuggest further research: Many of our subjects were in full-timeemployment or were full-time students; most were still living athome with their parents, a high proportion of whom knew of theirheroin use. Although there were instances of nondrug crime beforeheroin use began, there was only one such conviction (a secondoffense) afterwards. Whether drug use is for some people an"alternative" to other types of delinquent behavior isa question which suggests itself for investigation and remainsopen, but it is clear that our sample in no way constitutes adrifting criminal subculture, RESEARCH Until 1967, research in drug addiction inEngland depended on the personal interest of a physician. Ahandful of doctors wrote papers based on their personalexperiences with addicts. Public awareness of the problem stillwas slight, and concern and knowledge among doctors in generalwere not much greater. Funds for research simply were notavailable. Today, the veterans of the predrug-crisis eracontinue to produce papers for both national and internationalmedical publications, but they have been joined not only byindividual newcomers but by a government-supported researchproject as well. The Addiction Research Unit is a kind ofscientific conglomerate that investigates three of man's majorvices-drinking, smoking, and drug addiction. The unit, a part ofthe Department of Psychiatry of London University's Institute ofPsychiatry, began in 1964 as an alcoholism research group. In1967, after the Brain Committee report was translated intolegislation and public concern heightened with the catapultingaddiction statistics, political pressure prompted the HealthDepartment to provide funds for drug-addiction research. Druginvestigations were added to the unit's agenda, and sufficientfunds were supplied to construct a separate building on thegrounds of Maudsley Hospital. Research on smoking was added in1969. Each area of investigation has a separatestaff and coordinator, with the largest number in thedrug-addiction field. Dr. Griffith Edwards, whose earlierinterest was in alcoholism, is director of the entire unit, andDr. David V. Hawks, a psychologist, is coordinator of theeleven-man (and woman) Drug Research Group. Another organization, the Institute for theStudy of Drug Dependence, a privately financed group, does noclinical research, although it is looking for funds to financeboth clinical and other investigations. The Institute, with SirHarry Greenfield as board chairman, is directed by a retiredforeign-service officer with a personal interest in addiction. Inthe two years since it began, this struggling enterprise-financedby small foundation grants-has carved out a useful function as aninformation clearinghouse. It is the one place in England where aresearcher can find extensive, indexed, and easily availablematerial on the English drug scene as well as numerous itemsinvolving other countries. Until now, the national Department of Healthhas done no specific drug-addiction research of its own. In 1970,a joint committee of the Health Department and the Home Officewas created primarily to try to straighten out the sometimesconfused drug statistics. It recommended establishment of a DrugsResearch Group to be staffed by both agencies. While no specificresearch program was proposed, the committee suggested thefollowing areas of investigation: 1. Developing a typology of heroin users. 2. Measuring the effectiveness of differentforms of treatment in the existing clinics. 3. Comparing the effectiveness of compulsorytreatment (in prison) with voluntary treatment in hospitals. More important, perhaps, was the committee'srecommendation that statistical information be compiled on allpersons addicted to any dangerous drug in England andWales. The Department of Health is now building such a data bank,which already includes a total of 2,400 names, with the basicinformation obtained when an addict applies to a clinic or ishospitalized. Other government statistical records to be tappedinclude: 1. Dates and causes of death from the GeneralRegister office. 2. Admissions and length of stay inpsychiatric hospitals from the Department of Health and SocialSecurity records. 3. Details of employment histories, sicknessand unemployment payments from the Department of Health andSocial Security's Mental Health Inquiry Records. 4. Criminal records and prison statistics fromthe Home Office Statistical Division. This will be a vital resource forinvestigators and will open numerous research opportunities intodrug addiction in England. THE STATISTICS How accurate are the drug statistics inEngland today? It is difficult to generalize. Some statisticsare clearly more solid than others. A number of personsinterviewed expressed skepticism about the validity of one ormore sets of statistics. Included among the skeptics was aDepartment of Health official who works with the drug numbers. The problem with the statistics is thatreporting depends on individual physicians and clinic personnelwhose information is not channeled through a system ofcross-checks. The new Health Department data bank should help toimprove the accuracy of some of these statistics. Among the numerical data available, the clinicfigures reporting quantities of drugs prescribed appear to beleast open to significant error. Apart from an occasionalbookkeeping mistake, these statistics should accurately reflectthe downward trend of heroin use and the rise in methadone. The monthly clinic-attendance figures shouldstand up. However, the number of new addicts that clinics reportevery month may be a somewhat soft statistical area, becauseclinics may vary in their definition of a new addict. The clinic figures for the percentage ofaddicts employed could be on the high side, since"employment" depends on the individual's definition,and the accuracy of the addict's statements is questionable. Thedata bank, which will include employment records based onsocial-security information, should provide a cross-check forthese claims. The vital Home Office figures on addicts haveto be separated into addicts reported any time during the yearand addicts known to be receiving drugs at the end of the year. The figures for the total year tend to beaccepted as reasonably correct by those interviewed, with thegeneral acknowledgment that obviously not every addict in Englandis known to the Home Office. However, no one suggested that thenumber of "unknowns" is as large as the numbers listed.Opiate addiction, under the English drug approach, is difficultto conceal if it is taking place on any significant scale. Thehighest estimate for unreported opiate use was 25 per cent, butthis guesstimate included occasional users as well as addicts. The Home Office figures for 1968 may beunusually high because inauguration of the clinics may well haveflushed out previously unknown addicts. As a result, the tinyincrease in the total 1969 figures may not accurately reflect thedegree of change. Not until the end of 1970 did England have afirm statistical basis for concluding that the narcotic-addictionspiral of the 1960's had been halted. RESULTS There is a shortage of hard statistical dataabout the success or failure of Britain's drug approach, eitherbefore or after the clinic program was begun. Most availableevaluations were done prior to the inauguration of the clinicprogram. These do not generate applause. For example, in 1968, a study of 1,271 heroinaddicts who became known to the Home Office between 1947 and 1966showed that 70 per cent were still taking opiates in 1966."Of the nontakers, some 293 addicts-64 per cent-were in prison,hospital, or other institutions, and 89 were dead, the majorityas a result of overdose, suicide, or sepsis. The death rate among English addicts has beenvery high according to the Bewley study, twice as high as amongU.S. addicts. However, this study was conducted prior to theclinic program, when British addicts were receiving huge amountsof heroin prescribed by general practitioners. The death rateamong addicts included in this review was 28 times greater thanthe rate for the equivalent age group in the general population. Studies of withdrawal treatment in hospitalsare not more encouraging. In one follow-up of 23 hospitaladmissions, 12 relapsed within a week, five within a month, andthree within two months. Only three were still avoiding narcoticsthree months after discharge." Like their American brethren, the Englishtoday have no file folder marked "cures"; there is nocomputer printout on clinic performance that supports either thecritics or the defenders of the program. There is, however, a cautious thread ofoptimism that runs through conversations with clinic directorsand also a surprising degree of candor in identifying areas ofshortcoming and outright failure. Furthermore, these subjectiveevaluations by different directors generally make nearlyidentical points of both promise and disappointment. Finally,they are echoed by those who have no particular vested interestin the clinics. Dr. Margaret Tripp, a doctor at St. Clementwith no previous experience with drug addicts, frankly admitsthat her charges conned her in the beginning. Two years later shesaid: "I think we are controlling legal heroin. Muchto my surprise, we have stabilized the addicts-they're not dead,and they are better. They are more stable than before; their druguse has gone down, they work longer, and they are less of anuisance to everybody." Dr. Tripp chooses her words very carefully:"Three or four of the [present] cases are reasonably offdrugs." Dr. Willis, at St. Giles, also avoids wordslike "success" and "cure." He also cites thedrop in heroin and agrees that the rise of addiction has slowed."It's been possible to mount a general tidying-up operation.They are more stable now than they were a year ago. Their generalappearance is better. They are not asking for more drugs, andthey are not claiming as much drug loss [in order to obtainreplacements] as they did before." Dr. Connell, who is among the handful ofEnglish drug-treatment veterans, a consultant to the nationalHealth Department and director of the Maudsley Hospital drugclinic, summed it up this way: I'm pleased that the frightening curve of heroin addiction has leveled off. I'm disturbed that methadone and barbiturates have risen. In terms of containing the heroin problem, they [the clinics] are successful. They have provided some treatment services where none have existed. All of the terrible prognostications of American workers in the drug field have been unfounded. But [Dr. Connell added] in terms of research they are a failure. Similar sentiments are voiced by those who arebeing asked to evaluate their own work. Even the most hardened policeman-as we notedin the law enforcement section-is not prepared to suggest thatEngland should scrap the clinics. Despite the grumbling aboutdoctors who are either too softhearted-in the eyes of thepolice-or simply conned by addicts, the interviewer is left withthe distinct impression that even law-enforcement officersbelieve that the hard-drug picture has improved somewhat. Among druggists, there also is cautiousoptimism for the clinic approach. For example, Jerry Young, chiefchemist at Boots Picadilly, says flatly: I'm very pleased with the clinic system. I'd even be more pleased if they'd take the whole thing in their hands [administer drugs directly in the clinics]. We see more stability in the addicts. They don't come in making exorbitant demands on our service and our time. The genuine addicts are less of a nuisance. On the whole, they took physically better. They respond better. Asked for some tangible proof of hisassessment, Mr. Young said that, prior to the spring of 1968,when the clinics began, he had to call the police on the averageof twice a week to control an unruly addict in his pharmacy. Now,he said, he can't remember a recent call for police assistancewith a clinic addict. Occasionally, he asks police help with aforged prescription or when someone under the influence ofbarbiturates makes a disturbance. Mr. Young's analysis, like those of thephysicians who send him prescriptions, is subjective. However,there are at least a few statistical indications-developed sincethe clinic program began -that tend to support these assumptions.To find them, you have to go to an institution dealing with aconsiderably larger clientele than drug addicts. Brixton Prison, with its incongruousflower-filled inner courtyard, is to London what the Tombs is toNew York. It is a remand prison, where all London-area maleprisoners are brought while awaiting trial. There are 12,000"receptions" there annually. Brixton, in 1970, had on its staff the one manwho may have seen more English drug addicts personally than anyother individual. Dr. Ian James, the prison psychiatrist, has along interest in drug addiction. His small prison office is linedwith maps showing the routes by which drugs come to England, thelocation of addict arrests in London, the location of clinics,the arrests of those who are off drugs-all appropriately markedin clusters of multicolored pins. In 1969, Dr. James saw 223 drug addicts whowere at Brixton for both drug and other offenses. Theyrepresented about 10 per cent of all heroin addicts reported tothe Home Office during the year. Significantly, Dr. James said itwas rarely that he saw an addict unknown to the Home Office. Dr. James in the past has been a vocalopponent of the clinic program. His opposition was based largelyon medical ethics. Nobody prescribes two bottles of gin a day with duly enriched Vitamin B for alcoholics. The doctor knows that the addict will use an unsanitary procedure to satisfy his habits. He will take unsterile pills [heroin tablets], hold them in his sweaty hand, and put them in a syringe which he pulls from his grimy pocket. What kind of medicine is that? But Dr. James's own statistics are softeninghis anticlinic stand to the point where he said: "I thinkthe clinics are succeeding, but on the wrong premises." Dr. James's accounting may not giveoverwhelming proof to the statement that the clinics are having apositive impact, but it does add some significant bone behind thesubjective flesh of cautious optimism. In 1970, a third fewer drug addicts wereadmitted to Brixton than during the previous year, Almostthree-fourths of all addicts received at Brixton in 1970 wereattending a drug-addiction clinic prior to their arrest. In 1968,only three-fifths of the drug addicts were clinic-registered. These statistics not only buttress thecautious optimism of English drug experts but also cast doubt onany contention that there is a large addict population unknown tothe Home Office or to the clinics. If such an "unknown"addict pool in fact existed, sustaining itself from thehigh-priced black market, a significant number of its memberssurely would appear periodically inside the steel gates ofBrixton. There are other substantive indications thatthe narcotics situation is improving. At three London centers,the number of addicts holding jobs almost doubled in two years.In these same clinics, a series of urine tests given a year apartshowed that, while many addicts still were taking more anddifferent drugs than those prescribed, such misuse had beenreduced." In yet another survey, there were fewer arrests ayear after addicts had been with a clinic than before. But what does all this mean for the UnitedStates? What relevance does it have to America's ever-increasingnarcotics problem? In the past, almost all visiting American drugexperts have said flatly: None." The two countries, theysaid, are just too different. Not only do some key narcotics lawspoint in opposite directions, but the two societies' traditions,youth culture, and race problems are so disparate that what worksin the row houses of London could not possibly work in thewalk-ups of New York. A young researcher at the Addiction ResearchUnit may well have given an explosive jolt to such blanketdismissals. Jim Zacune, a social psychologist, in 1970 examinedin detail the performance of Canadian addicts in their nativeland and after they emigrated to England. His study issignificant to the U.S.-Britain narcotics-policy argument, sinceCanada's approach to opiate addiction is largely patterned afterours. Zacune traced and interviewed 25 of the 91Canadian addicts who are known to have come to England in the1960's. The rest of the emigres could not be located or hadeither died or been deported. For those he was able to interview,Zacune compared work records, prison records, and crime recordsin the two countries. He diplomatically says that his findingsshould not be used to condemn one country's addiction approachwhile praising another's, and cautions that his sample may haveincluded the most stable of the Canadians who packed up theirsyringes for England. But his findings are neverthelessstartling: At home, the Canadians spent 25 per cent oftheir addicted years, a combined total of 141 years and 2 months,in jail; in England, less than 2 per cent, a combined total of 2years and 5 months. At home, they compiled 182 offenses; inEngland, 27. At home, in the high addict-crime category oftheft, which included robbery and burglary, they committed 88; inEngland, 8. Not only did they commit far fewer crimes,but, while in England, many of them were crime-free. In Canada,16 of the 25 had committed five or more crimes, with one of themrecording more than 20 separate offenses. In Britain, nonecommitted more than four offenses and nearly half (12) were nevercharged with any unlawful behavior. Despite the fact that the Canadians consumedfar more daily heroin than the London average, many of thembecame job holders and led fairly normal lives while in England.Their living accommodations were far more stable. In Canada, onlyfive had a constant residence for more than three years; inEngland, ten had lived at their present address for two or moreyears, eight for one to two years, and five for less than oneyear. Two were in the hospital at the time of the survey. The employment record showed the most dramaticdifference between the two countries. In Canada, only one addictclaimed to have worked steadily while addicted. In England, themajority (13) worked full-time, and four worked part-time. Sixhad held the same job for at least three years. Seven hadsemiskilled or skilled manual jobs, two were office workers, onein sales, and one worked as a croupier. One was a full-timehousewife and one a student. "For once we could work andlive like humans," the addicts said. The interviewscontained again and again this and other personal and pragmaticassessments. "There is less trouble from the police . . . wedon't constantly have to be paranoid . . . there is less pressure. . . there is no need to steal." This study may encompass too small and speciala group of addicts to permit definitive conclusions. But,together with the other fragmentary evidence, it suggests thatthe English approach is an alternative not to be dismissedsummarily, as it is in a widely distributed U.S. Governmentpamphlet, which claims that "The British system isconsidered a failure and has been modified to meet the increasingproblem of addiction."" PERSONAL OBSERVATIONS For the American visitor, the most pervasiveimpression of the English drug scene comes in the form of aquestion: Why has the United States, decade afterdecade, continuously viewed narcotics addiction as largely acriminal, instead of a medical, problem? With all its imperfections andinconsistencies, the British approach to drug addiction convincedme that the United States will never make significant headwaywith the drug problem until it shifts the emphasis from thecriminal to the medical. Until this national policy is changed,American addicts will continue to be an ostracizedsubculture-morally exiled and often barred from the very medicaland social-work help they need so desperately, but physicallyvery much present in the criminal countdown of the largersociety, which has had to lock itself behind doors for the luxuryof guarding an unworkable dogma. Until this national policy is changed, theblack market will continue to flourish no matter how many morenarcotics agents are enlisted, and daily will help to infectothers, because of the astronomical profits to be made. Based on my research in England, I believethat the United States should experiment with both a methadone-and -a heroin maintenance program under more controlled andrestrictive conditions than generally prevail in Britain today. I believe that England provides significantresearch opportunities about the effects of different opiates,which could fill the knowledge void that is plaguing theaddiction field in so many countries. For example, what is theprecise difference between the effects of heroin and of injectedand oral methadone? What are the differences in work performance,antisocial behavior, and life-styles among addicts who use heroinand injectable and oral methadone? Because heroin addicts can beobserved in England under relatively controlled circumstances, awhole series of comparative clinical and sociological studies arepossible. No simple "yes" or "no"answer can be given to the question: "Is the Britishapproach to addiction a success or a failure?" The questionitself may not be valid in a field that has so much difficultywith the word "success." A more accurate question maybe: Is the British approach to addiction helpful or harmful? Eventhen, the answer may only be "Yes, but . . ." Can the British and American approaches toaddiction legitimately be compared? The study of Canadianaddicts' performance in England certainly suggests that suchcomparisons no longer can be dismissed out of hand. In England,at least, comparisons are made. Everywhere I went, opinion onthis was uniform. On my final day in London, a Home Officeofficial, whose knowledge of drug addiction has brought him aninternational reputation, summed it up: "We don't want to force our system onyou, but for God's sake don't bring your system over here." NOTES 1. The Second Report ofthe Interdepartmental Committee on Drug Addiction (BrainCommittee), para. 22, July 31, 1965. 2. There are about 500 British physicianslicensed to prescribe heroin and cocaine to addicts. This is afar larger figure than the actual number of physicians workingwithin the drug clinics. However, a special license to prescribethese drugs has become part of the British medical profession'skitbag of status symbols. The Home Office is hopeful of reducingthis figure. 3. That is enough heroin to support over 800American addicts with a $20-a-day habit for an entire year. 4. National Health Service, The Treatment andSupervision of Heroin Addiction, memorandum issued March 7, 1967. 5. Ramon Gardner and P. H. Connell, "OneYear's Experience in a DrugDependence Clinic," The Lancet(1970), pp. 455-58. 6. G. V. Stimson and A. C. Agborne, A Surveyof a Representative Sample of Addicts Prescribed Heroin at LondonClinics, Addiction Research Unit, 1970. 7. Martin Mitcheson et al., "SedativeAbuse by Heroin Addicts," The Lancet (March 21, 1970)@ pp. 606-7. 8. Op. cit., p. 370. 9. 1. Pierce James, "Delinquency andHeroin Addiction in Britain," British Journal ofCriminology (April, 1969). 10. Kosviner et al., "Heroin Usein a Provincial Town," The Lancet (1968), i, pp.1189-92. 11. Bewley, ben-Arie, James, "Survey ofHeroin Addicts Known to the Home Office," British MedicalJournal (1968), 1, pp. 727-30. 12. Zacune, Mitcheson, and Malone,"Heroin Use in a Provincial TownOne Year Later," Internationaljournal of the Addictions (1969), IV, 55770. 13. Bewley, James, and Mahon,"Effectiveness of Prescribing Clinics for Narcotic Addictsin the United Kingdom," 1968-70. A paper, presented at theInternational Symposium on Drug Abuse, University of Michigan,Ann Arbor, on November 9, 1970, evaluating the efficacy of suchclinics. 14. Among the fewexceptions was Professor Alfred R. Lindesmith of IndianaUniversity, who has concerned himself with the drug problem formore than thirty-five years. He was a defender of the Britishview of addicts as sick people long before England moved to theclinic approach. Because of these views, Professor Lindesmith hasbeen one of the academic betes noirs of the old U.S.Bureau of Narcotics, predecessor to the present BNDD, as well asto the drug professionals who in the past shared its addicts-are-criminals view. 15. A Federal Source Book: Answers to theMost Frequently Asked Ouestions About Drug Abuse (GovernmentPrinting Office, 1970), p. 25. CliffSchaffer's Home Page WT02-B02-35IA086-000614-B046-66http://206.61.184.43:80/schaffer/Library/studies/dwda/contrib.htm 206.61.184.43 19970122022017 text/html 4741HTTP/1.0 200 OKDate: Wednesday, 22-Jan-97 02:20:11 GMTServer: WebSitePro/1.1f (S/N wpo-0deb)Allow-ranges: bytesContent-type: text/htmlLast-modified: Saturday, 28-Dec-96 07:10:32 GMTContent-length: 4524 THE DRUG ABUSE SURVEY PROJECT -- THE CONTRIBUTORS Dealing with Drug Abuse A Report to the Ford Foundation THE DRUG ABUSE SURVEY PROJECT THE CONTRIBUTORS Patricia M. Wald isa graduate of the Yale Law School. She has served as a member ofthe District of Columbia Crime Commission; as a consultant to thePresident's Commission on Law Enforcement and the Administrationof Justice, the National Advisory Commission on Civil Disorders,and the National Commission on the Causes and Prevention ofViolence; and as a staff attorney for Neighborhood Legal Servicesand for the Center for Law and Social Policy. Since January 1,1972, she has been a member of the Board of Trustees of the FordFoundation. Peter Barton Hutt isa graduate of Exeter Academy, Yale University, and the HarvardLaw School. At the time of the study, he was a partner in theWashington law firm of Covington & Burling, and at present heis General Council of the Food and Drug Administration. He is amember of the National Academy of Sciences' Institute of Medicineand has been deeply involved in medical and governmental projectsinvolving alcoholism and drug abuse. James V. DeLong isalso a graduate of the Harvard Law School. He has been alitigation attorney, a Special Assistant in the Department ofHousing and Urban Development, and a Senior Staff Member of theProgram Evaluation Staff of the U.S. Bureau of the Budget. He nowworks for the Drug Abuse Council. Peter A. Wilson, agraduate of Princeton University, is finishing his dissertationin political science at the University of Chicago. He is also aconsultant to the Rand Corporation. John F. Holahan holdsa doctorate in economics from Georgetown University. He is now atthe Urban Institute working on healtheconomics problems. Annette Abrams isa graduate of Howard University. She has been a Staff Assistantto a Midwestern senator and a member of the Staff of the NationalCoordinating Council on Drug Education. She now works for theDrug Abuse Council. Peter B. Goldberg isa graduate of the State University of New York at Albany and isfinishing the requirements for a graduate degree in urbanplanning at George Washington University. He now works for theDrug Abuse Council. Paul A. Henningsen, a former legislative assistant and press secretary to aMidwestern congressman, has also been involved in the promotionof minority business development. A graduate of LawrenceUniversity, he now works for the Drug Abuse Council. Dr. Andrew T. Weil is a graduate of Harvard Medical School. He is aco-author of some of the first clinical studies of marijuana donein this country in modern times and of a recent book on drugs. Atpresent, he is engaged in a study of drug use among Indians inSouth America. Edgar May holds adegree in journalism from Northwestern University. He has been areporter for several newspapers and has won numerous journalisticawards, including the Pulitzer Prize. From 1964 to 1968 he waswith the Office of Economic Opportunity, first as SpecialAssistant to the Director and then as Director of the Office ofInspection. Subsequently he was Special Adviser to the UnitedStates Ambassador to France. He is now a free-lance journalistbased in Paris. CliffSchaffer's Home Page WT02-B02-36IA086-000614-B041-319http://206.61.184.43:80/schaffer/Library/studies/lag/organiz.htm 206.61.184.43 19970122020030 text/html 13319HTTP/1.0 200 OKDate: Wednesday, 22-Jan-97 02:00:21 GMTServer: WebSitePro/1.1f (S/N wpo-0deb)Allow-ranges: bytesContent-type: text/htmlLast-modified: Saturday, 28-Dec-96 07:03:00 GMTContent-length: 13101 LaGuardia Committee Report - Organization of Staff Contents | Feedback | Search DRCNet Library | Schaffer Library | Major Studies | LaGuardiaCommittee Report Organization of Staff In October 1939 Police Commissioner Lewis J. Valentinedesignated Deputy Chief Inspector Daniel Curtayne, LieutenantEdward Cooper, Sergeant Bernard Boylan and Detective JosephLoures of the Narcotic Squad of the Police Department of the Cityof New York to cooperate with the Mayor's Committee on Marihuana.These police officials submitted a list of intelligent youngofficers with a suitable background. From this list six officerswere selected: two policewomen, and four policemen, one of whomwas a Negro. They were: Mr. James Coen, Mr. William Connolly, Mr.Benjamin Weissner, Mr. John Hughes, Miss Adelaide Knowles andMiss Olive Cregan. These police officers were encouraged to readliterature on the subject of marihuana and to familiarizethemselves with some of the characteristics of the plant, as wellas of marihuana cigarettes. They became expert in detecting thearoma of burning marihuana, and were thus able to recognize itand to identify its use in a social gathering. Regular assignments were made by the director of the survey.At intervals each officer dictated a general report on hisactivities and findings to a stenographer engaged by theCommittee. Frequent conferences were held in the office of thedirector of the survey, at which time individual reports werediscussed in detail and evaluated. An attempt was made to give the "marihuana squad" apsychological approach to the performance of their duties. At notime were these officers permitted to make known their activityto other members of the police force, or to make arrests. Thisarrangement was considered essential in order that they mightmaintain an effective role of investigator without being in anyrespect recognized as police officers. Although they were membersof the police force and constantly in contact with violators oflaw, their immediate superiors cooperated to an extreme degree byallowing the "marihuana squad" to report directly tothe director of the survey. While on duty the squad actually "lived" in theenvironment in which marihuana smoking or peddling was suspected.They frequented poolrooms, bars and grills, dime-a-dance halls,other dance halls to which they took their own partners, theatres-- backstage and in the audience -- roller-skating rinks,subways, public toilets, parks and docks They consorted with thehabitues of these places, chance acquaintances on the street,loiterers around schools, subways and bus terminals. They posedas "suckers" from out of town and as students incolleges and high schools. We highly commend these officers individually for theirexceptionally good performances. The aid given by Deputy ChiefInspector Daniel Curtayne, Lieutenant Edward Cooper, SergeantBernard Boylan and Detective Joseph Loures throughout deservesmention and appreciation. At times we must have been a source ofannoyance to them, but our requests were always cheerfully metand assistance heartily extended. Method of Retail Distribution In general, marihuana is used in the form of a cigarette.Occasionally some individuals chew the "weed" and seemto get the same effect as do others through smoking. The commonnames for the cigarettes are: muggles, reefers, Indian hemp,weed, tea, gage and sticks. Cigarettes made of marihuana differin size as do cigarettes made of tobacco: they are long, short,thick or thin. The price varies in accordance with the accepted opinion as tothe potency of the marihuana used in the cigarettes, and thisappears to be determined by the place of origin. The cheapestbrand is known as "sass-fras," and retails forapproximately three for 50 cents. It is made of the marihuanathat is grown in the United States. Smokers do not consider suchmarihuana very potent. They have found that they must consume agreater number of cigarettes in order to obtain the desiredeffect colloquially termed as "high." This opinion,expressed by smokers in the Borough of Manhattan, is at variancewith that of some authorities who believe that marihuana grown inthe United States is as potent as the marihuana grown in othercountries. The "panatella" cigarette, occasionally referred toas "meserole," is considered to be more potent than the"sass-fras" and usually retails for approximately 25cents each. The hemp from which the "panatella" is madecomes from Central and South America. "Gungeon" is considered by the marihuana smoker asthe highest grade of marihuana. It retails for about one dollarper cigarette. The "kick" resulting from the use ofthis cigarette is reached more quickly than from the use of"sassafras" or "panatella." It appears to bethe consensus that the marihuana used to make the"gungeon" comes from Africa. The sale of this cigaretteis restricted to a clientele whose economic status is of a higherlevel than the majority of marihuana smokers. A confirmed marihuana user can readily distinguish the qualityand potency of various brands, just as the habitual cigarette orcigar smoker is able to differentiate between the qualities oftobacco. Foreign-made cigarette paper is often used in order toconvince the buyer that the "tea is right from theboat." There are two channels for the distribution of marihuanacigarettes-- the independent peddler and the "tea-pad."From general observations, conversations with "pad"owners, and discussions with peddlers, the investigatorsestimated that there were about 500 "tea-pads" inHarlem and at least 500 peddlers. A "tea-pad" is a room or an apartment in whichpeople gather to smoke marihuana. The majority of such places arelocated in the Harlem district. It is our impression that thelandlord, the agent, the superintendent or the janitor is awareof the purposes for which the premises are rented. The"tea-pad" is furnished according to the clientele itexpects to serve. Usually, each "tea-pad" hascomfortable furniture, a radio, victrola or, as in mostinstances, a rented nickelodeon. The lighting is more or lessuniformly dim, with blue predominating. An incense is consideredpart of the furnishings. The walls are frequently decorated withpictures of nude subjects suggestive of perverted sexualpractices. The furnishings, as described, are believed to beessential as a setting for those participating in smokingmarihuana. Most "tea-pads" have their trade restricted to thesale of marihuana. Some places did sell marihuana and whisky, anda few places also served as houses of prostitution. Only one"teapad" was found which served as a house ofprostitution, and in which one could buy marihuana, whisky, andopium. The marihuana smoker derives greater satisfaction if he issmoking in the presence of others. His attitude in the"tea-pad" is that of a relaxed individual, free fromthe anxieties and cares of the realities of life. The"tea-pad" takes on the atmosphere of a very congenialsocial club. The smoker readily engages in conversation withstrangers, discussing freely his pleasant reactions to the drugand philosophizing on subjects pertaining to life in a mannerwhich, at times, appears to be out of keeping with hisintellectual level. A constant observation was the extremewillingness to share and puff on each other's cigarettes. Aboisterous, rowdy atmosphere did not prevail and on the rareoccasions when there appeared signs indicative of a belligerentattitude on the part of a smoker, he was ejected or forced tobecome more tolerant and quiescent. One of the most interesting setups of a "tea-pad,"which was clearly not along orthodox lines from the businesspoint of view, was a series of pup tents arranged on a roof-topin Harlem. Those present proceeded to smoke their cigarettes inthe tents. When the desired effect of the drug had been obtainedthey all merged into the open and engaged in a discussion oftheir admiration of the stars and the beauties of nature. Because of the possibility of spreading disease, note shouldbe taken of what seems to be a custom known as"pick-up" smoking. It is an established practicewhereby a marihuana cigarette is lit and after one or twoinhalations is passed on to the next person. This procedure isrepeated until all present have had an opportunity to take a puffor two on the cigarette. Occasionally a "tea-pad" owner may have peddlers whosell their wares in other localities and at the same time serveas procurers for those who wish to smoke marihuana on thepremises. One also finds other methods of retail distribution. Afterproper introduction, one may be able to purchase the cigarette incertain places. This is not an easy procedure, but it can beaccomplished. In some bar-and-grills, restaurants, and bars ourinvestigators were able to establish contact with someone who inturn, would introduce them to a peddler who apparently maderegular rounds of these places in order to sell cigarettes. Itappears that the owners of such places are not aware of thispractice, and in many instances they would discharge any employeeknown to be directly or indirectly associated with the sale ofmarihuana. On rare occasions public guides, if properly approached wouldrefer one to a place where the "reefer" could bebought. There was no evidence that the guide received money whenacting as go- between. Terminal porters, mainly Negroes, appearedto be more directly connected with the traffic of marihuana. Theywere more conversant with the subject and it was easier for themto establish contact between purchaser and peddler. Marihuana smoking is very common in the theatres of Harlemaccording to the observations of the investigators. We havereason to believe that in some instances, perhaps few in number,employees actually sold cigarettes on the premises. In the Harlemdance halls smoking was frequently observed either in thelavatories or on the main floor. The patrons as well as themusicians were seen in the act of smoking. There was no evidenceof sales being made by employees on the premises, or that therewas any gain on the part of the owners or employees in permittingthis practice. Whereas the smoking of marihuana was notencouraged, nothing was done to prohibit such practice. There are specific sections in the Borough of Manhattan wherethe sale of marihuana cigarettes appears to be localized: 1) theHarlem district; 2) the Broadway area, a little east and west ofBroadway and extending from 42nd Street to S9th Street. While itis true that one may buy the cigarette in other districts, it isnot as easily obtainable as in the two localities mentioned. Contents | Feedback | Search DRCNet Library | Schaffer Library | Major Studies | LaGuardiaCommittee ReportWT02-B02-37IA031-000655-B036-397http://206.61.184.43:80/schaffer/Library/studies/redfern/rf3.htm 206.61.184.43 19970122112124 text/html 29181HTTP/1.0 200 OKDate: Wednesday, 22-Jan-97 11:21:13 GMTServer: WebSitePro/1.1f (S/N wpo-0deb)Allow-ranges: bytesContent-type: text/htmlLast-modified: Sunday, 19-Jan-97 10:55:05 GMTContent-length: 28965 2. Steps to Harm Reduction Contents | Feedback | Search DRCNet Library | Schaffer Library | Major Studies | BeyondProhibition Beyond Prohibition Report of the Redfern Legal Centre DrugLaw Reform Project September 1996 2. Steps To Harm Reduction INTRODUCTION Our existing drugs policy, grounded inprohibition, is failing. Drug use continues at significantlevels, the drug trade continues to flourish, and the socialconsequences of a thriving drugs black market - includingsignificant property crime and police corruption - continue tocause concern. We need to continue the process begun a decadeago with the introduction of legal needle and syringe exchanges.That is, we need to continue to shift the primary policy focusfrom prohibition to harm reduction: to rely less on the criminallaw to discourage drug use and supply, and more on education,treatment and research to make drug use as safe and responsibleas possible. Our current approach to drugs confuses legalstatus with questions of safety. Both alcohol and marijuana arewidely used in social situations, both methadone and heroin arehighly addictive, both Prozac and ecstasy induce comparablefeelings of well-being. Yet the differing legal status of each ofthese drugs skews social attitudes to their appropriate use, anddistorts accurate education messages about their effects and thedangers of misuse. There is a limit to the constructive harmreduction measures which can be undertaken without changes to thelaw. We have probably already reached the point at which the lawscriminalising drug use represent a real impediment to programmesaimed at minimising the personal and social harm which can becaused by drug use. Reducing Drug-related Harm Harm reduction means aiming at reducing theharm that drugs can cause to users and to the broader community.It involves accepting that drug use will never be eliminated,even if we do not approve of it. Harm reduction should be thestandard against which we measure the success or failure ofexisting drug laws, and proposals for change. Redfern Legal Centre has proposed that in thelong term, we should implement a system of controlledavailability for most currently illicit drugs. The Centre's HarmReduction Model of Controlled Drug Availability sets outprinciples for controlled availability which would produce thegreatest degree of harm reduction, and sketches some case studiesto illustrate what these principles might mean in practice. In the immediate future, we should take someless dramatic steps towards reducing drug related harm. Here weoutline some immediate steps we should take to implement harmreduction principles in the short term. Policy Objectives Although drugs policy could never be describedas uncontroversial, there is some common ground. Most would agreethat drugs policy should be framed in the context of healthobjectives and social policy, not with the criminal law as thestarting point. Where drug use is problematic, it should beaddressed as a health issue, not a legal issue. What does this mean in concrete terms? The changes we recommend here address what weconsider to be the most significant drug policy issues impactingon public health. The particular objectives of the proposals madehere are 1. To establish the legal environment for theimplementation of effective education and other health programsto: reduce overdose deaths reduce the number of new Hepatitis C infectionsassociated with injecting drug use at least maintain (and if possible reduce)existing low levels of new HIV infection through injecting druguse improve the level of responsible disposal ofused needles 2. Reduce socially harmful impact of criminaljustice system on users of currently illicit drugs. Taking the steps detailed below will not solveall the problems associated with drug use. Change to the existinglegal framework must of necessity be made gradually. Once theproposals for change outlined here are implemented and evaluated,we can consider what further changes to drug law and policy arenecessary. These measures would have only a small initialimpact on crime rates and police corruption. These social harmsresult directly from the drug laws particularly laws about drugsupply. We need to move towards greater regulation of the drugsmarket to enable us as a society to influence the size andoperation of the drugs market. Achieving the maximum publichealth benefits will require regulatory control over matters suchas purity, weight, recommended dosages, and labelling. The greatest source of social harm associatedwith drugs is the black market. The black market, with itsextraordinary profits, fuels police corruption, and generatesproperty crime. And the black market is an unregulated market,with no controls on drug quality, multiplying the dangers of druguse. The enormous profits to be made will always draw a steadystream of new entrepreneurs to the production and distribution ofdrugs. The size of the black market is determined bythe laws we make about drug supply. While it is likely that wewill never be able to completely eliminate the drugs blackmarket, changes to the legal approach to drugs can reduce andmarginalise the negative social impact of a contracted illicitmarket. We must explore alternative strategies tocontrol the size of the black market, including consideringalternative changes to the law about supply. But we cannotsensibly undertake that consideration without first resolvinglegal and policy issues about use and possession. Each of the measures outlined below wouldrepresent an important step on the way to creating the legalframework for a comprehensive harm reduction strategy. PROPOSALS FOR CHANGE 1 . Personal Use and Possession Penalising drug users for the activity of druguse does little if anything to discourage drug-taking. Criminalising drug using behaviour adds to thesocial and personal burden on drug users without anycorresponding social benefit. The current laws force drug useunderground, compounding health problems and making it moredifficult to implement effective public health programs. Police drugs strategy states that policeresources should be directed towards drug traffickers andlarge-scale suppliers, rather than drug users. However, the factis that 60% of drug matters prosecuted involve drug use orpossession offences. Because there is a distinct socioeconomic biasin the manner in which different communities are policed, thereis a differential outcome in how these charges are laid. Thismeans that the drug laws impact unfairly on the poor, thehomeless, Aborigines and the young - disproportionately to theiractual patterns of usage. Changing our approach to the legal treatment ofdrug use would assist in HIV/Hepatitis C prevention by allowinginjecting drug users to access (and dispose of) new needles andsyringes without fear of police harassment. It would also removeexisting disincentives for drug users (such as marijuana smokers)to openly discuss their use with doctors and other healthprofessionals. There are a number of constructive alternativesto the criminalisation of personal use and possession of drugs. The options are to: a. abolish the offences of use and possession; b. abolish the offence of self administrationonly; and/or c. vary enforcement practices We will briefly discuss the merits of thesealternative approaches. Option a. Abolish the offences of use andpossession The most straightforward solution is to removethe offence of drug using and possession. That is, it would nolonger be a criminal offence to use an illicit drug, nor topossess a small quantity for personal use (say 30 grams forcannabis, 1 gram for heroin, amphetamine and other powders). Inorder to minimise the number of cannabis users accessing theblack market, cultivation of up to five cannabis plants perhousehold should also be allowed. Removing these offences would remove the legalobstacle to drug users seeking appropriate health care, includingthe estimated 600,000 cannabis users in this State. It wouldreduce fear of police harassment by injecting drug usersaccessing needle and syringe exchanges and, especially,contribute to responsible disposal of used needles. Becausepossession of a used needle is evidence of the offence of druguse, the law currently creates incentives to dispose of usedneedles quickly rather than thoughtfully. Removing these offences would be consistentwith existing police strategy which states that police resourcesshould be directed towards drug traffickers, not drug users. Option b. Abolish the offence of selfadministration only Because drug use ("selfadministration") and drug possession are separate offencesunder the Drugs Misuse and Trafficking Act, it is possible toremove the offence of use without any change to the lawprohibiting drug possession. Removing the criminality of the act of using adrug would improve the capacity of educators and researchers tocommunicate in direct and plain terms with people about theirpast and present levels of drug use, and use behaviours. In practical terms, it would mean that a personwho had recently consumed a drug but had no other drugs in theirpossession, would be not subject to arrest or criminal charges.This would encourage larger numbers of injecting drug users toresponsibly dispose of used needles and syringes, positivelycontributing to reduction in new HIV and hepatitis infections,and to community perceptions of public safety. Most self administration convictions resultfrom the person admitting having consumed a drug, without otherevidence (blood or urine tests are not undertaken to supportthese charges). This law is selectively enforced against thosewho are most vulnerable and least aware of their civil rights(especially the right to silence). If the self administration provision iswithdrawn, there would remain ample legal power for the police tocontrol offensive or anti-social behaviour which might accompanydrug use. Appropriate community policing strategies would addresscommunity concerns about unacceptable behaviour in public placesby people under the influence of illicit drugs, while alsoachieving desirable public health and social equity results. Option c. Vary enforcement practices The alternative to legislative amendment is tochange how these laws are enforced. There are several ways inwhich this might be done. (i) Better directed police discretion The police have the discretion not to arrest orlay a charge in a wide range of circumstances, subject to theirduty to protect the peace and to uphold the law. This exercise ofdiscretion applies in the enforcement of the drug laws. Inpractice this means that many police officers choose, in manycircumstances, not to lay charges where they become aware ofminor drug offences. The anecdotal evidence is that the policeare increasingly exercising their discretion in this way, perhapsespecially with cannabis. The exercise of police discretion in this wayis not only legitimate but desirable. It contributes positivelyto public health outcomes, and reduces what would otherwise be aliterally intolerable burden on criminal justice resources ifevery episode of drug use or possession which came to policenotice were prosecuted. It is desirable however that there be somestandardisation of this exercise of discretion, to achievegreater uniformity of police practice (and therefore socialequity) and to better target particular public health objectives. We propose that the Commissioner's Instructionsshould be amended to give guidance to police on the exercise oftheir discretion. Some suggestions are: Police guidelines should specificallydiscourage arrest in overdose and similar medical emergencysituations, of either the overdose patient or their associates.Knowing that there was no risk of arrest would encourage peopleexperiencing overdose, or their friends, to seek medical help asearly as possible. People suffering overdose, or other physical orpsychological distress, should be able to access medical serviceswithout fear of arrest. There are some 220 drug overdosefatalities in NSW each year. Many of these deaths arepreventable. Studies show that one in three heroin users reporthaving had at least one overdose experience. Police should be encouraged not to harassclients of methadone clinics, even if known drug users are likelyto congregate there. [This would be an extension of existingguidelines which discourage police harassment of clients ofneedle and syringe exchanges.] Existing Commissioner's Instructions(Instruction 16.02), say that police should not interruptinjection, nor deliberately break syringes. In fact, thesepractices still occur. Relevant police instructions should bemade the subject of training and greater management direction. The Police Service should undertake acomprehensive examination of its practices and protocols as theyimpact on drugs policy. The fact that there are existingCommissioner's Instructions which are not being applied raisesquestions about the capacity of the Police Service to respondflexibly and appropriately in this area, in the absence oflegislative reform. If measures are taken to develop theapplication of police discretion in drugs policy, it must beclosely monitored to assess the degree of compliance withguidelines. If this approach does not significantly improve thecurrent negative impact of law enforcement on effective drugspolicy, the only alternative is to legislate change to laws. (ii) Formal police cautions The recent Victorian Premier's Drug AdvisoryCouncil Report (the Pennington Report) recommended that the useand possession of illicit drugs be dealt with through a system ofautomatic formal police cautions for first offenders (withvoluntary referral to drug assessment and treatment services).Mandatory good behaviour bonds would be imposed as a sentence forsecond offenders. Third offenders would be dealt with by a courtin the normal way (ie, by decision of the magistrate to imposefines, community service orders, or other appropriate penalty). A mandatory caution/bond system for drug useand possession offences would make police contact with drug usersless negative than it is now (except for repeat offenders), andwould allow law enforcement to be accompanied by referral totreatment or counselling services in appropriate cases. If introduced, this system should be closelymonitored for its effect on the number and type of cases broughtbefore the courts. (It should be noted that introducing a systemof police referral to drug treatment services may result in anincreased demand for those services, which are now significantlyunder-researched.) (iii) On-the-spot fines Some jurisdictions (South Australia, theAustralian Capital Territory and the Northern Territory) haveintroduced a system of on-the-spot fines as a method of"decriminalising" the personal use and possession ofmarijuana. Since this system was implemented in SouthAustralia in 1987, there has been a 450% increase in the numberof fine notices issued (although research shows that marijuanausage has increased only slightly, in line with increases inother States). Half of the 18,000 people issued with notices lastyear did not pay their fine on time, exposing them to the risk ofarrest, prosecution and incurring a criminal record. In practice therefore, this initiative hasactually increased the cost of police and court time devoted tomarijuana law enforcement. In the ACT and NT, it is too early to saywhether there will be a similar escalation in the number ofnotices issued. There are few apparent advantages in adoptingthis measure. The other alternatives offer either more completeand systematic solutions, or the opportunity for more flexiblepolicing practices.  Remove prison as a sentencing option fordrug use or possession If the offences of drug use and possession arenot abolished, then at the least, imprisonment should be removedas an available sentencing option. Prison sentences are a completely inappropriatepenalty for minor drug possession and use offences. Imprisonmenthas never been evaluated for its effects on drug use orpossession recidivism, although anecdotal evidence suggests thatit does not deter ongoing drug use. Research into the questionshould be encouraged. About 150 people are gaoled each year in NSWfor drug use or possession of small quantities of drugs. In 1995(the most recent figures available), there were 62 people gaoledfor use or possession of marijuana, 61 were gaoled for use orpossession of heroin, and 44 were gaoled for use or possession ofother drugs. Although custodial sentences of up to eight monthswere imposed, the period of imprisonment for most was less thantwo months. In relative terms, these prison terms would beconsidered short. However, considering the minor nature of theoffences and prevailing social attitudes, they areextraordinarily harsh. 3 . Allow use of cannabis for medical purposes If the offences of drug use and possession areremoved, there is no need for separate treatment for those whouse cannabis for genuinely therapeutic purposes. However, ifthose offences remain, an exception should exist for the medicalapplications of cannabis. Cannabis in smokable form is a valuablealternative to other medical treatments for people living withAIDS and for some cancer and glaucoma patients. It is useful fornausea and pain relief, and to stimulate appetite. Smokablecannabis is now used in the community for these purposes withoutrecognition, support or medical supervision. Synthetic cannabis products in tablet form areavailable on prescription, but they are not satisfactory. Theyare expensive and reported to be less effective in achieving thedesired therapeutic results. Many patients who smoke marijuana tocontrol nausea are unable to swallow tablets. For some conditions(eg, weight loss associated with AIDS), there are no effectivealternatives. As well, numerous people living with hepatitisuse cannabis as a social alternative to alcohol. 4 Allow possession of drug equipment as well asneedles and syringes Possession of equipment intended for use ofprohibited drugs is illegal - needles and syringes are the onlyexception. It is anomalous to publicly fund thedistribution of needles and syringes, but not to allow thepossession of swabs, sterile water and tourniquets for thepurpose of using illegal drugs. Allowing the legal possession of allintravenous drug using equipment would assist in HIV prevention.It would also assist in preventing Hepatitis C infection, whichoften results from sharing equipment other than needles andsyringes., and it would assist in holistic harm reduction (eg,using sterile water to reduce the risk of injecting bacteriawhich can cause a range of illnesses). The sale and possession of bongs for thesmoking of cannabis is also illegal even though using a bong isprobably less harmful than smoking cannabis cigarettes. Furtherresearch should be undertaken into the relative physical harms ofdifferent methods of consuming cannabis (eg, in cigarettes,through bongs, or in foods). Legalising the sale and possession of cannabissmoking equipment would assist education strategies aimed atencouraging cannabis users to use in relatively safe ways. 5 . Provide safe injecting spaces Legal safe injecting spaces (or "shootingrooms") would considerably reduce the harm associated withinjecting drug use in public places like parks and laneways. Safeinjecting spaces could reduce drug overdose deaths, and shouldalso reduce the number of used syringes unsafely disposed of inpublic places. Publicly funded, safe injecting spaces shouldbe introduced on a trial basis in areas of existing highintravenous drug use. The trial should be conducted over twoyears, with an initial review after six months. Potential benefits include: i. Reduction in injecting drug use in publicplaces (such as parks and laneways), with the consequent publichealth dangers posed by used needles being left in those places. ii. Improved access and personal safety forambulance officers and other health workers treating overdoses. The difficulty with introducing such a trial isthat the authorities are wary of funding, even tolerating,facilities at which people would break the law (ie by selfadministration). We have made a number of suggestions above aboutreform of the law, or at least law enforcement practices, arounddrug use and possession. Introducing any of those proposals wouldclear the way legally for the introduction of safe injectingspaces. The proposal for safe injecting spaces is alogical extension of existing needle and syringe exchangeprograms. The legal framework to allow shooting rooms to operate(in the absence of more far-reaching changes to the law), wouldbe similar to the arrangements for needle and syringe exchangeprograms, namely: legislative amendment to make it not an offenceto inject a prohibited drug on site at an approved safe injectingplace (at least for the duration of a trial); instructions to police to not harass theclients of the facilities (just as existing instructions directpolice to not harass needle exchange clients) statutory amendment to protect workers in safeinjecting places from prosecution for aiding and abettingoffences. 6 Allow use, possession and supply of Narcanwithout prescription Narcan is an anti-narcotic used to revivepeople in the event of narcotic overdose. It has no pleasurableeffects, and no effect on someone who has not used heroin orother narcotics. Wider availability of Narcan has beenrecommended by researchers at the National Drug and AlcoholResearch Centre as an effective way to reduce fatal heroinoverdoses. If Narcan were to be made more readilyavailable, it should be accompanied by an appropriately targetededucation campaign to ensure that Narcan is understood to be afirst aid measure only. The person revived from the overdose by ashot of Narcan requires further medical attention, involvingeither calling an ambulance or attendance at a hospital. FUTURE CHANGE The implementation of these proposals should befollowed by continuing attention to laws and programmes whichimpact adversely on public health and other social programmes.Relevant government agencies should undertake a comprehensivereview to identify which laws require amendment to further reducedrug related harm. Key agencies to be involved in such a revieware the Departments of Health, Attorney-General's, Police, andSchool Education. In the longer term, the nature and pace offurther changes to drug law and policy will need to be consideredand debated. Implementing some or all of the above proposalswould significantly improve public health outcomes. Making thesechanges would allow the community to decide whether and how totake further steps. We should begin now, in a measured way, toexplore and implement workable alternatives to the failure ofdrugs prohibition. Contents | Feedback | Search DRCNet Library | Schaffer Library | Major Studies | BeyondProhibitionWT02-B02-38IA087-000632-B014-211http://206.61.184.43:80/schaffer/Library/studies/redfern/rftoc.htm 206.61.184.43 19970122090959 text/html 3422HTTP/1.0 200 OKDate: Wednesday, 22-Jan-97 09:09:53 GMTServer: WebSitePro/1.1f (S/N wpo-0deb)Allow-ranges: bytesContent-type: text/htmlLast-modified: Sunday, 19-Jan-97 10:54:58 GMTContent-length: 3207 Beyond Prohibition - Table of Contents Contents | Feedback | Search DRCNet Library | Schaffer Library | Major Studies | BeyondProhibition Beyond Prohibition Report of the RedfernLegal Centre Drug Law Reform Project September 1996 Contents Executive Summary 1. History of Project 2. Steps to Harm Reduction 3. Comments on"Steps" 4. Harm Reduction ModelControlled Drug Availability 5. Comments on the HarmReduction Model 6. Future drug law reformactivities Appendices This document has been produced with thefinancial assistance of the Law Foundation of NSW. The opinionsexpressed are those of Redfern Legal Centre and should not betaken as representing the views of the Law Foundation. Contents | Feedback | Search DRCNet Library | Schaffer Library | Major Studies | BeyondProhibitionWT02-B02-39IA031-000655-B036-334http://206.61.184.43:80/schaffer/Library/studies/redfern/rf1.htm 206.61.184.43 19970122112035 text/html 4463HTTP/1.0 200 OKDate: Wednesday, 22-Jan-97 11:20:22 GMTServer: WebSitePro/1.1f (S/N wpo-0deb)Allow-ranges: bytesContent-type: text/htmlLast-modified: Sunday, 19-Jan-97 10:55:20 GMTContent-length: 4248 Beyond Prohibition - Executive Summary Contents | Feedback | Search DRCNet Library | Schaffer Library | Major Studies | BeyondProhibition Beyond Prohibition Report of the Redfern Legal Centre DrugLaw Reform Project September 1996 Executive Summary The Redfern Legal Centre Drug Law ReformProject began in mid 1994. Its objectives were to promoteinformed public discussion about drug law reform, and tocontribute to bringing forward reform of the drug laws. The Project's main achievements over the pasttwo years are: Published discussion papers, fact sheets,stickers and a poster promoting a range of initiatives to end thecurrent prohibition policy on currently illicit drugs and movetowards a model of controlled availability; Convened a series of community forums in SouthSydney and Cabramatta on ways that drug laws impact on the workof community and health organisations; Held discussions with a number of NSWParliamentarians, including Ministers and their advisors; Participated in several conferences andseminars, including the International Conference on the Reductionof Drug Related Harm Provided formal, detailed submissions to arange of inquiries including the Wood Royal Commission into theNSW Police Service and the Victorian Premier's Drug AdvisoryCouncil (Pennington Committee). This report includes two of the Project's mostsignificant publications: Steps Towards Harm Reduction Harm Reduction Model of Controlled DrugAvailability. In addition, this report provides summaries ofcomments on these publications from a diverse range oforganisations and individuals. The comments show that the Projectand its publications have made a significant contribution to thedebate about reform of the drug laws in NSW. Future activities for the Redfern Drug LawReform Project are likely to include closer links to othercommittees and organisations working on drug law reform in NSWand other parts of Australia. Contents | Feedback | Search DRCNet Library | Schaffer Library | Major Studies | BeyondProhibitionWT02-B02-40IA031-000655-B036-360http://206.61.184.43:80/schaffer/Library/studies/redfern/rf2.htm 206.61.184.43 19970122112059 text/html 11793HTTP/1.0 200 OKDate: Wednesday, 22-Jan-97 11:20:39 GMTServer: WebSitePro/1.1f (S/N wpo-0deb)Allow-ranges: bytesContent-type: text/htmlLast-modified: Sunday, 19-Jan-97 10:55:25 GMTContent-length: 11577 Beyond Prohibition - History of the Project Contents | Feedback | Search DRCNet Library | Schaffer Library | Major Studies | BeyondProhibition Beyond Prohibition Report of the Redfern Legal Centre DrugLaw Reform Project September 1996 1 . History of Project Background The Redfern Legal Centre Drug Law ReformProject began in mid 1994. Its objectives were to promoteinformed public discussion about drug law reform, and tocontribute to bringing forward reform of the drug laws. Redfern Legal Centre provided funding to payone part-time worker to coordinate the Project and to carry outmany of its tasks. The Project was oversighted by a small buttypically enthusiastic committee, which reported to the Centre'sManagement Committee. The funding for the Project came (untilFebruary 1996) from the Centre's own resources, primarilylitigation costs. From March until September 1996, the Projectwas funded by a grant from the Law Foundation of NSW Redfern Legal Centre undertook this Project forseveral reasons: 1. Drug prohibition fosters crime (becauseprohibition artificially inflates prices for drugs on the blackmarket). Abandoning prohibition would be the simplest single wayto achieve a noticeable reduction in property crime, and to alesser but still important extent, violent crime. 2. Those affected by drug-inspired crime areprimarily the socially disadvantaged. Drug law reform isdesirable as a social equity measure. 3. Prohibition contributes to policecorruption. It is no accident that the clear majority of policenamed adversely in evidence before the Wood Royal Commission intopolice corruption are in some way connected to drugs - policestealing drugs or money from drug suppliers, police sellingdrugs, police planting drugs on suspects as false evidence.Prohibition makes the drug trade so extravagantly profitable (itis the second largest trade in the world) that it createsenormous temptations for police and other officials. We cannothope to significantly reduce the opportunities for policecorruption while the drugs prohibition continues. 4. Prohibition has a significant negativeimpact on the legal system. Dealing with people facing drugcharges, or charges of property crime generated by the drugsblack market, creates an enormous drain on the courts, and inparticular on public funds available to provide legal servicesfor the poor and disadvantaged. Reducing drug-related crime wouldfree up law enforcement resources for other activities, and wouldimprove the resource capacity of the Legal Aid Commission andcommunity legal services to pursue other matters, such asconsumer claims and antidiscrimination cases. 5. Public health outcomes are compromised bylaws which drive drug use underground. In particular, the druglaws hamper efforts to contain the spread of HIV and Hepatitis Band C. 6. Despite years of community debate and thestrength of the case for reform, prohibition has been fiercelyresilient . Reliance on the criminal law to control behaviour inother areas of moral or personal choice gambling, sex work,abortion, censorship - has generally receded in recent decades,with the drug laws the notable exception. The demise ofprohibition is not as inevitable as it perhaps once appeared tobe. We believe that meaningful reform of our druglaws necessarily involves reconsidering the laws about supply aswell as possession and use of drugs, and laws about other drugsas well as cannabis. Harm reduction is a pragmatic approach whichemphasises reducing the personal and social harms associated withdrug use, while accepting that eliminating drug use isimpossible. Harm reduction has been officially the central goalof Australian drugs policy since the mid 1980s, although mostpublic resources devoted to the drug problem continue to promoteprohibition (eg, funds to police and customs services andunrealistic, wholly negative drug education). We believe thatharm reduction (in any meaningful definition) is incompatiblewith prohibition. The Project has attempted to develop coherentharm reduction strategies, focusing on measures which wouldreduce or eliminate the drugs black market. Community Forums The Project convened a series of communityforums at which service providers in the health and communitysectors in particular were invited to identify, from theirperspective, the ways in which existing legal approaches to drugsimpacted on their work, and to identify which legal frameworkcould best support drug treatment and education programs. Theseforums were held in both South Sydney, where the Legal Centre islocated, and in Cabramatta, Sydney's major heroin distributionpoint. The discussion at these forums was invaluable in assistingthe Project to developing strategies and proposals for change. Publications Two discussion papers were written anddistributed in the course of the Project. The Harm Reduction Model of Controlled DrugAvailability, published in May 1995, attempted to tackleconcretely the question of what exactly drug law reform couldlook like. Most previous proposals for law reform were eitherinadequate (eg, the on-the spot fine model adopted in variousforms in South Australia, the ACT and the Northern Territory), orairy generalisations about the possibility of regulating orderegulating the drugs market (with the idea of controlledavailability little more than a slogan). We considered it apriority to do the work of systematically applying harm reductionprinciples to all aspects of drug consumption, production anddistribution - in an open-minded but hopefully not fanciful way.The Harm Reduction Model therefore represents a detailedprojection of what controlled availability might look like inpractice. The Harm Reduction Model was widely circulatedand was endorsed by a number of community organisations andindividuals. An updated and expanded second edition of TheHarm Reduction Model was published in July 1996. Importantly, thesecond edition included a set of Principles for Controlled DrugAvailability to complement the essentially practical proposalsillustrating some possible means of regulating drug supply andconsumption. The Project's other discussion paper was Stepsto Harm Reduction. A companion document to the Harm ReductionModel, this paper addressed the present and short-term future. Itprovided an analysis of the possible immediate steps which couldand should be taken in drugs policy and drug law reform. Again,the value of the paper lay in its attempt to be detailed andspecific. The paper is a blueprint for reform, providing a listof proposals to achieve a graduated replacement of prohibitionwith harm reduction. These two papers form the major part of thisreport. The Project also produced: Two very popular bumper stickers (slogans EndProhibition: Support Drug Law Reform and Break the Crime Cycle:Support Drug Law Reform) A full colour poster, a graphic presentation ofwhat the future of drugs policy might look like. A series of Fact Sheets with statistics andother information detailing the social impact of existing druglaws. Discussions with politicians Throughout the Project, we held discussionswith a number of NSW Parliamentarians, including Ministers andtheir advisors. It must be said that the political climate provedto be not conducive to change on drug policy, despite some earlyencouraging if ambiguous statements from the incoming CarrGovernment. Issues discussed included many of the issuesdealt with in this report, including the desirability ofintroducing a trial of legal safe injecting spaces, and apossible Parliamentary motion on prioritising harm reduction indrugs policy. Inquiries The Project also provided formal, detailedsubmissions on proposals for law reform to the followinginquiries. Wood Royal Commission into the NSW PoliceService Victorian Premier's Drug Advisory Council(Pennington Committee) Commonwealth Access to Justice Inquiry. Conference papers During the life of the Project, we participatedin a number of conferences and seminars. Perhaps the mostsignificant conference papers we presented were a paper inSeptember 1995 to the NSW Corrective Health Services Symposium onDrug-Related Crime, and the two papers to the 7th InternationalConference on the Reduction of Drug Related Harm, in Hobart inMarch 1996. Contents | Feedback | Search DRCNet Library | Schaffer Library | Major Studies | BeyondProhibitionWT02-B02-41IA031-000655-B036-422http://206.61.184.43:80/schaffer/Library/studies/redfern/rf3a.htm 206.61.184.43 19970122112139 text/html 18180HTTP/1.0 200 OKDate: Wednesday, 22-Jan-97 11:21:30 GMTServer: WebSitePro/1.1f (S/N wpo-0deb)Allow-ranges: bytesContent-type: text/htmlLast-modified: Sunday, 19-Jan-97 10:55:10 GMTContent-length: 17964 3. Comments on Steps to Harm Reduction Contents | Feedback | Search DRCNet Library | Schaffer Library | Major Studies | BeyondProhibition Beyond Prohibition Report of the Redfern Legal Centre DrugLaw Reform Project September 1996 3. Comments on Steps to Harm Reduction A version of the Steps towards Harm Reductionsection of this report was provided to people and organisationswith expertise or interest in the area of drugs policy and drugslaw, together with a questionnaire (see Appendix 2) seekingcomments on the paper. Responses were sought from 55 individuals andorganisations (see Appendix 1). Written responses were receivedfrom 21 respondents and eight responses were obtained byinterview (29 responses in all). Given the low response rate andthe ways that respondents were selected, this survey is notdesigned to provide research evidence about support for oragainst changes to drug laws. However, the responses allow us tosee where support appears to be forming and what areas continueto be the subject of intense debate. Responses were received from the followingindividuals and organisations. Organisations are listed when theyprovided an organisational response: otherwise the individualslisted spoke only in a personal capacity and not on behalf of anyOrganisation: Uniting Church Board for Social ResponsibilityAnglican Church Catholic Archdiocese of Sydney AIDS Council of NSW Hepatitis C Council of NSW Australian Federation of AIDS OrganisationsAustralian IV League NSW Bar Council Australian Medical Association UN Association of Australia (NSW) Drug AbuseControl Committee HEMP Nimbin Dr Lisa Maher Meriel Schultz Garth Popple James Pitts Lory Price Greg Chilvers Don Weatherburn David McDonald Dr Alex Wodak Bill Stronach Professor Peter Baume Dr Robert Marks John Howard (lecturer, not PM) Dr Wendy Lox1ey Major Brian Watters Ken Marslew Angela and Tony Wood Dr Peter B Paisley (Total responses do not always add up to 29because some respondents did not answer all questions and somegave overall support or opposition, rather than provide detailson specific points.) Do you support some change in the legal currentapproach to personal use and possession? All respondents agreed that some change wasnecessary. The overwhelming majority favoured change in thedirection of some liberalisation of existing legal approaches.One respondent supported change in the form of higher penaltiesfor use and possession offences. One supported additionalintervention (eg, education) as well as police intervention. Comments: "There is (and has been for decades)overwhelming evidence that the current system not only does notwork but is cataclysmically harmful." "[Supported] for cannabis use/possessiononly. Population use of cannabis has reached the point whereprohibition does more harm than good." "Counterproductive and contrary toprinciples of harm minimisation and National Drugs Strategy tocriminalise users." "Should be less criminal records for theseoffences, shorter time for expungement of criminal records." It is important to note that almost allrespondents support some change, as one of the findings of thisprocess is that views are polarised on the points contained inthe Steps Towards Harm Reduction. While most respondentssupported the need for changes in all of the areas covered by thedocument, several respondents opposed most such changes. Thosegenerally in favour of change included some church groups,doctors, lecturers, researchers, drug educators, drug treatmentstaff and community based organisations. Those generally opposedincluded some church groups, doctors association, drug treatmentstaff and some community members. Several respondents chose to write letters insupport of their general position. These general commentsincluded: "Issues of dependency could be more easilyaddressed and the transmission of blood borne viruses could bemore efficiently reduced by taking the Steps Towards HarmReduction." "Too much attention is focused on thequestion of whether the present system of drug prohibition isworking. In my view, the answer is clearly that prohibition isnot working ... But accepting that prohibition has failed is notenough. Whether we should get rid of it depends on what we cancome up with as a replacement. Criminal law is not the only meansof regulation nor is its central presence in drug controlstrategy inevitable ... The real choice is about what type ofstate control is to replace prohibition as the dominantstrategy." (original emphasis) "The case here tends to be overstated byextrapolations and generalisations ... There cannot be a blanketapproach to encouraging safe and responsible drug use ... Thereis no clear evidence that either more restrictive or more liberalpolicies have achieved significant impact on the prevalence ofillicit drugs." "The (United Nations) conventions doreflect consensus and, with the problem of substance misuse,there has to be a line drawn somewhere. I believe that drug lawreform, at its worst, acts to destroy all the lines and to leaveonly confusion to those who desperately seek direction." Option a. Abolish the offences of use andpossession Eighteen respondents supported this change, sixwere opposed, three were unsure. Comments: "It's a victimless crime. What you do toyourself in the privacy of your own home is no-one'sbusiness." "[The current law is] counterproductivesocially and economically." "It would equal approval - a message thatdrug use is OK." "There needs to be community consultationsbefore progress can occur." Option b. Abolish the offence of selfadministration only The proposal to abolish the offence of selfadministration only was not included in the questionnairecompleted by respondents. However, one response noted that themost recent Ministerial Council on Drug Strategy meeting hadresolved to form a Working Party of the National Drug StrategyCommittee to examine the self administration laws in everyjurisdiction. This Working Party is chaired by Mr Neil Bridge ofthe NSW Police Service. Option c. Vary enforcement practices (i) Betterdirected police discretion The version of the paper circulated for commentdid not include this section, so most respondents did not havethe opportunity to comment on the proposals. The proposals werediscussed with a small number of respondents, who indicated somesupport. (ii) Formal Police cautions Twenty respondents favoured this proposal,three were opposed. Among the supporters, two indicated broadsupport for the concept, but disagreement with the detailsproposed. Two supporters expressed the view that this proposalwas a poor alternative to the repeal of the offences. Anotheradvocated this approach before considering legislative amendmentat a later time. Comments: "Police contact, if it is a deterrent,would be just as effective with a caution or bond as with aharsher penalty." "Diversion of users away from criminalcharges should be used wherever possible. Unfortunately [theDepartment of] Health does not resource sufficient treatment orcounselling services. Magistrates cannot refer if there are noservices. Neither can police." "Less intrusive and punitive. Gives someoption for the individual" "It should remain a court matter, but withno convictions recorded." (iii) On-the-spot fines Seven respondents were in favour of thisproposal, with another one "half in favour" and 15opposed. The respondent who was partially in favoursuggested that the South Australian experience was not a fairtest of the effectiveness of this approach because the law theredoes not allow the police to demand identification. Thisrespondent suggested a variation on the proposal, with no finesor other police attention for amount of less than 25 grams (forcannabis), and fines for quantities in the range of 25 grams to,say, 100 grams. Comments: "Although I favour legalisation, on thespot fines may be a half way house" "Fines are overused as a sanction." "They would just fill up the fines yardsand periodic detention centres." "It is too difficult,apparently, to prevent net-widening." V) Other suggestions Respondents were invited to make othersuggestions for legal change concerning personal use andpossession. Six respondents offered comments. Comments: "Policing priorities (I guess goes with(b)) Licensing of IV users (?), pot smokers(?)" "Some process for referral for assessmentfor treatment/ rehabilitation. Need to look at withdrawingdriving licences, eg for methadone patients." "Let people grow what they like. Let themarket place sort it out. Supply good quality seed - kill theblack market. Keep it cheap. Get away from needles." "Referral options - jobs - safehousing." "Legalise heroin and cannabis." "Continue education and encouragement ofnon-use, and not starting to use: eg, experiment." Remove prison as a sentencing option for druguse or possession Twenty respondents were in favour of thisproposal, and four were opposed. Two of those in favour of this change supportedthe establishment of secure, custodial rehabilitation facilitiesfor some drug users as an alternative to prison. Comments: "What's the point of putting users ingaol?" "[Yes] But it should be seldom if everused." "Minimise or modify prison sentence,deviation/direction to rehabilitation or treatment agencies whenpossible." 3 Allow use of cannabis for medical purposes Eighteen respondents were in favour of thisproposal, three were opposed. One of those in favour supportedcannabis for medical purposes on prescription only. Comments: "Even if it is only a third rate drug -why not allow some people to benefit?" "Cannabis in smokable form is not the bestavailable treatment for patients suffering from anyillness." "For some conditions (eg, AIDS relatedweight loss), there is no good alternative." 4. Allow possession of drug equipment as wellas needles and syringes Nineteen respondents favoured the proposal(including one who supported legal change for bongs, but wasuncertain about injecting equipment), four were opposed. One ofthose opposed to this proposal thought that a new offence shouldbe introduced for irresponsible disposal of used needles andsyringes. Comments: "Don't want to encourage drug use." "It's a proven public healthsuccess." "Present situation is patentlyludicrous." 5 Provide safe injecting spaces Eighteen respondents were in favour of thisproposal, five were opposed. Comments: "Definitely. Works towards increased safedisposal (by centralising use), decrease in overdoses (monitoreduse), takes away IV use from public facilities like publictoilets, provision of counselling, health monitoring. Highpriority change." "Safe for whom? These could assist incollection of used needles which a good thing. If illegalsupplies of drugs which are being trafficked, these may proveunsafe for users." "Socially unworkable. The practicalitiesof their location and operation are enormous." "Cannot assume beneficial public healtheffect especially if current prohibitions remain in place. Alsohave to ensure that such places are truly 'safe' and clients arefree from identification and police harassment." "What about non-metro towns? They may needthem more." 6 Allow use, possession and supply of Narcanwithout prescription Eleven respondents were in favour of thisproposal, four were against. Most others were unsure. Comments: "This is well supported in research. Thereare practical difficulties with its availability. Needs to beworked on rather than talked about!" "I don't want to see kids die." "100% for it." "I'm not sure about this, but I suppose Ishould logically support it." Contents | Feedback | Search DRCNet Library | Schaffer Library | Major Studies | BeyondProhibitionWT02-B02-42IA031-000655-B037-9http://206.61.184.43:80/schaffer/Library/studies/redfern/rf4.htm 206.61.184.43 19970122112201 text/html 29998HTTP/1.0 200 OKDate: Wednesday, 22-Jan-97 11:21:47 GMTServer: WebSitePro/1.1f (S/N wpo-0deb)Allow-ranges: bytesContent-type: text/htmlLast-modified: Sunday, 19-Jan-97 10:55:31 GMTContent-length: 29782 4. Harm Reduction Model of Controlled Drug Availability Contents | Feedback | Search DRCNet Library | Schaffer Library | Major Studies | BeyondProhibition Beyond Prohibition Report of the Redfern Legal Centre DrugLaw Reform Project September 1996 4. Harm Reduction Model of ControlledDrug Availability (Second Edition) This paper is in two Parts. Part A sets outPrinciples which should apply to the social and legal managementof currently illicit drugs. Part B provides some examples of howthese Principles might be applied for particular drugs.Individuals and organisations are invited to endorse thePrinciples of Controlled Availability contained in this proposal.(An earlier version of this paper was published in May 1995.) PART A: PRINCIPLES Preamble Prohibition causes enormous social damageincluding: Vastly increased drug-related property crime bydrug users to pay prices inflated by the black market Law enforcement costs to apprehend drug usersand sellers, and those who commit drug-related crime, andincreased costs and delays in the court system to process thesecases Corruption flourishing at all levels and inmany forms: profits are so great that few police or otherofficials are able to resist the enormous sums offered as bribes Violent crime developing from suppliercompetition Thousands of Australians jailed for drugrelated crimes, leading to increased costs for correctiveservices and the need for more jails Prohibition contributes to the spread of HIVand other blood-borne diseases such as Hepatitis B and C in thefollowing ways: Needle sharing among injectors of somecurrently illicit drugs can spread these infections: many drugusers begin to inject to receive the greatest effect from thesmallest quantity of the expensive drug Some users of illicit drugs are forced intohigh-risk forms of sex to pay for drug use Needle and syringe supply programs aredifficult to establish and operate under regular threat ofclosure, despite significantly reducing the spread of HIV andother blood-borne diseases Unsafe disposal of used needles and syringesincreases because drug injectors believe that police will usethese articles as the basis for prosecution Drug injectors sent to prison continue to usedrugs but have virtually no means to protect themselves frominfection Laws prohibiting certain drugs have drivenusers of currently illicit drugs from their social supportnetworks, making it hard to reach them with education messagesabout protecting themselves and others from infection Marginalisation of drug users (encouraged byprohibition) has led most Australians to care little what happensto drug users Prohibition causes damage to the health of drugusers (and consequently increases health costs to society) by: Users paying black market prices for drugs,leading to increasing malnutrition and other health deficitsrelated to poverty Adulterants and inconsistent drug type or dose(caused by unregulated manufacturing due to prohibition) causinghealth damage, overdose and death among users of currentlyillicit drugs Marginalisation of drug users leads to lowerself esteem and decreases motivation for self-care Goals of Rational Drug Policy Drug policy should: Have realistic goals Take account of the different patterns andtypes of harms caused by specific drugs Be shown to be effective or be changed Separate arguments about the consequences ofdrug use from arguments about morals Be developed in the light of the costs ofcontrol as well as the benefits Ensure that the harms caused by the controlregimes themselves do not outweigh the harms prevented by them Recognise the existence of multiple goals, butensure that contradictory goals are minimised We believe that this proposal achieves each ofthese policy objectives. The specific goals of this proposal are tosimultaneously reduce the size and profits of the illicit drugmarket by the greatest amount; and provide the greatest level ofharm reduction for users of currently illicit drugs; and minimisethe number of users of these drugs who experience problemsrelated to their drug use Defining Harm Reduction We use the term "harm reduction" tomean: A policy or programme directed towards reducingthe adverse health, social and economic consequences of drug useto the community and to the individual user, even though the usermay continue to use psychoactive drugs at this time. Harm reduction policies and programmes must bepart of a public health approach to managing drug use. Protectingthe health of the community must include protecting the health ofdrug users. Principles of Controlled Availability Applying these policy goals under the abovedefinition of harm reduction, we propose that a system ofcontrolled availability of currently illicit drugs be introduced. Such a system should have the followingprinciples as its key elements: 1. The use and possession of currently illicitdrugs should be made legal, in an environment of controlledavailability. 2. The regulated manufacture, supply and saleof selected drugs should be allowed. 3. The drugs selected for controlledavailability should include cannabis, heroin, amphetamine,ecstasy and anabolic steroids. 4. The drugs selected for should be madeavailable either: a) Over the counter from licensed premises inspecified (generally low) dosages of known purity, clearlylabelled with ingredients shown; or b) By prescription. 5. The age limit for the regulated supply ofcurrently illicit drugs should be the same as it is for alcohol. 6. Advertising and marketing should be theminimum necessary (eg, for brand identification) to ensure thatnon-users are not attracted into drug use by marketing. 7. Prices of regulated drugs should be set sothat least harmful forms of the drug (usually lower dosages) aresubstantially less costly than more harmful forms of the drug. 8. Users must demonstrate adequate knowledgeabout the effects of the drug they intend to purchase, and aboutsafe usage. 9. Profits earned from the commercialproduction or supply of drugs should be taxed. Revenues obtainedfrom taxes and licence fees must be applied (in whole or in largepart) to education, and to treatment for those drug users whowant it. 10. Controlled availability should operate in aframework of: a) education in which doctors and other healthprofessionals, licensed drug sellers and drug users allparticipate in baseline and follow-up education based on validresearch; and b) widespread, easily accessible treatment fordrug-related problems, with funding to be provided to a widevariety of non-coercive options for positive change. 11. The prescription system should have thefollowing characteristics: a) Appropriate criteria for a drug to beprescribed to an individual would be: i. regular frequent use (usually daily); ii. clear evidence of dependence; iii. continued use having a severe effect onlifestyle; iv. the harms associated with non-prescribeduse being significantly greater than those associated withprescription. b) A variety of forms for oral, smokable orinjectable use be made available, in a range of doses up to anegotiated maximum dose. Users must also have access toappropriate drug using equipment. C) Users of the prescription system beregistered. d) The prescription system would operate in aframework of: i. Harm reduction and full consumerparticipation. ii. Entry assessment to ensure that theindividual wants to be maintained on the drug: this assessmentmust be carried out by a trained, qualified drugs worker and mustinclude a full and frank discussion of the likely consequences ofa range of options including maintenance, detoxification,selective detoxification, and controlled using. iii. Options for dispensing which may include: Pharmacy dispensing Drug clinic dispensing Home delivery or mobile van for long-termillness, palliative care or isolated individuals Safe injecting spaces ("shootingrooms") in areas with a high concentration of druginjectors, especially those who are homeless. iv. Reasonable cost to the consumer. Servicesto clients on low incomes would be delivered through the publichealth system. PART B: CASE STUDIES In this Part we propose some concrete examplesof how these Principles might be applied for particular drugs. We do not suggest that the proposals in thisPart describe the only possible application of these principles. Cannabis We use the term "cannabis" to referto the complete range of cannabis products including marijuana,hashish resin and oil, and other preparations, as well asindustrial hemp. It would be legal to grow up to 10 cannabisplants for personal use. It would be legal to consume cannabisproducts or to possess up to 50 grams (dry weight) of cannabisfor personal use. It would be legal to supply in small quantities(up to 50 grams) to people aged 18 and over for no payment. It would be legal to grow larger quantities ofcannabis under licence to a State Government Office of DrugRevenue (ODR). Officially sanctioned cannabis growers would beallowed to sell their products to cannabis shops or Kafes, or tomanufacturers of other cannabis products such as biscuits andcakes, rope, paper, textiles, etc. A regulation system wouldensure that grades of cannabis (principally by THC content) areadhered to, providing quality assurance for end users. Adifferential tax could operate with different grades beingsubject to different tax. A system of cannabis Kafes would be establishedfor retail sales of cannabis, both for consumption on thepremises and for take-away consumption to people aged 18 andover. A range of cannabis products from rolled cigarettes tobiscuits might be available, together with smoking implementsdesigned to reduce the level of harm associated with smokingcannabis products (eg bongs). Other retailers (eg tobacconists) would belicensed to sell take away cannabis products. Cannabis seeds, andinformation about home cultivation, would also be available. Commercial cannabis suppliers would be requiredto label their products with consumer information concerningweight, THC content, recommended dosage, and approved healthwarnings. Profits earned from the commercial manufactureor supply of cannabis would be taxed. Prices for cannabis products should becomparable with prices of alcoholic spirits. Prices should be setto encourage users to eat cannabis products rather than smoke. Sales to people under 18 and unlicensed (ieuntaxed) sales would be illegal. Advertising and marketing of cannabis productswould be restricted to the minimum necessary (eg for brandidentification). It might include a statement outside and insideKafes that "cannabis products are sold here", orperhaps a discrete symbol indicating availability of cannabisproducts. Cannabis smoking would be banned in placeswhere tobacco smoking is banned. A realistic education campaign about thehazards of using cannabis, concentrating on safe cannabis use,"dope-driving", the effects of both shortterm andchronic use, and the use of cannabis and alcohol together, wouldbe carried out at regular intervals. The cost of this campaignand ongoing campaigns directed at school students, homeless andworking youth and visitors to the State would be paid for by taxrevenues from cannabis sales. Revenues from taxes and licence fees would beused to administer the regulatory system and to provide educationand treatment services through services funded by the HealthDepartment. It would remain an offence to drive while underthe influence of cannabis, unless further research proves thatcannabis does not impair driving ability. Research should beconducted to determine what (if any) level of cannabisintoxication would not adversely affects drivers' ability. It would remain illegal to import or exportcannabis. Heroin & other opioids In this section, we refer to heroin and othercurrently illicit opioids such as opium, as well as currentlyrestricted drugs such as methadone. It would be legal to use heroin and allcurrently illicit opioid products, and to possess smallquantities (2 grams) for personal use. It would remain illegal to supply, manufactureor traffic in currently illicit opioid drugs except as follows: Opiated teas, tinctures, tonics and otherproducts, clearly showing the percentage of opioid per volumewould be manufactured under licence to a State Government Officeof Drug Revenue (ODR) and sold through pharmacies to people overthe age of 18. All ingredients of these products would be listedon their packaging. Taxes raise from the sale of these productswould be used to fund treatment and education programs. Smokable opium and heroin would be manufacturedunder licence to the ODR and sold in pharmacies to people overthe age of 18, together with smoking implements designed toreduce the level of harm associated with opium and heroin smoking(ie. smoke cooling equipment such as hookahs and long pipes).Prices of these products would be set so that they would: (a) encourage opium use over heroin use, butwhich (b) encourage opioid smoking over opioidinjecting. Sales of these products would be in smallquantities only (enough for 3-4 episodes of intoxication). Taxesraised from sales would be used to fund treatment and educationprograms, and to subsidise the prescription system. By prescription (see below). The pharmacy sales of opiated products, opiumand heroin would be regulated by officers of the ODR, not by thepolice. The retail system would be accompanied by aneducation, information and referral system. A general educationcampaign would be carried out to provide the rationale for thissystem and to explain its workings. Commercial suppliers would be required to labeltheir products with consumer information concerning weight,recommended dosage, and approved health warnings. Profits earned from the commercial manufactureor supply of heroin and other opioids would be taxed. There would be no advertising or marketing ofopioid products except for the minimum necessary for brandidentification. Realistic education materials would be availablein a range of formats to opioid product buyers. Training would also be provided to pharmacistsin early identification of opiate-related problems, assessment ofthese problems, and referral for assistance via prescribedopioids, drug treatment or other help as negotiated with theconsumer. Part of this training would be in obtaining informationfrom new buyers about their level of knowledge of opioid use, andensuring that new buyers especially have access to appropriateeducation materials. It would remain an offence to drive while underthe influence of heroin or other opioids. Prescription The prescribing system should be establishedfor registered "dependents" (people who are or believethat they are dependent on a drug). Such a prescription systemwould have the following as its essential elements: The system should have as its core values harmreduction and full consumer participation. The system should havean entry assessment to ensure that the individual wants to bemaintained on an opioid drug. Assessment must be carried out by atrained, qualified drugs worker. A full and frank assessment ofthe likely consequences of a range of options includingmaintenance, detoxification, selective detoxification, controlledusing, etc should be negotiated with the individual. The prescription system should make available achoice of the five most popular opioid drugs in a variety offorms for oral or injectable use, in a range of doses up to anegotiated maximum dose when they so desire. To avoid "double" prescribing, acomputerised register would be kept of the dependent person'sname, address, preferred drug(s) and maximum dose(s). Options for dispensing should also benegotiated. They may include: Pharmacy dispensing Drug clinicdispensing Home delivery for long-term illness or palliativecare. Safe injecting spaces ("shooting rooms") in areaswith a high concentration of drug injectors, especially those whoare homeless. The system should be costed at a reasonable feeto the consumer. Services to clients on low incomes should bedelivered through the public health system. Operating costs willbe supplemented by some of the revenues from the ODR. It would remain illegal to import or exportheroin and opioids. Amphetamine It would be legal to consume amphetamine and topossess small quantities (2 grams) for personal use. It would remain illegal to manufacture, supplyor traffic in currently amphetamine except as follows: Amphetamine would be manufactured under licenceto a State Government Office of Drug Revenue (ODR) and sold inpharmacies to people over the age of 18. Prices of these productswould be set so that they are much higher than cannabis products.Sales of amphetamine would be in small quantities only (enoughfor 3-4 episodes of intoxication). Taxes on sales would be usedto fund treatment and education programs and to subsidise thatprescription program. By prescription. The pharmacy sales of amphetamine would beregulated by officers of the ODR, not by the police. The retail system would be accompanied by aneducation, information and referral system. A general educationcampaign would be carried out to provide the rationale for thissystem and to explain its workings. Profits earned from the commercial manufactureor supply of amphetamine would be taxed. Realistic education materials would beavailable in a range of formats to amphetamine buyers. There would be no advertising or marketing ofamphetamine except for strictly limited brand identification. Commercial suppliers would be required to labeltheir products with consumer information concerning weight,recommended dosage, and approved health warnings. It would remain illegal to import or exportamphetamine. It would remain an offence to drive while underthe influence of amphetamine. Training would also be provided to pharmacistsin early identification of amphetamine-related problems,assessment of these problems, and referral for assistance viaprescribed amphetamine, drug treatment or other help asnegotiated with the consumer. Part of this training would be inobtaining information from new buyers about their level ofknowledge of stimulant use, and ensuring that new buyersespecially have access to appropriate education materials. The prescription system should be establishedfor registered "dependents" (people who are or whobelieve they are dependent on a drug). Such a system should havethe same essential elements as the opioid prescribing systemdescribed above. Ecstasy It would be legal to consume ecstasy and topossess up to 2 grams or 10 tablets. Ecstasy may be manufactured and sold underlicence in pharmacies to people over the age of 18. Licences tomanufacturers, distributors and pharmacists would be issued by aState Government Office of Drug Revenue (ODR). Pharmacists licensed to sell ecstasy would berequired to complete suitable training in the pharmacologicaleffects of MDMA. Part of this training would in obtaininginformation from new buyers about their level of knowledge ofecstasy use, and ensuring that new buyers especially have accessto appropriate education materials. Commercial suppliers would be required to labeltheir products with consumer information concerning ingredients,recommended dosage, and approved health warnings. Ecstasy shouldbe manufactured for sale in standardised doses. Profits earned from the commercial manufactureor supply of ecstasy would be taxed. Rave parties would be allowed subject topromoters obtaining a licence. To qualify for a licence,promoters must demonstrate that arrangements have been made toprovide adequate supplies of free water, chill out rooms, andother appropriate health measures. [If a significant black marketpersists, it may be necessary to have a pharmacologist on-site toanalyse tablets and powders on the request of patrons.] Health information should be made available inappropriate formats at places where ecstasy use is predictable(eg raves). This information would include advice to drinkadequate water and to rest and cool down regularly. It would remain an offence to drive while underthe influence of ecstasy. It would remain illegal to import or exportecstasy. Anabolic Steroids Steroids represent a separate and differentphenomenon of drug use to traditional psychoactive drugs. Therelationship between effect desired and effect obtained isspecific, and has less to do with the social and environmentalcontext of drug use. A harm reduction approach to steroid usewould include medical supervision of training and diet, as wellas psychological and physical monitoring (such as testing forliver and kidney function). It would be legal to use or possess smallquantities of anabolic steroids, provided the user holds acurrent prescription from a medical practitioner authorisingtheir use. Prescriptions may be issued for a maximumsingle period of one month. Prescriptions could be renewed onlyafter consultation with the prescriber. Training in the physical and psychologicaleffects of steroid use would be provided to those medicalpractitioners who wish to be steroid prescribers. Commercial suppliers would be required to labeltheir products with consumer information concerning ingredients,recommended dosage, and approved health warnings. Education campaigns should be undertaken aimedat encouraging steroid users to moderate the quantities anddosages used, and to use steroids only under medical supervision. Research should continue into the physical andpsychological effects of use of anabolic steroids, especiallylong term use. The results of this research should be promotedwidely among steroid users. Sporting organisations would be able tocontinue to ban steroid users from competition, and to testcompetitors for steroid use. It would remain illegal to import or exportanabolic steroids. Contents | Feedback | Search DRCNet Library | Schaffer Library | Major Studies | BeyondProhibitionWT02-B02-43IA031-000655-B037-36http://206.61.184.43:80/schaffer/Library/studies/redfern/rf5.htm 206.61.184.43 19970122112212 text/html 9035HTTP/1.0 200 OKDate: Wednesday, 22-Jan-97 11:22:04 GMTServer: WebSitePro/1.1f (S/N wpo-0deb)Allow-ranges: bytesContent-type: text/htmlLast-modified: Sunday, 19-Jan-97 10:55:14 GMTContent-length: 8820 5. Comments on the Harm Reduction Model Contents | Feedback | Search DRCNet Library | Schaffer Library | Major Studies | BeyondProhibition Beyond Prohibition Report of the Redfern Legal Centre DrugLaw Reform Project September 1996 5 Comments on the Harm Reduction Model Respondents were asked to comment in broadterms about the desirability of controlled availability, andabout the Principles for Controlled Availability outlined in thepaper. Responses were received from the same groupunder the same conditions outlined in Chapter 3. General remarks General comments on the Model included: "I would argue that we need to examinespecific regulatory options in terms of their potential for harmminimisation and, in particular, to assess the relationshipbetween drug-related harm and particular forms of markets andsystems of distribution. As Nicholas Dorn and Nigel South haverecently suggested in the UK context, we need to ask: 'What sortof markets do we least dislike, and how can we adjust the controlmix so as to push markets in the least undesired (harmful)direction." "Some of the specific goals proposed forrational drug policy have still to be tested. The means ofimplementing controls on age, advertising and marketing, andadequate knowledge about safe use are unknown. There shouldcertainly be a framework of treatment for drug related problems.The prescription system is untested, as is the assessmentprocess." "I wish to endorse (the Model's) contents,especially the point that prohibition has had no positiveresults. I am not competent to suggest any amendments except toadd that I was a registered nurse for about thirty-fiveyears." "Unfortunately, the (Model) goes muchfurther than the harm minimisation principles of the NationalDrug Strategy, to the point of having few controls onavailability at all." "In general, harm reduction strategiespresuppose the impossibility of addressing the undesirablebehaviour and hence direct attention to the consequences. What isnot clear, in my mind, is how we define the I undesirablebehaviour' with which we are dealing. In other words, is drug usea cause or result of other social or behavioural problems?" Controlled availability Should we adopt a "controlledavailability" approach in the long term as the best policydirection for currently illicit drugs? Fourteen were in favour of the concept ofcontrolled availability as outlined in the paper, six wereagainst. Comments: "Supported, because it's sensible." "(Controlled availability) is needed asthe next step in harm minimisation." "We need education about drug effects, andresearch too. Controlled availability provides a means both ofgenerating data and of informing users." "Sends the wrong message to youngpeople." "Supported, provided that: it isresearched for each drug group research is open and rigorous onlymove to next group if research is favourable" "Controlled availability as defined seemsmore like 'uncontrolled availability' when over-the-counteroptions are included. All drugs with a medical purpose that canhelp people with an addiction problem should be available onprescription, but not over-the-counter." "Can't answer for all drugs at this stage.Support idea for cannabis." "I am unconvinced as to the merits of a'blanket' approach to controlled availability. More convinced asto the merits of controlled availability of cannabis, perhapsecstasy, and favour prescribing system for heroin." Internal consistency Is the Harm Reduction Model of Controlled DrugAvailability internally coherent? For example, are the principlesconsistent with the stated goals? Seventeen said yes, four said no. Comments: "Good effort in putting all this together... the way you've done it contains a lot of common sense." "I don't think the mechanisms ofcontrolled availability have been spelt out in enough detail tomake a judgment about harm minimisation for all drugs." "They're the best considered proposalsI've yet seen coming from an Australian source ... May theseproposals enjoy wide readership." "Raises all the right questions which needto be addressed. The current system needs to be challenged." "The document could be strengthened bydescribing the pros and cons of each method of delivery (Eg,prescription and over the counter)." Principles Do you broadly support the Principles ofControlled Availability set out in the Harm Reduction Model ofrug Availability? Eighteen were in favour, five were opposed. Comments: "The closest to the mark we've seen sofar." "It is this kind of extremism that offersopponents of harm minimisation strategies a platform from whichto jump." "You should be congratulated for doing theexercise. By being specific about details, you give everybody achance to tear it apart. But that is positive." "We congratulate the Drug Law ReformProject on the production of such a positive and practical Model,one that if fully and successfully implemented by governments andother decision makers, would most certainly contribute to asubstantial reduction of hepatitis C transmission. We lookforward to hearing of progress on its implementation." Contents | Feedback | Search DRCNet Library | Schaffer Library | Major Studies | BeyondProhibitionWT02-B02-44IA031-000655-B037-61http://206.61.184.43:80/schaffer/Library/studies/redfern/rf6.htm 206.61.184.43 19970122112226 text/html 8918HTTP/1.0 200 OKDate: Wednesday, 22-Jan-97 11:22:17 GMTServer: WebSitePro/1.1f (S/N wpo-0deb)Allow-ranges: bytesContent-type: text/htmlLast-modified: Sunday, 19-Jan-97 10:55:18 GMTContent-length: 8703 6. Future Drug Law Reform Activities Contents | Feedback | Search DRCNet Library | Schaffer Library | Major Studies | BeyondProhibition Beyond Prohibition Report of the Redfern Legal Centre DrugLaw Reform Project September 1996 6. Future drug law reform activities Future -activities for the Redfern Drug LawReform Project are -likely to include closer links to othercommittees and organisations working on drug law reform in NewSouth Wales. These groups are growing in number and diversity andinclude in their members the parents, siblings and friends ofpeople who have died from overdose, AIDS or other drug-relatedcauses, doctors, lawyers, professors and emeritus professors ofmedicine and pharmacology, drug users, health care workers,clerks, needle exchange workers, historians and artists. In turn, these NSW groups are working closelywith groups in other States and with the Australian Drug LawReform Foundation to address issues of drug policy and relatedlaw reform in every jurisdiction in Australia. The documentscontained in this report will be examined again next year to seewhether further changes and refinements are needed. Anotherreport of people's comments on the documents will also bereleased at some point in 1997. Individuals and organisations are invited toendorse, abuse or otherwise comment on the documents and to sendthese comments to: Drug Law Reform Project Redfern Legal Centre 73 Pitt St Redfern 2016 New South Wales Australia Fax: 61-2-9310-3586 Acknowledgments The main author of this report was Steve Bolt,who served as project officer from mid-1994 until August 1996.Dave Burrows, was the main author of the Harm Reduction Model ofControlled Drug Availability, and assisted Steve in finalisingthis report and preparing it for publication. Timothy Mooreassisted in writing the report and Harriet Grahame of RedfernLegal Centre carried out crucial work in facilitating manyaspects of the Project. Members of the Redfern Legal CentreManagement Committee assisted the Project in many ways from itsinitial funding to monitoring its activities, providinginstitutional support and attending Project committee meetings.Thanks also go to the many people who provided comments for thisreport, and to the many people who participated in the Projectcommittee over the past two years. Appendix 1 Comments were sought from the followingorganisations/individuals (asterisk means a response wasreceived). Where individuals are identified, they spoke asindividuals and not necessarily as representing theirorganisations: Hepatitis C Council of NSW* AIDS Council of NSW* Australian Federation of AIDS Organisations* NSW Users and AIDS Association Australian IV League* HEMP Nimbin* National Drug and Alcohol Research Centre: Dr Lisa Maher* Professor Wayne Hall Paul Dillon Dr Shane Darke Centre for Education and Information on Drugsand Alcohol: Meriel Schultz* We Help Ourselves Garth Popple* Odyssey House* NSW Law Society NSW Bar Association* Lawyers Reform Association Australian Medical Association* Doctors Reform Society Pharmacy Guild of Australia NSW Police Service Supt Frank Hansen Chief Supt Mal Brammer Lory Price* Police Association of NSW Greg Chilvers* Justice Action David Heilpern, solicitor Don Weatherburn* David McDonald* Peter Homel Dr Alex Wodak* Dr Nick Crofts Mike Lodge Owen Westcott Frank Quinlan Corrections Health Service Dr Peter B Paisle * Australian Drug Foundation Bill Stronach* University of NSW School of Community Medicine Professor Peter Baume* University of NSW Graduate School of Management Dr Robert Marks Macquarie University, School of Drug DependenceStudies John Howard* Professor Bill Saunders National Centre for Research into thePrevention of Drug Abuse Dr Wendy Loxley* Salvation Army Major Brian Watters* Ken Marslew* Angela and Tony Wood* United Nations Association* South Sydney Community Aid Cabramatta Community Centre Aboriginal Medical Service Youth Advocacy and Policy Association Parents and Citizens Federation Local Government Association Catholic Church* Uniting Church* Anglican Church* NSW Ambulance Service NSW Ambulance Officers Association Contents | Feedback | Search DRCNet Library | Schaffer Library | Major Studies | BeyondProhibitionWT02-B02-45IA086-000614-B042-150http://206.61.184.43:80/schaffer/Library/studies/lag/compare.htm 206.61.184.43 19970122020422 text/html 17806HTTP/1.0 200 OKDate: Wednesday, 22-Jan-97 02:04:14 GMTServer: WebSitePro/1.1f (S/N wpo-0deb)Allow-ranges: bytesContent-type: text/htmlLast-modified: Saturday, 28-Dec-96 07:02:41 GMTContent-length: 17588 La Guardia Committee Report - Comparison Between Users andNon-Users Contents | Feedback | Search DRCNet Library | Schaffer Library | Major Studies | LaGuardiaCommittee Report LaGuardia Committee Report on Marihuana Comparison Between Users and Non-Users from the Standpoint ofMental and Physical Deterioration A careful testing of the motor and sensory functions of thenervous system was included in the general physical examinationof each subject. Of motor functions, reflex activity and muscularresponse and coordination were determined; of sensory functions,perception of touch, pain and temperature stimuli; of specializedfunctions, taste, hearing and vision. In the eye, the corneal andlight reflexes were tested and a retinal examination was made. Inthis neurological examination no pathological conditions werefound in any of the subjects. In the psychiatric examination attention was paid to generalintelligence and knowledge in relation to the subject'sbackground, to relevancy of talk in conversation, to orientationas to time, place and situation, to memory of past and recentevents, to ability in simple arithmetic, to judgment in reachingdecisions, and to the presence of abnormal mental content shownby delusions, hallucinations, obsessions, and ideas ofpersecution. There was no evidence of disordered cerebralfunctioning in any of the group. As would be expected, differences in grades of intelligenceand in orderliness in thinking and reasoning were noticeable. TheBellevue Adult Intelligence Test was administered to a total of60 male subjects, 40 marihuana users and 20 nonusers. The averageI.Q. for the user group was 96.7, range 70 to 124, and for thenon-user group the average I.Q. was 104.5, range 93 to 114. Bothgroups may therefore be classified as of average intelligence. When analyzed according to racial distribution the two groupswere even better equated intellectually than the total resultsindicate. For the 28 white subjects examined (13 users and 15non-users) the average I.Q. for the users was 106.1 range 77 to124, and for the non-users the average I.Q. was 106.3, range 96to 114. There were 24 Negro subjects, 19 users and 5 non-users.The average I.Q. for the users was 92.6, range 70 to 112, whilefor the non-users the average I.Q. was 98.8, range 93 to 101.Although the non-users averaged 6.2 points higher than the users,it must be taken into account that the number of Negro non-userstested was small. In any event, the disparity in results wouldnot be considered significant.. The average I.Q. of the 2 PuertoRican users was 91.0, range 72 to 100. Reports on mental deterioration due to toxic, organic orpsychotic factors as given in the literature reveal that in suchcases the individual scores on the Bellevue Adult IntelligenceTest show marked irregularity, depending upon the functionsinvolved in the deteriorative process. As a group, the marihuanausers tested in this study showed very even functioning, and whatlittle irregularity occurred can be explained on the basis oflanguage and racial factors. The physical and psychiatric examinations were of aqualitative rather than a quantitative nature. In the specialexaminations and tests of organ and system function, quantitativemeasurements were obtained for 17 marihuana users. These subjectswere selected for the reason that they had smoked marihuana forthe longest period of time. The figures for years of usage andnumber of cigarettes smoked daily were taken from each subject'sstatement. Marihuana users accustomed to daily smoking for a period offrom two and a half to sixteen years showed no abnormal systemfunctioning which would differentiate them from the non-users. There is definite evidence in this study that the marihuanausers were not inferior in intelligence to the general populationand that they had suffered no mental or physical deterioration asa result of their use of the drug. Addiction and Tolerance A drug addiction is characterized by a compelling urge to usethe drug for the prevention or relief of distressing mental andphysical disturbances which occur when the necessary dose isdelayed or omitted. A drug habit is also characterized by an urgeto use the drug, but this is not compelling. The abstinencesymptoms, which are expressions of nervous states, are notparticularly distressing and do not occur as long as the person'sattention is placed on other matters. Drug tolerance in the narrower sense used here means thatlarger doses than those originally used are required to bringabout the effects desired by the subject. In the case ofmorphine, tolerance develops because of addiction, but in otherinstances tolerance may be present without addiction andaddiction without tolerance. When both are present the mattertakes on greater importance because of the extremes to which theaddict goes to obtain the drug constantly and in increasingquantities. As our group of subjects included 48 users of marihuana,opportunity was afforded for some conclusions concerningmarihuana addiction and tolerance. Practically all of our groupof users stated that they could and often did voluntarily stopthe smoking for a time without any undue disturbance from thedeprivation. In the sociologic study reported by Dr. Schoenfeldit was found that smokers had no compelling urge for marihuana.If "reefers" were not readily available there was nospecial effort made to obtain them from known sources of supply.Dr. Walter Bromberg, Psychiatrist-in-Charge, Psychiatric Clinic,Court of General Sessions in New York, states: "The factthat offenders brought up on marihuana charges do not requestmedical treatment on their incarceration (with its cessation ofdrug supply) argues for the absence of with drawal symptoms.''(1)From interviews with several hundred marihuana users he concludesthat true addiction was absent. (1) Bromberg, W. "Marihuana: a psychiatric study."J.A.MA. 113:4, 1939.=20 The evidence submitted here warrants the conclusion that asfar as New York City is concerned true addiction to marihuanadoes not occur. The evidence concerning acquired tolerance is less clear-cutTolerance develops during the periods when the drug is beingtaken and accounts for the necessity of increasing the dosage tobring about the desired effects. How long the tolerance persistsafter the drug administration is stopped has not been definitelyestablished in any instance. The statements of marihuana usage and time since stoppagegiven by eight of our subjects are summarized in Table 26. (TABLE26) On one or more of the numerous occasions on which marihuanawas administered each of these subjects received what wasconsidered a minimal effective dose. One (J.B.) was given 1 cc.,another (A.B.) 3 cc., the others 2 cc. In all instances thecustomary physical effects, conjunctival injection, dilated andsluggishly reacting pupils, tremors and ataxia, were observed.With these doses the subjects also experienced the sensationdescribed as "high." The only conclusion warranted hereis that if acquired tolerance does occur it persists for alimited period only. Further evidence, though indirect, was brought out by Dr.Shoenfeld's investigation and by personal interviews with our 48users. There is agreement in the statements that among users thesmoking of one or two cigarettes is sufficient to bring on theeffect known as "high." When this state is reached theuser will not continue smoking for fear of becoming "toohigh." When the desired effects have passed off and thesmoker has "come down," smoking one cigarette bringsthe "high" effect on again. This could not be the casehad a steadily increasing tolerance developed. The evidence available then=AD-the absence of any compellingurge to use the drug, the absence of any distressing abstinencesymptoms, the statements that no increase in dosage is requiredto repeat the desired effect in users-=ADjustifies the conclusionthat neither true addiction nor tolerance is found in marihuanausers. The continuation and the frequency of usage of marihuana,as in the case of many other habit-forming substances, depend onthe easily controlled desires for its pleasurable effects.Possible Therapeutic Applications If a drug has well-marked pharmacological actions and lowtoxicity, as appears to be the case with marihuana, aconsideration of special interest is its possible therapeuticapplication. In the older clinical literature marihuana wasrecommended for use in a wide variety of disorders, but in recentyears it has almost disappeared from the materia medica and itwas dropped from the United States Pharmacopeia twenty years ago. In view of the laboratory and clinical findings obtained inthis study the question of the therapeutic possibilities of thedrug was considered. Marihuana possesses two qualities whichsuggest that it might have useful actions in man. The first isthe typical euphoria- producing action which might be applicablein the treatment of various types of mental depression- thesecond is the rather unique property which results in thestimulation of appetite. In the light of this evidence and inview of the fact that there is a lack of any substantialindication of dependence on the drug, it was reasoned thatmarihuana might be useful in alleviating the withdrawal symptomsin drug addicts. At the Riker's Island Penitentiary observations were made on56 inmates who were addicted to morphine or heroin. Two groupswere selected, the addicts in each being matched with those inthe other group as to age, physical condition, duration andintensity of habit, and number of previous attempts at cure. Thesubjects in one group received no treatment or were givenMagendie's solution according to the usual hospital regimen whilethose in the other group were treated with 15 mg. oftetrahydrocannabinol three times daily with or without placebo(subcutaneous water injection). An attempt was made to evaluatethe severity of the withdrawal signs and symptoms. The impressionwas gained that those who received tetrahydrocannabinol had lesssevere withdrawal symptoms and left the hospital at the end ofthe treatment period in better condition than those who receivedno treatment or who were treated with Magendie's solution. Theones in the former group maintained their appetite and in somecases actually gained weight during the withdrawal period. Since psychological factors play a large part in thewithdrawal symptoms of at least a certain proportion of morphineaddicts, there are grounds for the assumption that a drug havingthe properties of marihuana might be of aid in alleviating mentaldistress during the withdrawal period. However, the studies heredescribed were not sufficiently complete to establish the valueof such treatment, and before conclusions can be drawn theproblem must be investigated under completely controlledconditions. PHARMACOLOGICAL STUDY (1) S. Loewe, MD (2) (1) Fromthe Department of Pharrnacology, CorneU University MedicalCollege. (2) Part of the experimental work here reported wasconducted in collaboration with W. Modell SUMMARY 1. This review of the pharmacology of marihuana is centeredaround the chemical and pharmacological identification of theactive principles of hemp. Coordination of chemical andpharmacological investigations as a prerequisite to success inthe search for unknown principles and of the analysis of thestructure-activity relationship of these compounds is discussed. 2. In a survey of the sources of preparations with marihuanaactivity, hemp seeds are disclosed as a heretofore unknown sourceof active substances. 3. Varieties of hemp can be distinguished according togenotypic differences of the content of active principles whichpersist over generations independently of soil and climate. 4. The pharmacological actions of marihuana are analyzed withregard to their specificity and their usefulness as indicators ofspecific components. 5. Sixty-five substances from the new class of cannabinols andrelated classes are reviewed, among which are the essentialcomponents of the marihuana-active hemp oils. The discovery ofthis class, the synthesis of these representatives, and theirstructural elucidation led the way to the discovery of the activesubstances. 6. Quantitative assay procedures are described for the mostimportant marihuana effects that are observed in the animalexperiment. The assay of the ataxia effect in the dog and of thesynergistic hypnotic effect in the mouse with refined proceduresare shown to be reliable expedients for measuring these twomarihuana actions, whereas the areflexia effect in rabbits failedto show the reproducibility required for quantitative purposes. 7. With the aid of these methods the naturaltetrahydrocannabinols are shown to be active principlesresponsible for ataxia in dogs and psychic action in man. Theyare intermediate products between the two ineffective substanceswhich compose the bulk of hemp oil: a labile excretion product ofthe plant, cannabidiol, and a stable end- product, cannabinol.The conversion of cannabidol into active tetrahydrocannabinol bya natural environmental influence has been paralleled byultraviolet irradiation in vitro. 8. Numerous isomers, homologs and analogs of tetra- andhexahydrocannabinol are shown to possess the specific marihuanaaction. The potency varies enormously and is highest in natural,optically active=ADlaevogyrous=ADtetrahydrocannabinols. 9. The significance of many of the structural details of thetetrahydrocannabinol molecule for marihuana activity iselucidated by quantitative determinations of relative potency.Special attention was devoted to a study of the importance ofvariations in the length of the 3- alkyl side chain oftetrahydrocannabinols. In studying methyl to nonyl homologs ofthe original amyl derivative occurring in nature, it was foundthat the maximum potency is not at the amyl, but at the hexylhomolog, and in two out of four homologous series at therepresentatives with still longer side chains. 10. In addition to the ataxia and the psychic action, otherpharmacological attributes of the tetrahydrocannabinols are adecrease in the respiratory and an increase in the pulse rates inthe non-narcotized dog. 11. The synergistic hypnotic action of marihuana in the mouseis to be attributed to the otherwise inert cannabidiol. 12. The corneal areflexia action in the rabbit was muchstronger in impure distillate oils than in pure tetrahydrocannabinols, which leads to the conclusion that this action iseither poorly reproducible or must be attributed to a different,as yet unknown, principle. 13. Only one among the numerous cannabinol derivatives, 7-methyltetrahydrocannabinol, was found to produce a motorstimulant=AD-convulsant=AD-action concomitant with ataxia action.A cannabidiol derivative, tetrahydrocannabidiol, was found tohave specific convulsant action in the dog. A central stimulant (benzedrine) considerably increased the ataxia action of marihuana, whereas a hypnotic (amytal) had no influence. Contents | Feedback | Search DRCNet Library | Schaffer Library | Major Studies | LaGuardiaCommittee Report WT02-B02-46IA086-000614-B049-73http://206.61.184.43:80/schaffer/Library/studies/aus/can_exe.htm 206.61.184.43 19970122023526 text/html 35700HTTP/1.0 200 OKDate: Wednesday, 22-Jan-97 02:35:16 GMTServer: WebSitePro/1.1f (S/N wpo-0deb)Allow-ranges: bytesContent-type: text/htmlLast-modified: Saturday, 28-Dec-96 07:16:11 GMTContent-length: 35482 Legislative options for cannabis use in Australia:Executive summary Contents | Feedback | Search DRCNet Library | Schaffer Library | Major Studies | LegislativeOptions for Cannabis Legislative Options for Cannabis Use in Australia Executive summary Chapter 1: Introduction This paper is concerned with the legislative options availablefor cannabis, and the impact of those options on the community atlarge and on the law enforcement sector. It has been prepared bythe Australian Institute of Criminology at the request of theNational Task Force on Cannabis; the Task Force plans to use thispaper in developing its recommendations to the National DrugStrategy Committee. This paper, along with other commissionedTask Force papers, may in future be used to inform thedevelopment of a national policy on cannabis. Chapter 2: Policy goals Given the importance which is assigned to setting clear goalsfor any major social policy, it is surprising how infrequentlydiscussion of drug policy is preceded by a precise specificationof what the policy is intended to achieve. Too often, goals areeither global (e.g. to reduce drug use) or unattainable (e.g. toeliminate drug use), and as such they allow for manyinterpretations. Similarly, goals are often stated in such a waythat they could be achieved through a number of quitecontradictory strategies and at vastly differing costs. This report starts from the proposition that it is importantto know what are the requirements for rational drug policy ingeneral, and what are the objectives of cannabis policyspecifically. In this context, it is important to address theissue of drug policy, as well as drug legislation. The linkbetween policy, legislation and implementation is important andmust be factored into these considerations. The development ofpolicy and legislation relating to cannabis should take intoaccount the following issues: Arguments that apply to the most appropriate control regime for one drug need not " and often do not" apply to others. Drug policy should be crafted to take account of the different patterns and types of harms caused by specific drugs. The details of control regimes are crucial determinants of their outcomes. Such details should not be left undefined. Any analysis of control regimes should attempt to estimate their effects on both consumption levels and patterns of use. Control regimes should not be considered in isolation from the problems of implementation and enforcement. Arguments about the consequences of drug use should be separated from arguments about morals. Options should be evaluated on the basis of evidence of damage. Any policy should recognise the changing nature of the drug problem and be able to change with it. Additionally, all policies should be reviewed periodically to ensure that they are still relevant to current circumstances. Policy should be made in the light of the costs of control as well as the benefits. The goals of drug policy should be realistic. Discussion of policy options should include a specification of which harms they are intended to reduce. Discussion of cannabis policy (and drug policy generally) should recognise the existence of multiple and sometimes contradictory goals. Policies to discourage cannabis use should be shown to be effective or be changed. The harms caused by the control regimes themselves should not outweigh the harms prevented by them. The application of these principles in a given situationshould lead to the development of explicit policy goals relatingto cannabis. It is likely that priorities will need to beassigned between the available goals, as they are frequentlyinconsistent. Nevertheless, the explicit specification of thegoals which policy and legislation are intended to achieve isessential if they are to be properly articulated and evaluated. 3. Cannabis in context: history, lawsand international treaties Cannabis has been used for many thousands of years. It hasbeen used for the production of material products such asclothing and rope; for its medicinal properties; and for itspsychoactive properties. Cannabis was used medicinally inAustralia until the mid-1960s and is currently used in many partsof the world, in the form of hemp, for the production of cordage,clothing, etc. Australian drug laws, like those of many other countries,closely followed the development of international drug treaties.The influence of the United States of America in the conceptionand development of treaties and related international instrumentshas been enormous. The 1925 Geneva Convention on Opium and OtherDrugs was the first such convention to cover cannabis. TheConvention required the parties to limit the availability ofcannabis to medical and scientific purposes only. This remainsthe status of cannabis in the international community. Numerous enquires into drug use and trafficking have beenconducted both in Australia and overseas. Australian committeeshave generally been very cautious about recommending changes tothe legal status of drugs. Nevertheless, a number of high levelAustralian committees of inquiry have recommended theliberalisation of legislation relating to cannabis, or at leastthat such liberalisation be carefully considered. The most recentof these at the national level was the Parliamentary JointCommittee on the National Crime Authority which reported in 1989,and at the State/Territory level, the Australian CapitalTerritory Legislative Assembly's Select Committee on HIV, IllegalDrugs and Prostitution, which reported in 1991. In the main, cannabis was little known or used in Australiauntil the 1960s. Nevertheless, the drugs legislation which wasintroduced in most of the States and Territories towards the endof the 1800s and early 1900s (primarily concerned with thesmoking of opium by Chinese people) provided a framework for theprohibition of cannabis. The first Australian controls oncannabis use were introduced in Victoria in 1928 legislationwhich penalised the unauthorised use of Indian hemp and resin.This was followed by corresponding legislation in the otherjurisdictions as the years passed. From the 1960s, however, theCommonwealth has become increasingly involved in legislationrelating to cannabis (particularly with regard to itsimportation). The penalties relating to cannabis cultivation,possession and use were generally quite severe during the 1960sand 1970s but have tended to lessen since then in mostjurisdictions, at least with regard to the minor offences of useand possession of small quantities. Perhaps the most significant recent legislative changes havebeen the introduction in 1987 in South Australia and in 1992 inthe Australian Capital Territory of expiation notice schemes.Under these schemes, a person found committing a minor offencerelating to cannabis is given what amounts to an"on-the-spot" notice. If the prescribed penalty is paidwithin the prescribed time then no court appearance is requiredand no conviction is entered. If the person receiving theexpiation notice fails to respond to it, however, normal courtprocesses follow. People considering the legal status of drugs and thepossibility of legislative change need to be cognisant ofAustralia's international treaty obligations. Although somedifference of opinion exists with regard to the range oflegislative options for cannabis which are available to Australiawithin the scope of the international treaties, it is clear thatthe policy of total prohibition currently followed by most Statesand Territories is only one of a number of options which areavailable. Chapter 4: Five legislative options forcannabis in Australia Many legislative options are available for cannabis, and muchconfusion exists in the terminology used to describe them. In ourview, the South Australian Royal Commission into the Non-MedicalUse of Drugs (the Sackville Commission) which reported in 1978provided the most useful categorisation of these options. Thelanguage used avoids the terms 'decriminalisation' and'legalisation' as these expressions have quite different meaningsfor different authorities. The five options discussed belowcapture all the approaches which people have in mind when theyrefer to 'decriminalisation' and 'legalisation', as well as otheroptions which these two words may or may not encompass. Theoptions are total prohibition (with and without an administrativeexpediency principle), prohibition with civil penalties for minoroffences, partial prohibition, regulation and free availability. Under the system of total prohibition the use, possession,cultivation, importation, sale and distribution of any amount ofcannabis are treated as criminal offences. Total prohibition cantake a number of forms. In the United States, for example, theeradication of all illicit drug use is a central aim of drugpolicy and it is thought that total prohibition is the mosteffective means of reaching this goal. Cannabis use is seen aspart of a larger drug problem and is dealt with as such. Thetotal prohibition policy, as implemented in the United States,many other countries and most of the Australian States andTerritories, has clearly not achieved its intended goal ofsubstantially reducing cannabis consumption. This is despite anincreasing amount of resources directed towards achieving thisgoal. Both the financial and social costs of law enforcementunder an active policy of total prohibition are high. The policyfails to meet a number of the crucial criteria for good drugspolicy, enunciated above. Cannabis policy has not been separatedfrom that of other drugs; arguments about the consequences ofdrug use have not been separated from arguments about morals; thegoals of the 'war on drugs' are unrealistic; it appears that theharms caused by the control regimes outweigh the harms caused bythe drug itself. The Netherlands provides an example of a quite differentapplication of the total prohibition policy from that observed inthe United States and elsewhere. In The Netherlands, legislationmakes a clear distinction between 'drugs presenting unacceptablerisks', on the one hand, and 'cannabis products', on the other.In addition, a clause in The Netherlands Code of CriminalProcedure, known as the 'Expediency Principle', states that theProsecution Office may decide whether or not to enforce certainlaws, to prosecute or to initiate criminal investigation on thebasis of whether or not such action would be 'in the publicinterest'. Using this clause, the Minister of Justice issuedguidelines in 1976 for the enforcement of drug laws and theinvestigation and prosecution of breaches of drug laws.Essentially it is these guidelines, rather than the totalprohibition legislation, that determines drug policy in TheNetherlands. According to the guidelines, dealing, possessing orproducing small amounts of cannabis do not require policeinvestigation, arrest or prosecution. A low priority is also given to the investigation andprosecution of retail dealing in cannabis, and police are onlyrequired to confront cannabis dealers when they advertisepublicly or conduct their business in a provocative manner. Thisis part of a broader government policy of 'normalisation', underwhich efforts are made not to marginalise drug users, but toensure that the harm related to their drug use is minimised andthat they are able to avail themselves of community services tothe optimum extent. Evaluative studies have shown that cannabisuse has not increased in The Netherlands since the liberalisationof its policy relating to cannabis. Indeed, levels of cannabisconsumption are far lower than those of the United States, wherethe total prohibition policy is rigorously enforced. The policyof the separation of the drug markets (i.e. separating cannabisfrom other drugs which can have more serious consequences) hasapparently been successful. In a number of ways The Netherlands'drug policy meets many of the criteria for good drug policydiscussed above. The second policy option is that of prohibition with civilpenalties. Under this option, the penalties for the possessionand cultivation of small amounts of cannabis for personal use aredealt with by civil sanctions such as paying a monetary penalty,rather than by criminal sanctions such as fines or imprisonment.Criminal sanctions still apply to the possession, cultivation anddistribution of large quantities of cannabis. The SouthAustralian Cannabis Expiation Notice Scheme, introduced in 1987,and the similar scheme introduced in the Australian CapitalTerritory in 1992 are examples of this option in practice. As mentioned above, under the South Australian and ACTsystems, minor cannabis offences such as the possession of smallquantities, cannabis consumption, or the cultivation of a smallnumber of plants are expiable offences, i.e. if the prescribedpenalty is paid within the specified period, the offender doesnot have to appear in court and avoids a criminal conviction. Ifthe penalty is not paid then the normal court appearance andpossibility of conviction ensues. The evaluations conducted to date indicate that the cannabisexpiation notice schemes go a long way towards achieving theirgoals and meeting the criteria for effective drugs policydiscussed above. This option takes account of the differentpatterns of use and harms relating to cannabis, compared withother drugs. The policy and legislative development has beenaccompanied by attention to the details of implementation, ratherthan being expressed in general terms only. It reflects anunderstanding of the patterns of harm associated with cannabis,recognising that much of the harm relates to the patterns ofenforcement of cannabis legislation, rather than to the use ofthe drug itself. The approach is realistic and the goalsattainable, focusing on minimising the negative impact on usersof cannabis-related involvement in the criminal justice system,along with producing society-wide benefits in terms of lesseningthe financial costs to the criminal justice system. The major concern associated with this approach (at least inSouth Australia where most experience has been gained) is thatthere could be a social class differential in terms of theapplication of the policy. In other words, people from lowersocioeconomic classes could be disproportionately representedamong those who fail to expiate the offence and, consequently,obtain criminal records. This concern is balanced by theobservation that, at a society-wide level, it appears that thepatterns of cannabis consumption are similar in South Australiaand the ACT to those found in the other jurisdictions whichoperate policies of total prohibition. The third legislative option is partial prohibition. This isan option which seeks to maintain controls on the production anddistribution of cannabis while at the same time avoiding thecosts of criminalising the use of the drug. Under partialprohibition, it would remain an offence to grow or deal incannabis in commercial quantities. It would not be an offence touse cannabis or to possess or grow it in quantities judgedappropriate for personal use. A number of variations are possiblewithin this broad outline. A small number of countries, forexample Spain, have followed this model. Other countries, such asItaly, have made possession and use unlawful, but not criminallypunishable. In none of these cases does it seem that an increasein cannabis use has resulted from the establishment of thislegislative approach. The partial prohibition model attempts to use legalrestrictions to discourage cannabis use by concentrating on theprohibition of the commercial cultivation and supply and on theadvertising of the availability of the product. At the same time,the model attempts to minimise the personal and social costs ofthe total prohibition policy by allowing the use and personalpossession of cannabis. It assumes, therefore, that the harmsassociated with cannabis are sufficiently serious to justify somelevel of restriction on its availability and that criminalsanctions remain an appropriate instrument to achieve thisrestriction. Since this model has not been fully implemented and evaluatedin any country, no empirically based information is available asto the likely outcomes of this model. Nevertheless, it is likelythat the main outcome would be to reduce the financial and socialcosts of having personal possession and use a criminal offence.The possibility of an increased level of use of cannabis, underthis model, has been suggested as a potential limitation on itseffectiveness. It appears, however, that this fear is unfoundedowing to such factors: as the limited role of deterrents in asituation where only a low probability of detection occurs;evidence that fear of arrest is not a significant factor inpeople's decision not to use cannabis; and evidence that reducingor eliminating penalties does not generally lead to any increasein cannabis consumption. This option meets the criteria ofeffective drugs policy to a greater extent than some of the otheroptions considered here. It separates cannabis from other(potentially more harmful) drugs. It seeks to minimise thenegative impacts of enforcement regimes. It acknowledges thecontradiction between the goals of limiting cannabis use whileminimising the negative aspects of enforcement. Finally, itsgoals are realistic and attainable. The fourth legislative option is regulation. In this approach,the production, distribution and the sale of cannabis would becontrolled to a greater or lesser extent by government agencies.Trafficking outside the regulated system would continue to be acriminal offence and attract penalties. Activities associatedwith personal use, however, would not be penalised. While no fullworking model of this option is available, cannabis control inThe Netherlands exhibits some elements of the regulatory option.While the Dutch Government does not license production,distribution or sale of cannabis, youth centres and coffee shopsselling hemp products operate openly under certain clearlydefined conditions. Examples of regulatory systems for drugsother than cannabis exist within Australia. For instance, opiumpoppies are cultivated under government licence in Tasmania. Aregulatory regime applies to the drugs tobacco, alcohol and manypharmaceutical products. The two major regulatory models for currently illicit drugsare regulated commercial sale and government monopoly. The optionexists, within this broad approach, for a range of initiatives tolimit the attractiveness of cannabis, including setting highprices through taxation and limiting the availability of theproduct. The primary rationale for the regulatory option is therecognition that the eradication of all cannabis use is anunrealistic goal and that, since cannabis use will occur, itshould occur in the safest possible environment. It recognisesthat the gateway theory of drug use (that cannabis users have anincreased likelihood of progression to more dangerous drugs as adirect result of using cannabis) is not supported by empiricalevidence. The outcomes of a regulatory policy would depend very much onthe regulatory framework established. To achieve its goals, theregime would need to be structured in such a way as to remove theincentives for the operation of a black market in cannabis. Whileconsiderable financial and social costs could be avoided by theoperation of this policy, it could entail a complex system oflicensing and monitoring which could involve high administrativecosts. These implementation details would need to be clearlyworked out to attain a satisfactory balance. A number of policy goals might be satisfied by a well-designedregulatory system. These include the separation of drug markets,a separation of arguments about the consequences of drug use fromarguments about morals, the adoption of a realistic approach todrug use and a reduction in harm. Two important factors must,however, be kept in mind. The first is the need to mould anypolicy of regulation to fit the particular drug  in this casecannabis. Secondly, regulatory policy must take into account notonly legislative frameworks but also appropriate measures ofsocial control, such as appropriate drug education andprohibitions on advertising, so that the goals of reduction ofharm can continue to be pursued. The final option discussed here is the free availability ofcannabis. Like the total prohibition option, this is an extremelegislative option. Free availability would mean the absence ofany legislative or regulatory restrictions on the substance'scultivation, importation, sale, supply by other means, possessionor use. This legislative option is not practised in any countriesat the moment but was the approach used in Australia until the1920s. It must be noted, however, that very little cannabis useoccurred up to this time. Although a strong lobby exists for the liberalisation ofcannabis legislation in Australia, few lobbyists advocate totallyfree availability. Perhaps for pragmatic reasons, at least someform of regulation is generally deemed acceptable. This reflectsconcerns about the quality of cannabis (e.g. the presence ofhealth-impairing pesticide residues), driving or operatingmachinery while intoxicated by the drug, its use by children,etc. Those who advocate totally free availability do so on thebasis of an extreme libertarian position. It is difficult to imagine the free availability option everbeing fully implemented, particularly in Australia. To do sowould require governments to abrogate all responsibility in thearea of consumer protection, to forego taxation revenue and totake no action to protect particularly vulnerable groups. Considering the position of other drugs in Australian society,it is difficult to maintain an argument for the free availabilitylegislative option. This is because governments have both theright and the responsibility to act to mitigate sources of harmto society. The culture shift in most Western nations to minimisethe harm caused by currently licit drugs, especially tobacco andalcohol, means that the free availability of cannabis is not aviable contemporary option. Chapter 5: Diversion and compulsorytreatment The terms of reference for this study include a review ofdiversion and compulsory treatment as they relate to cannabisusers. Diversion of cannabis users can take a number of forms,including pre-arrest diversion, pre-court diversion, pre-sentencediversion or post-conviction diversion. Compulsory treatment mayor may not be a feature of diversionary process, that is,compulsory treatment is sometimes mandated as a condition of thediversion of an offender or an alleged offender from the criminaljustice system, but sometimes operates independently of thatsystem. Pre-arrest diversion is essentially the discretion exercisedby police at the point of contact with an alleged offender. Inaddition to this form of diversion, a variety of more or lessformal diversionary programs are in place in Australia andoverseas. As indicated above, they operate at a range of pointsin the processing of alleged and convicted offenders and take awide variety of forms. In the Australian Capital Territory, forexample, legislation provides, as a sentencing option, thatanyone found guilty of an offence may being sent for assessmentas to whether the person is drug dependent and suitable forreferral to treatment. In these instances, an offender may bereferred to a treatment assessment panel consisting of a legalpractitioner and two others with extensive knowledge of alcoholand other drug treatment. In conjunction with the offender andrelevant treatment agency, the panel makes a recommendation tothe court which will determine the length of time the personshould spend at the treatment centre and the pattern of periodicreviews. If the person consistently fails to appear for review orfails to undertake the treatment program, a summons may be issuedand the person dealt with by the court in the normal way.Diversionary programs mandated by legislation also exist in SouthAustralia, New South Wales, Victoria and Western Australia. Themethod of operation of the diversionary programs differs fromcase-to-case. Diversionary systems in other countries illustratea further variety of options. Although only a tiny minority of cannabis users reportproblems with the drug serious enough to require treatment, it iswidely accepted that a prison sentence is an unsatisfactoryoption for many offenders with drug problems, and diversion forthe purpose of treatment is a widely used alternative, onewelcomed by judges and magistrates. Criminal justice systeminvolvement is seen as providing an opportunity to intervene indrug users' lives in order to confront them with their drugproblems and to bring them into contact with treatment agencies.In some cases, merely attending for assessment is sufficient tobring about a change in a person's attitude. While some disputeexists about the value of coercion, the fact that involuntaryclients tend to spend longer in treatment programs than dovoluntary clients frequently contributes to their exhibiting moresuccessful treatment outcomes. It should be noted, however, thatfew cannabis users need treatment for dependence on cannabis assuch. Rather, their needs are more likely to centre around theirlifestyles and psychological needs generally. A number of countries, and within Australia the State ofVictoria, have legislative provisions relating to civilcommitment for the compulsory treatment of drug users, generallypeople deemed to be drug dependent. In Victoria, for example, aperson who is dependent on alcohol and/or other drugs and who isconsidered suitable for treatment may be committed for treatmentfor a period of seven days, and at the discretion of the medicalofficer in charge of the assessment centre, for a second sevendays. Civil commitment is widely used for drug users in theUnited States. It is generally applied to people who come to theattention of the criminal justice or the health systems, and whorefuse to enter treatment voluntarily. The individual is referredfor medical examination and, on the basis of that examination,may be committed to compulsory treatment. Naturally, this raisesserious issues regarding the civil rights of the individualsinvolved, as decisions are made about their liberty withoutreferral to a court. The relevance of such programs tolegislative options for cannabis in Australia are limited, owingto the fact that very few cannabis users have problems withdependence on the drug, and there is little evidence thattreatment, as it is generally understood, has much to offercannabis users. Chapter 6: Evaluating new legislativeapproaches to cannabis The principle of evaluating new policy and legislation iswidely accepted but is less frequently observed in practice. InAustralia and most other Western nations, insufficient has beendone, especially by government agencies, to monitor and evaluatetheir national drug policies. This is the case in instances wheredrugs legislation has been developed incrementally, and alsowhere new approaches have been implemented following detailedpolicy reviews. Too often evaluation is considered relevant onlyafter a policy has been in place for some time and changes arebeing considered. To be of most value, new initiatives should bedesigned and implemented with an explicit and adequatelyresourced monitoring and evaluation component built into theinitiative from the outset. Policy evaluation is a differentprocess from program evaluation, having different goals andresearch techniques. Australia's National Drug Strategic Plan 1993-97 provides theframework within which we base our recommendations relating tomonitoring and evaluation. The plan points out that 'the overallmission of the National Drug Strategy is to minimise the harmfuleffects of drugs and drug use in Australian society'. Policiesand programs in specific areas, including cannabis, should beevaluated in a manner consistent with this national goal. Decision-making relating to legislative options for cannabisin Australia can be conducted in an ad hoc manner, but clearlythe application of more systematic policy choice models ispreferable. Two groups of such decision-making models areavailable to governments, the 'rational' and the 'incremental'approaches. A rational decision-making model is one which goesthrough logical steps to clarify the context of the legislativeinitiative, its goals, the rationales for the goals and thelikely impacts on key stakeholders. It includes a carefulanalysis of the data available to evaluate the proposed approach.The process would end in making judgments regarding theappropriateness of the goal or goals, how achievable the goalsare and, if the goals are judged to be achievable, how effective,efficient and appropriate are the implementation optionsavailable. This systematic, rational approach to policyevaluation is not often enough seen in the development of drugspolicy. Nevertheless, the National Drug Strategic Plan provides aclear framework for engaging in this type of analysis. Theinformation presented in this report, along with the researchreports prepared by other groups for the National Task Force onCannabis, provides a firm base for the making of rational policychoices. Chapter 7: Conclusion Australia's National Drug Strategy provides a policy frameworkwithin which new legislative approaches may be developed. Bothexisting and newer approaches have the possibility of bothenhancing and detracting from the achievement of the mission ofthe National Drug Strategy, that of minimising the harmfuleffects of drugs and drug use in Australian society. No best single option for cannabis legislation exists. What ismost appropriate will depend upon what goals both policy makersand the community are seeking to achieve. Our review suggeststhat two of the five legislative options discussed above areinappropriate in contemporary Australian circumstances. They arethe options which we have characterised as total prohibition andfree availability. Australia experiences more harm, we conclude,from maintaining the cannabis prohibition policy than itexperiences from the use of the drug. We also reject thelegislative option of the free availability of cannabis. Oursociety is one that accepts that governments and others have boththe right and the responsibility to intervene in diverse ways toprotect people from harm and to advance the common good. It wouldbe unreasonable, therefore, to argue that cannabis should beavailable in an uncontrolled manner. We conclude that cannabis law reform is required in thiscountry. Many options for policy, legislation and implementationprocesses exist within the broad categories of prohibition withan administrative decision that it is inexpedient to prosecutepeople for minor cannabis offences, prohibition with civilpenalties, partial prohibition and regulated availability. Webelieve, on the available evidence, that widely accepted socialgoals, well attuned to the needs of contemporary Australiansociety, will be attained through the adoption and implementationof policies which lie within these options. Appendixes Appendix 1 Appendix 2 Contents | Feedback | Search DRCNet Library | Schaffer Library | Major Studies | LegislativeOptions for Cannabis WT02-B02-47IA087-000632-B017-132http://206.61.184.43:80/schaffer/Library/studies/aus/CANNABIS.HTM 206.61.184.43 19970122091830 text/html 3356HTTP/1.0 200 OKDate: Wednesday, 22-Jan-97 09:18:24 GMTServer: WebSitePro/1.1f (S/N wpo-0deb)Allow-ranges: bytesContent-type: text/htmlLast-modified: Saturday, 28-Dec-96 07:16:01 GMTContent-length: 3139 Legislative options for cannabis use in Australia Contents | Feedback | Search DRCNet Library | Schaffer Library | Major Studies | LegislativeOptions for Cannabis Legislative options for cannabis use in Australia Commonwealth of Australia 1994 Monograph No. 26 CONTENTS Executive Summary Chapter 1: Introduction Chapter 2: Policy goals Chapter 3: Cannabis in context: history, laws and international treaties Chapter 4: Five legislative options for cannabis in Australia Chapter 5: Diversion and compulsory treatment Chapter 6: Evaluating new legislative approaches to cannabis Chapter 7: Conclusion Appendix 1. The medicinal use of cannabis Appendix 2. Industrial and horticultural uses of cannabis Appendix 3. The authors Contents | Feedback | Search DRCNet Library | Schaffer Library | Major Studies | LegislativeOptions for Cannabis WT02-B02-48IA086-000614-B049-89http://206.61.184.43:80/schaffer/Library/studies/aus/can_ch1.htm 206.61.184.43 19970122023537 text/html 5560HTTP/1.0 200 OKDate: Wednesday, 22-Jan-97 02:35:32 GMTServer: WebSitePro/1.1f (S/N wpo-0deb)Allow-ranges: bytesContent-type: text/htmlLast-modified: Saturday, 28-Dec-96 07:15:47 GMTContent-length: 5343 Australian Report on Cannabis - Chapter 1 Introduction Chapter 1. INTRODUCTION Australia's National Drug Strategy is widely acclaimed, bothin this country and internationally, as a world leader. Itfeatures a balance between action addressing the demand for andsupply of drugs. It involves a partnership between the governmentand non-government sectors. It addresses all drugs, bothcurrently licit and illicit. Above all, its overarching goal isto minimise the harmful effects of drugs and drug use inAustralian society (MCDS 1993). It does not have theimpossible-to-achieve goal of eliminating drug use nor thesimplistic approach of addressing just one class of drugs (thecurrently illicit ones), the approaches taken by some othernations. The project to which this paper contributes is part ofAustralia's National Drug Strategy. Under the auspices of the[1]Commonwealth/State Ministerial Council on Drug Strategy, aNational Task Force on Cannabis was formed, to prepare a papersummarising current knowledge about cannabis use; the paper willbe used by the Ministerial Council on Drug Strategy to assist itin developing a national statement on cannabis. As part of thisprocess, the Australian Institute of Criminology has beencommissioned by the National Task Force on Cannabis to preparethis paper addressing the legislative options available forcannabis in Australia. We have approached the project with an interdisciplinaryorientation, drawing on legal, criminal justice and socialscience perspectives. Much of the material presented is factualinformation that we believe will assist policy makers and thecommunity at large to think systematically about cannabis policyand legislation in Australia; where we have expressed ouropinions on legislative options, this has been made clear. Thepaper is structured as follows. After these introductory remarks, in [2]Chapter 2 we discussthe issue of policy goals regarding cannabis, arguing thatlegislation should not be seen independently from the policies itimplements. We seek to clarify the key issues which underpincannabis policy, focusing on the goals of those policies, sincemuch of the confusion about cannabis policy options and theireffects reflects confusion concerning the policy goals. [3] Chapter 3 places cannabis in context. A brief overview of thehistory of cannabis in Australia and elsewhere is presented. Wethen describe the legislative context of Australia's cannabispolicies: domestic legislation and international treatyobligations are discussed. [4] Chapter 4 addresses the range of legislative optionsavailable. It describes the options, discusses their rationales,presents information on the impacts of those options and reviewsthem in terms of the goals which they seek to achieve. Fivedistinct options are dealt with. At the specific request of theNational Task Force on Cannabis we include, as [5] Chapter 5, a discussion of the diversion, from the criminaljustice system, of cannabis offenders, and the related topic ofthe compulsory treatment of cannabis users. This chapter, likethe previous ones, draws upon both Australian and overseasexperience in these areas. The focus of [6] Chapter 6 is the process for evaluating legislative optionsfor cannabis. We discuss both policy evaluation and programevaluation, as they are usefully dealt with separately. [7] Chapter 7 concludes the main part of the paper. There werevisit the central issues of the preceding chapters and makerecommendations regarding the legislative options for cannabiswhich we consider most appropriate for contemporary Australia.Consistent with our consultancy brief, we do not make detailedrecommendations along these lines. Rather, being researchers andnot policy makers, the approach that we have taken is to indicatethose legislative options that we consider to be inappropriate,and to indicate the dimensions of the policy making task fordealing with the remaining options. Three appendixes (touching upon the medical andhorticultural/industrial uses of cannabis, and information aboutthe authors) are included, along with a listing of sourcematerial that the authors found particularly useful. We are conscious of the fact that this paper is one of fourbeing prepared for the National Task Force on Cannabis. Theothers address the health impacts of cannabis use, consumptionpatterns in Australia and public opinion concerning cannabis. Thefindings of the other research teams in their respective areasshould be considered concurrently with the information set out inthe following chapters. Reference Ministerial Council on DrugStrategy 1993, National Drug Strategic Plan 1993-97, AGPS,Canberra. CliffSchaffer's Home Page WT02-B02-49IA086-000614-B049-112http://206.61.184.43:80/schaffer/Library/studies/aus/can_ch2.htm 206.61.184.43 19970122023549 text/html 26067HTTP/1.0 200 OKDate: Wednesday, 22-Jan-97 02:35:41 GMTServer: WebSitePro/1.1f (S/N wpo-0deb)Allow-ranges: bytesContent-type: text/htmlLast-modified: Saturday, 28-Dec-96 07:15:43 GMTContent-length: 25849 Australian Report on Cannabis - Chapter 2 Chapter 2. POLICY GOALS Given the importance which is assigned to setting clear goalsfor any major social policy, it is surprising how infrequentlydiscussion of drug policy is preceded by a precise specificationof what the policy is intended to achieve. Too often, goals areeither global (to reduce drug use) or unattainable (to eliminatedrug use) and allow many interpretations. Similarly, goals areoften stated in such a way that they could be achieved through anumber of quite contradictory strategies and at vastly differentcosts (economic, social, and personal). Only infrequently doesthe discussion address the issue of the costs we are willing totolerate in order to achieve stated goals. Rarely is detailedconsideration given to how we might go about measuring the costs,both of drug use itself and of attempts to control it. In examining the range of potential regimes for the controlof cannabis use, it is important to have a clear idea of thecriteria against which we might evaluate their effects. Yetunambiguous and meaningful statements of the objectives ofcannabis policies are difficult to find anywhere. Most officialstatements about drug policy generally, and most discussionsabout drug control strategies, suffer from one or more of anumber of limitations. They may fail to proffer specific goals.They may state goals which are known to be unattainable. They mayfail to recognise the existence of multiple goals or, if they do,they may fail to acknowledge contradictions between them or toprovide a means for assigning priorities when the goals clash. All of these failings contribute to a policy debate whichlacks precision and intellectual rigour, and whose outcomesdepend more on rhetoric and emotion than on logical argument andempirical data. This report starts from the proposition that itis important to know what are the requirements for rational drugpolicy in general and what are the objectives of cannabis policyspecifically. Only when these issues are articulated clearly andcan be subjected to full public scrutiny can it be said that thecannabis policy debate has become a comprehensive and rationalone. The issues discussed in this chapter can be applied, withsuitable modifications as to specifics, to any area of drugpolicy. In this chapter we do not take any position on particularpolicy options. Our intention is to provide a comprehensiveframework within which any option can be evaluated. We intend in this chapter, too, to address the issue of drugpolicy, rather than drug legislation. As our discussion oflegislative options will show, similar-looking laws may havequite different implications for cost and effectiveness dependingon the way in which they are administered. In other words, thepolicy context may be more important than the legislation inunderstanding the impact of a particular approach to cannabiscontrol. For example, in both the United States and TheNetherlands it is illegal to possess and sell personal-usequantities of cannabis. The way in which the legislation isinterpreted and enforced, however, puts these two countries atdifferent ends of the cannabis policy spectrum (Wardlaw 1992). In its turn, the policy framework adopted in any particularcountry can only be understood fully if the observer is aware ofthe social and political context within which social problems areviewed, and with a knowledge of the nature and dimensions of thedrug problem in that country. Some conceptual clarificationsKleiman and Saiger (1992) suggest that discussion of options fordrug control policy should be preceded by agreement on some basicconceptual clarifications. These clarifications are intended todefine the nature of a satisfactory debate about drug controloptions. The following list is a modification and extension of Kleimanand Saiger's suggestions. Arguments that apply to the most appropriate control regime for one drug need not - and often do not apply to others. There has been considerable resistance to the idea that use of different drugs may best be controlled by different strategies. Certainly, a dominant theme in the drug control policies of many countries is that it is necessary to have consistent policies towards illicit drug use. It is argued that treating different illicit drugs differently, especially when 'differently' implies that one drug will attract less law enforcement attention or less social disapproval than another, will undermine the general authority and credibility of anti-drug messages. This approach overlooks at least one important consideration. That is that there are a number of approaches to the notion of consistency. Consistency does not necessarily imply that we have to have a monolithic approach to drug problems. We can, for example, have the goal of reducing the harm caused by illicit drug use, but can achieve that goal by a number of avenues. There is no logical reason why these avenues have to be the same for all drugs, as long as we can justify why we are treating different drugs differently, and as long as we can articulate these reasons to the public. The belief that we must maintain a rigid adherence to one set of strategies for all illicit drugs ignores the reality that we already quite successfully accept inconsistencies and contradictions in drug policy across the board. The most obvious example is the fact that we allow a number of drugs, foremost amongst which are tobacco and alcohol, to be used legally despite their causing the same types of damage against which we try to protect individuals and society by banning the use of other drugs. There is general agreement that it is the goal of policy on licit drugs to reduce the harm caused by their use. We seek to achieve this by attempting to persuade people not to take up drug use, to decrease their consumption of these drugs, or to alter their manner or pattern of use. Although the simplest way to reduce harm would be to reduce the number of people using the drugs (assuming for the argument here that remaining users continued their existing consumption levels and patterns), we do not see attempts to get others to move to less dangerous patterns of use (rather than giving up use) as undermining the message that use of drugs is not socially desirable. Rather, we recognise that the overall goal of reducing harm can be achieved by persuading some people not to take up drugs, others to discontinue their use, and yet others to moderate their use or to change to less dangerous drugs or methods of administration. Strategies aimed at moderation are not seen as undermining strategies aimed at abstinence. We simply accept that different strategies are appropriate for different groups in the community and that they can all contribute to the overall goal of harm minimisation. There is no logical reason why we cannot adopt the same approach with illicit drugs. Drug policies should be crafted to take account of the different patterns and types of harms caused by specific drugs. Attempting to impose across-the-board strategies for illicit drug control in the name of consistency (ignoring for the moment the glaring inconsistency in not treating licit drug use similarly) seems to assume that all drug problems are, in fact, equally susceptible to the same measures. We know, however, that this is not the case. Each drug has its own consumption patterns; each drug harms users and others in different ways and to different degrees; and each has its own demand patterns, supply systems and market characteristics (Kleiman & Saiger 1992). Not only do drugs differ in these ways, but the same drug may exhibit different characteristics in different geographical, socioeconomic or cultural contexts (Haaga & Reuter 1990). Accordingly, it is not logical to expect that there will be uniform solutions to drug problems. 'Consistency for the sake of it should not be able to stifle the ability of local areas, states or nations to deal with drug problems in a manner which is appropriate for their circumstances, cultural context, dimensions of the problem and so forth' (Wardlaw 1992, p154). It follows that decisions about how best to deal with problems in relation to a specific drug should be made on the basis of the circumstances surrounding use of that drug and the practical possibilities for intervening in them. The details of control regimes are crucial determinants of their outcomes. Such details should not be left undefined. Much of the confusion over what is the most appropriate regime for the control of cannabis use stems from poor definition of terms such as 'decriminalisation' and 'legalisation', and lack of specification of the details of alternative control regimes being debated. As the South Australian Royal Commission into the Non-Medical Use of Drugs ([1]South Australia 1978) commented, people use these terms in a variety of senses and are often unaware of the significant differences that exist between various methods of control that have been proposed under them. We agree with the Commission that these terms are not very helpful. The word 'decriminalisation' sounds as though it refers to the removal of cannabis control from the criminal law. In practice, however, it usually refers to changes to the law which either allow possession of specified amounts of cannabis for personal consumption or reduce the penalties for such possession to minor fines or administrative sanctions involving no criminal record. As such, decriminalisation refers to reducing penalties, rather than removing them altogether ([2]Single 1989). Under most so-called decriminalisation proposals, dealing in cannabis would remain a serious criminal offence. The term 'legalisation' presents similar difficulties. It covers proposals which would literally remove the drug from the criminal law, to those which would limit availability to adults (much as alcohol and tobacco are now regulated), to more specific proposals which would allow access through clinics or other health services only to those with established habits. Discussing 'decriminalisation' or 'legalisation' without specifying the details of the particular model being proposed is not likely to be very productive (Kleiman & Saiger 1990). No sensible discussion of any of the options can take place without specification of such details as to whom proposed changes would apply and under what circumstances, rules about advertising, place and time of consumption, whether or not the changes would apply to all preparations and forms of cannabis (or, for example, be restricted to those falling below a certain potency), and the type of regulatory arrangements which would replace the current law enforcement ones, together with details of their methods of operation and costs. 'Such details should not be dismissed as easily determined or postponed as a problem requiring future thought' (Kleiman & Saiger 1992, p225). This report will discuss policy options under the broad headings suggested by the South Australian Royal Commission into the Non-Medical Use of Drugs, i.e. the total prohibition model; the prohibition/'civil penalty' model; the partial prohibition model; the regulatory model; and the free availability model ([3]South Australia 1978). Any analysis of control regimes should attempt to estimate their effects on both consumption levels and patterns of use. A major concern about any lessening of the current controls on cannabis is that it might lead to increases in consumption. While this is a serious concern, it is not the only dimension which needs to be monitored. It is also important to estimate how patterns of consumption might change under different control options. For example, if numbers of users rose slightly, but consumption per person fell, or less dangerous forms of the drug were used, or less harmful methods of use were employed, the overall amount of harm occasioned might be reduced and the policy might be judged more successful than the status quo. Similarly, if under one option, it seemed that numbers of users might fall, but that heavier use patterns would emerge, or more potent forms of the drug would become more popular, the option might be judged less desirable, even though a decrease in numbers of users had been achieved. Control regimes should not be considered in isolation from the problems of implementation and enforcement. In attempting to predict the outcomes for users of various alternatives to the current methods of cannabis control, it is important to specify the costs and problems of regulation that would accompany them. In all options which have any political reality there remains the need to licence, to tax or to regulate to ensure that restrictions are observed on such things as sale to minors, use in conjunction with the operation of vehicles or machinery, potency levels, amounts purchased etc. The costs and practical problems of implementation should be included in any debate about control options. Arguments about consequences of drug use should be separated from arguments about morals. Much confusion has been engendered in the drug policy debate because of a failure to separate the negative consequences of drug use from moral considerations. It is quite legitimate for a community to invoke moral arguments in determining the proper course of drug policy (Wilson 1990). But it must be clear that the arguments are moral ones, not morality disguised as concern over consequences. If opposition to cannabis use is based on the view that it is illegitimate to use a drug to alter one's perception, to seek pleasure or to become intoxicated (a moral argument), then it should be clearly stated as such so that the proposition can be debated in those terms. It confuses the issue and injects unproductive emotion into the argument if that concern is disguised by reference to the harms caused by cannabis use. These need also to be debated separately. We need to know whether there would still be opposition to cannabis use on moral grounds even if we could eliminate the health costs. Options should be evaluated on the basis of evidence of damage. We should require that policies that seek to impose expensive control regimes on any drug be based on evidence of harm occasioned by use of the drug. The cost and restrictiveness of the control regime should be clearly related to the damage caused by use of the drug, and there should be empirical evidence of the type and extent of the damage. Any policy should recognise the changing nature of the drug problem and be able to change with it. Additionally, all policies should be reviewed periodically to ensure that they are still relevant to current circumstances. A major drawback to current approaches to drug policy is that they are generally poor at adapting to changes in the nature of the drug problem or to changes in our levels of knowledge and understanding of drug use processes and patterns and their interactions with different control strategies. All policies should have in-built capacity for evaluation to enable them to be adjusted in a timely manner to emerging patterns of use or changes in our understanding of the problem. Policy should be made in the light of the costs of control as well as the benefits. Discussion of any policy option should clearly identify any costs associated with it. An attempt should be made to inventory all of the direct and indirect costs associated with the option, including social costs. It is particularly important to include any unintended consequences predicted or discovered. For example, what are the substitution effects of a particular policy (does enforcement success, for example, result in fewer users or do the users turn to other, more dangerous drugs)? The goals of drug policy should be realistic. Enunciating unrealistic goals for drug policy can have a number of negative consequences. Foremost amongst these are the undermining of the credibility of the policy and the justification of extreme methods in their pursuit (Wardlaw 1992). Discussion of policy options should include a specification of which harms they are intended to reduce. Specifying the harms intended to be reduced by the overall policy and the options within it clarifies thinking about goals and provides a necessary basis for evaluation. If possible, effects should also be discussed according to the dimensions of time (short-, medium-, and long-term effects), duration (temporary or permanent), and scale (minor, moderate, or major). Discussion of cannabis policy (and drug policy generally) should recognise the existence of multiple and sometimes contradictory goals. It may be necessary to choose explicitly between goals, to assign them to a hierarchy, or to accept that different goals (and, therefore, different strategies and programs) may be appropriate for different sub-populations or areas. Examples include accepting that it is appropriate to teach established users safer methods of use while trying to discourage other groups from starting use, or police not arresting cannabis users because it is considered to impose an unwarranted burden on the court and corrections systems. Policies to discourage cannabis use should be shown to be effective or be changed. Sound social policy should be robust enough to withstand critical scrutiny. The costs of current approaches to cannabis control are considerable and their continuation should be guaranteed only if data can be provided which demonstrate their effectiveness. The same criterion should be applied to any alternative approach. The harms caused by the control regimes themselves should not outweigh the harms prevented by them. It is very difficult to measure accurately the costs both of cannabis use and of efforts to prevent it. Nevertheless, it is not good enough merely to assert that a policy is the correct one, or to fail to investigate alternatives when there is evidence of ineffectiveness (the large number of users) and cost (the cost of law enforcement, the intrusions on civil liberties, violence and corruption caused by forcing sales onto a black market, and so on). Any social policy should be reviewed when there is reason to believe that the costs of administering it outweigh the harms reduced. The goals of cannabis policy In deciding upon the appropriate model to adopt to control cannabis use, it is necessary to specify the goals of the policy, as they will constitute the criteria against which selection will be made (and against which eventual evaluation of performance will be made). The following list comprises possible goals which have been mentioned in the literature on cannabis policy. It is intended as illustrative of the range of goals which might be considered and is not a set of goals proposed by this report: to reduce the total amount of cannabis consumed; to reduce use among young people; to reduce the supply of cannabis to the market; to increase the cost of cannabis to the buyer; to increase the probability of arrest for a cannabis offence; to promote safer methods of consumption of cannabis; to limit use of cannabis to smaller amounts; to limit sales of cannabis to specialist sellers (and not to have it sold by dealers in other, more dangerous, drugs, for example); to limit progression from cannabis use to use of other drugs; to serve as a symbol of community disapproval of drug use; to limit the amount of violence in the cannabis distribution system; and to limit the substitution of other (more damaging) drugs for cannabis. This list is not intended to be comprehensive. It is merelyindicative of the range and detail which needs to be consideredwhen deciding on policy directions and on the resultinglegislation and implementation strategies. Examination of such alist makes a number of things apparent. One of these is that tomake sense of it requires the assignment of priorities.Priorities may be of two types. The first is simply to assign aranking in order of importance as judged by some definedcriteria. This is useful when attempting to assign resources todifferent parts of a total strategy. A consideration which mayalso play a part here is the impact that a particular strategy isestimated to be capable of having. The second involves decidingbetween two or more conflicting goals. Considerations here arelikely to include harms caused or prevented, as well asconsiderations such as cost and effectiveness. Laying out goalsin this fashion also alerts us to the need for high quality datafor decision-making, and to the need for sound evaluationmethodologies to be able to measure the impact of our policiesand their resulting implementation strategies. Examination of thelist above makes it immediately apparent that extensive empiricaldata are required to be able to assign priorities and measureimpacts. The list also provides a practical example of the sortsof considerations which policy makers should include in theirdeliberations as they attempt to apply the conceptual toolsdiscussed earlier in this chapter. References Haaga, J. & Reuter, P. 1990, 'The limits of the Czar'sukase: drug policy at the local level', Yale Law and PolicyReview, vol. 8, no. 1, pp36-74. Kleiman, M. & Saiger, A. 1992, 'Taxes, regulations andprohibitions: Reformulating the legalization debate', in DrugPolicy in the Americas, ed. P. Smith, Westview Press, Boulder. Kleiman, M. & Saiger, A. 1990, 'Drug legalization: theimportance of asking the right question', Hofstra Law Review,vol. 18, pp527-565. Single, E. 1989, 'The impact of marijuana decriminalization:an update', Journal of Public Health Policy, vol. 10, no. 4,pp456-466. South Australia. Royal Commission into the Non-Medical Use ofDrugs 1978, Cannabis: A Discussion Paper, South AustralianGovernment, Adelaide. Wardlaw, G. 1992, 'Discussion', in M. Bull, D. McDowell, J.Norberry, H. Strang & G. Wardlaw, Comparative Analysis ofDrug Strategy, NCADA Monograph Series No. 18, AGPS, Canberra. Wilson, J.Q. 1990, 'Drugs and crime', in Drugs and Crime:Crime and Justice: A Review of Research, vol. 13, eds M. Tonry& J.Q. Wilson, University of Chicago Press, Chicago. CliffSchaffer's Home Page