WT02-B03-1IA086-000614-B049-152http://206.61.184.43:80/schaffer/Library/studies/aus/can_ch3.htm 206.61.184.43 19970122023621 text/html 89274HTTP/1.0 200 OKDate: Wednesday, 22-Jan-97 02:35:55 GMTServer: WebSitePro/1.1f (S/N wpo-0deb)Allow-ranges: bytesContent-type: text/htmlLast-modified: Saturday, 28-Dec-96 07:15:34 GMTContent-length: 89056 Australian Cannabis report - Chapter 3 Chapter 3. CANNABIS IN CONTEXT: HISTORY, LAWS AND INTERNATIONAL TREATIES Definitions In 1978 the South Australian Royal Commission into theNon-Medical Use of Drugs issued a comprehensive discussion paperon cannabis ([1]South Australia 1978). It proposed a general anda specific definition of cannabis along the following lines.Cannabis generally refers to 'the cannabis plant and anypreparations made from the plant, including the dried leaves andflowering tops, resinous material separated from the plant andrefined oil' ([2]South Australia 1978, p.i). Like the word 'marijuana', 'cannabis' is also used to referspecifically to the 'dried preparations of the plant itself'([3]South Australia 1978, p.i). The words 'cannabis resin' and'hashish' are used when referring to the resin of the cannabisflower. Cannabis is a Latin word meaning hemp. The expressions'hemp' or 'Indian hemp' are particularly used in older documentscited in this chapter and refer to the whole of the cannabisplant. Cannabis in history From its earliest recorded uses, cannabis has been importantin commerce and warfare. Its fibrous stems have been used to maketextiles, paper, ropes and bowstrings. Cannabis has been employedas a medicine and as a psychoactive drug for social and religiouspurposes. Cannabis seeds have been used as an ingredient in themanufacture of soap, lamp oil, paint and varnish ([4]Abel 1980,p.x) and as bird seed. According to[5] Abel (1980), the earliest recorded use ofcannabis occurred in Taiwan, approximately 10,000 years ago. Italso appears to have been used in China as early as the secondcentury BC for clothing, shoes, bowstrings and for itsanaesthetic properties. In India, it is known to have beenutilised for its psychoactive properties in religious ceremoniesand was an ingredient in three preparations - bhang, ganja andcharas. Its use has been documented in Asia Minor - in Turkey -as early as 1,000 BC. Both the Greeks and Romans recorded itsefficacy as a medicine - especially for treating earache. Oneparticular example of its use in the Middle East must be detailedbecause of its influence on misconceptions about the propertiesof the drug. Between the 11th and 13th centuries AD, a sect knownas the Assassins, followers of Hasan-ibn-Sabah, dominated theMiddle East through a reign of terror. Marco Polo reported thatthe Assassins used a drug. He did not identify hashish as thisdrug and it appears, in any case, that the drug used by theAssassins was not used to rouse them to bloody deeds. However, inthe 19th century a number of European writers claimed that theword 'Assassin' was a derivation of the word 'hashish'. A linkwas thus forged and popularised associating cannabis andviolence; an association that was repeated in the 20th century inthe anti-cannabis writings of Harry Anslinger, chief of theUnited States Federal Bureau of Narcotics [6](Abel 1980). In the Middle Ages cannabis was used for its psychoactiveeffects as well as commercially. Its use as a mind-altering drugwas widespread in Egypt and seems to date from around the 13thcentury. In medieval Europe cannabis appears to have beenemployed as a folk medicine, particularly for the treatment oftoothache and rheumatism, and in childbirth. Its role inwitchcraft resulted in a Papal fiat in the 15th century whichcondemned witchcraft and the use of hemp in the satanic mass[7](Abel 1980). Its major use in Europe during the Middle Agesand into the time of the colonial expansion of the Europeanpowers was to produce ropes and cordage - especially for ships'rigging and anchor ropes. In Italy, hemp was a major crop,particularly important in establishing states such as Venice asseafaring powers. The Venetians operated a state-run hemp factoryas a way of achieving quality assurance. The historical importance of hemp is evidenced by a decreeissued by Henry VIII in 1533 that 'for every sixty acres ofarable land a farmer owned, a quarter acre was to be sown withhemp. The penalty for not doing so was to be three shillings andfour pence' [8](Abel 1980, pp72-3). Hemp cultivation was clearlya vital ingredient in enabling aspiring maritime powers toexploit the riches of the New World. However, despite the threatof penalties, the British had little success in stimulating theproduction of cannabis domestically. They were more successful intheir American colonies: 'During the 17th century Indian hemp was the basis of theAmerican Colonialists' trade and commerce, and so great was theneed to equip the British Navy that James I issued a Royal Decreeto instruct colonialists to increase their hemp production'[9](Hindmarch 1972, p254). It appears that more widespread use ofcannabis in Europe for its psychoactive effects dates from theperiod of colonial expansion. Interest in cannabis and other drugs was stimulated by thediaries and journals of travellers who described the use ofcannabis and other drugs in Africa, India and Asia Minor, and byreports from soldiers in colonial armies who experimented withcannabis while serving overseas. One of the first Westernpublications on drugs was Garcia Da Orta's Colloquies on theSimples and Drugs of India published in 1563, which described theeffects of bhang (a concoction containing cannabis). Thispublication was followed by several other books by Europeanadventurers published in the latter part of the sixteenthcentury. These works were not only important in spreadingknowledge of cannabis' psychoactive properties, but inpopularising misconceptions about the drug. For example, a widespread belief that the effects ofconsuming opium and bhang (which contained both opium andcannabis) were identical can be dated from this period. Itappears both in the works of the Dutchman John Huyghen vanLinschoten and the Portuguese Fray Sebastien. The linkage betweencannabis and violent and dangerous behaviour also dates fromaround this time - in particular, from the writings of theOrientalist Silvestre de Sacy. Colonial expansion and colonialwars also brought with them new understandings in Europe of themedical uses of cannabis. [10]Abel (1980) claims that by the 17thcentury 'the medicinal properties of the plant were fairly wellknown to the medical profession' (p116) and by 1682, cannabisseeds were listed in the New London Dispensatory as a remedy forcoughs and jaundice. In addition to increasing interest in cannabis being shown byscientists and doctors, hashish (and other drugs such as opium)became known to European students, writers and artists. InEngland, Egyptian hashish sweets such as Turkish Delight wereeaten by university students. In the 19th century, hashish wasused by the French Hashish Club which numbered among its membersTheophile Gautier, Alexandre Dumas, Victor Hugo and EugeneDelacroix. While not so popular among English writers andartists, it was used around the turn of the century by theDecadents including WB Yeats and Ernest Dawson. For French andEnglish writers, hashish, like other drugs, was taken to givethem new experiences to write about, as a plot device, and it wasemployed to enhance creativity. Another important aspect of the colonial experience in thespread of cannabis to Western Europe is seen in the work of W.B.O'Shaughnessy, an Irish doctor posted to India who is creditedwith introducing cannabis to Western medicine [11](Abel 1980).While in India he experimented with cannabis in the treatment ofa wide range of diseases including rheumatism, cholera, tetanusand epilepsy, and was enthusiastic enough about its usefulness tocommission its conversion to a form suitable for medicinal use.This extract was widely prescribed for childbirth, migraine,insomnia, coughs and the treatment of opium withdrawal [12](Abel1980). However, Western use of cannabis for medicinal purposes didnot extend much beyond the first few decades of the 20th century.The medical profession turned its attention to other drugs andother methods of administration. The science of organic chemistryenabled drugs like morphine and cocaine to be isolated, andchemical synthesis of drugs such as heroin to occur [13](Musto1991). The hypodermic syringe was invented in 1845 and enabledmore efficient administration of drugs. Morphine was isolated in1803 and unlike cannabis was water soluble and thus injectable[14](Abel 1980). Further, the growth of the pharmaceutical industry enabledthe new drugs to be mass produced, advertised and distributed[15](Musto 1991). In addition, the strength of commerciallyavailable cannabis varied considerably, and administration of thesame amounts of the drug appeared to elicit different responsesin different patients. There were reports of adverse effects inpatients [16](Manderson 1993). In contrast, drugs like morphine and later heroin wereenthusiastically embraced by doctors because they werefast-acting, and provided reliable and very effective painrelief. Some use of cannabis for medical purposes did remain.Until the late 1930s 'Parke Davis, Eli Lilly and Squibb ...marketed preparations of cannabis extract and promoted them forthe treatment of asthma, tension and pain' [17](South Australia1978, p98). Cannabis appeared as 'extractum cannabis' in theUnited States Pharmacopoeia until 1942 (Australia 1977). InAustralia, tincture of cannabis was used until the mid-1960s[18](Caswell 1992). Medical and scientific interest in cannabis has largely beendormant until recently. In the United States renewed attention isbeing given to its possible therapeutic properties, particularlyas an anti-emetic for cancer chemotherapy patients and as anagent for reducing intra-ocular pressure in glaucoma sufferers([19]Trebach & Zeese 1990). Some scientific debate is alsooccurring in Australia [20](Caswell 1992; see also [21]Appendix1). If non-medical consumption of cannabis in the 19th and early20th centuries was regarded as a problem at all, it was inrespect of its use by colonised peoples and minority groups.However, in relation to colonised peoples, the attitudes of theWestern powers were far from consistent. For example, cannabiswas widely used in India and Egypt - both subject to Britishrule. In Egypt, local officials and foreign rulers, including theTurks, attempted to suppress its use in the 19th century. TheBritish, who received no revenues from Egyptian cannabisproduction, supported these attempts. The situation was more complex in India. The Britishgovernment initially appears to have had little interest incannabis use among Indians. British complacency was no doubtlargely due to the fact that, since 1798, the government hadlicensed the manufacture and sale of hemp drugs in India andreceived considerable revenues as a result. However, pressurefrom local Indian administrators and later from their Britishcounterparts - concerned that cannabis use was contributing tocrime, illness and social unrest - finally resulted in theestablishment of the Indian Hemp Drugs Commission in 1893. TheCommission reported in 1894. Loss of revenue if cannabis were tobe banned was a factor in the Hemp Commission's conclusion thatprohibition would not be justified. Other importantconsiderations for the Commission were lack of evidence about theill effects of cannabis, the difficulties of enforcingprohibition and the important place of the drug in the religiousand social life of the sub-continent. The use of cannabis by Black Africans was largely ignored bythe colonial powers. However, South Africa had concerns aboutcannabis use among Indians brought to work in the colony. In 1870a law was passed forbidding the smoking, use or possession ofhemp by Indians. In the United States, anxiety about cannabis use wasassociated with its possession by poor ethnic groups. It appearsto have been used first by Mexican refugees fleeing into thesouth-western states from the 1910 Revolution. The earliest USlaws proscribing the use of cannabis can be found in thosestates. Cannabis use later spread to the Black population. By1937 there were prohibitions on cannabis across the country. Development of international treaties Australian drug laws, like those of many other countries,closely follow the development of international drug laws, so inthis section the growth of international drug treaties will bedescribed. These treaties are designed to control theinternational traffic in certain drugs and to encourage domesticrestrictions on their supply and use. The influence of the United States in the conception anddevelopment of these instruments has been enormous. JusticeMichael Kirby has characterised the degree of internationalcooperation brought about by the fear of drugs as 'exceptional'(1992, p312). However, fear was not the only ingredient in earlycrusading by the United States for international action. Acomplex array of factors was at work. The first international meeting on drugs was concerned withopium and, in particular, with Britain's opium trade with China.It was attended by 13 nations and held in Shanghai in 1909. Atthe Shanghai Conference the United States argued for a totalprohibition on opium, and was opposed by the United Kingdom.According to [22]Abel (1980) the background to the meeting was asfollows. In 1882 the United States Congress passed the ChineseExclusion Act. In retaliation, China prohibited the importationof American manufactured goods: Faced with the loss of thelucrative Chinese market, and aware of China's efforts toeradicate its own domestic opium problem, President TheodoreRoosevelt convened an international conference in 1909 inShanghai to help China eradicate the problem of opium addictionamong its inhabitants. By trying to impress China with itsgoodwill and concern about her drug crisis, the United Stateshoped to change China's attitude towards American goods'[23](Abel, p193). While economic factors were undoubtedly important inprecipitating US action, they were not the only considerations.Fear of social unrest, racist attitudes and moral crusading allplayed a part. In addition: Missionaries from the United Statesin China had long been publicising the source and the perniciouseffects of opium smoking among the Chinese. Given the role ofEngland in that trade, the [Indian Hemp Commission] report seemedlike a whitewash for British commercial purposes and fannedAmerican progressive opinion even further against the Europeanimperialists in Asia [24](South Australia 1979, p42). The 1909 conference did not produce an international treaty.Another international drugs conference was held in 1912. At the1912 Hague Conference some 46 nations discussed morphine,cocaine, cannabis and heroin, as well as opium. The outcome ofthe conference was the Hague Convention for the Suppression ofOpium and Other Drugs. It required the parties to 'confine tomedical and legitimate purposes the manufacture, sale and use ofopium, heroin, morphine and cocaine' [25](quoted in Manderson1993, p63) Both the United States and Italy wanted cannabisincluded in the Convention, but they were unsuccessful. The 1925 Geneva Convention on Opium and Other Drugs was amore significant document. As a result of lobbying by Egypt,Turkey and South Africa, who were supported by the United States,cannabis was included in the Convention. The Convention alsocreated an international scheme for the monitoring and control oftraffic in narcotic drugs, together with an administrative agency- the Permanent Central Opium Board. Import and export quotaswere established, as well as statistical reporting requirements.The Convention required the parties to 'enact effective laws tolimit exclusively to medical and scientific purposes themanufacture, import, sale, distribution, export and use ofcannabis in the form used for medical purposes at the time'[26](South Australia 1978, p34). Significantly, the word'legitimate' which appeared in the 1912 Hague Convention wasremoved from the 1925 Geneva Convention. Finally, the Narcotics Limitation Convention of 1931 targetedthe manufacture of narcotics and required the parties to limit itto scientific and medical purposes. Controls on licit manufacturewere seen as important, because apart from illicit imports fromabroad, leakage from the licit market was a source of illicit usein Western nations. . Inquiries into drug use and trafficking The number of inquiries into drug use and trafficking havebeen legion - both in Australia and overseas. Three commonfeatures are seen in many of them. First, many question thealleged ill effects of cannabis use. Second, some makerecommendations for law reform. Third, most inquiries have hadlittle impact on public policy or legislative change in relationto cannabis use. In Australia, for example, governments have generallypreferred to rely on law enforcement, treatment and education intheir quest to reduce drug use [27](Hartland et al. 1992). Theyhave been far less ready to embrace a philosophical shift inpolicy towards minimising the harm resulting from drug use or totackle politically sensitive issues such as cannabis law reform.As mentioned earlier, the first inquiry relating to cannabisdates from 1893 when the British administration in Indiaestablished the Indian Hemp Drugs Commission. The Commissionheard nearly 1,200 submissions, both oral and written. It had awide mandate, including the effects of cannabis use on 'the moraland social life of the people of India' [28](Abel 1980, p127).While the Commission found that excessive use of cannabis couldlead to mental disorders, immorality and susceptibility todisease, it concluded that the evidence demonstrated 'mostclearly how little injury society has hitherto sustained fromhemp drugs' [29](quoted in Abel 1980, p131). In particular, theCommission reported that moderate use had no appreciable physicalor mental effects, did not induce immoral behaviour and hadlittle connection with crime. Other major overseas inquiries that failed to discover anydependence-producing properties in cannabis, harm as aconsequence of moderate use, a strong link with crime or aprogressive effect leading inexorably to use of drugs such asheroin, cocaine or morphine were: the Panama Canal Zone Military Investigations (1916-1929); the La Guardia Committee Report 1944 - United States; the Report of the Hallucinogens Sub-Committee of the United Kingdom Advisory Committee on Drug Dependence 1968 (Wootton Report); the report of the Commission of Inquiry into the Non-Medical Use of Drugs 1972 (Le Dain Commission) - Canada; and the report of the National Commission on Marihuana and Drug Abuse 1972 (Shafer Commission) - United States. In addition, both the Le Dain and Shafer reports containedproposals for law reform. The Shafer report recommendeddecriminalisation of: possession of marijuana for personal use in private; and casual distribution in private of small amounts of marijuana for no or insignificant remuneration ([30]United States 1972, pp152-4). It also recommended that possession in public of an ounce or less of marijuana should not be an offence but should be subject to seizure [31](United States 1972, pp152-4). The Le Dain Commission recommended that simple possession offences be repealed. Other overseas investigations which failed to uncoverunequivocal evidence about the harmful effects of cannabis were astudy of the United States Institute of Mental Health entitledGanja in Jamaica (1975), and a United States government study onCosta Rica (1975). It should not be surmised, however, thatoverseas investigations have all concluded that cannabis usepresented no risks to drug users. United Nations reportspublished between 1973 and 1974 found that cannabis use waslikely to lead to dependence, and resulted in public health andsocial problems. A 1974 US Senate report on Marihuana-HashishEpidemic and its Impact on US Security reported that cannabis useresulted in brain damage, amotivational syndrome, and genetic andreproductive defects. In Australia, there have been a large number of Parliamentaryinquiries and Royal Commissions into drug use and drugtrafficking. In 1971 the Senate Select Committee on DrugTrafficking and Drug Abuse (the Marriott Committee) wasestablished. Its brief included investigation into the incidence,distribution and causes of drug use, and the adequacy oflegislation and educational programs. It concluded that penaltiesfor drug use should be commensurate with the different degrees ofharm presented by different drugs, that young, first offendersshould be treated leniently and that penalties for traffickingshould be severe. However, its recommendations were cautious:that, pending further sociological and medical research, 'presentrestrictions on the use of cannabis drugs should be retained inAustralia' (Australia 1971, p91). The Marriott Committee report was followed in 1977 by one ofthe most significant Australian inquiries into drugs. In thatyear, the Senate Standing Committee on Social Welfare (the BaumeCommittee) produced its report Drug Problems in Australia - anIntoxicated Society? which looked at the use of licit and illicitdrugs in Australia. Like other reports, before and since, itrecognised differing harms produced by different drugs andconcluded that drug use was more a social/medical problem than alegal one. It also considered the social and personal harmsflowing from the illegal status of some drugs and recommendedthat: 'legal controls [should] not [be] of such a nature as to inhibit rehabilitation of the user or to cause more social damage than use of the drug causes' (Australia 1977, p164); cannabis legislation should be enacted that 'recognises the significant differences between opiate narcotics and cannabis in their health effects and in the criminal impact on users and the community' (Australia 1977, p164); possession of marijuana for personal use should no longer be a criminal offence and should attract only a fine; penalties for possession of hashish, hashish oil and purified THC should remain at their present levels because of the potency of these drugs. Commonwealth Government response to the Baume Committeereport was both tardy and hostile. [32]Hartland (1991) quotesSenator Baume's view of that response: The Prime Minister of the day, rather than come and say I wasa fink, did something cleverer. He appointed a learnedconservative Judge to head up a Royal Commission into Drugs withterms of reference which virtually made it inevitable that thelearned Judge would bring out a report which said we need moresocial control, heavier penalties, more enforcement authorities,and don't change the laws (p63). In 1978 the New South Wales Joint Parliamentary Committeeupon Drugs handed down its Report into Drug Abuses. Its mandatewas to examine the effects, use and supply of drugs of dependencetogether with policy issues. Alcohol and tobacco were notincluded in the Committee's terms of reference. The Committeeexpressed concern about 'the growing social stress that must bearising from the fact that a great many young adults, byindulging in a drug which they see as less damaging than alcohol,run the risk not only of involvement with the criminal law, butalso have the prospect of ruined careers' [33](New South Wales1978, p76). The report and the Committee's earlier Memorandum tothe New South Wales Parliament recommended that: personal use of cannabis no longer be a criminal offence; first offenders be given bonds and probation and on successful completion of these, all records be expunged; and penalties for trafficking in cannabis be severe. The next major inquiry was the Australian Royal Commission ofInquiry into Drugs (Williams Royal Commission). Its multi-volumereport was released in 1979. Rather than considering the degreeof harm produced by different drugs, the Williams RoyalCommission took the view that cannabis was not a harmless drugbecause it produced an intoxicating effect. It concluded thatremoval of prohibitions against cannabis would depart from theintention and spirit of the Single Convention on Narcotic Drugs,have a 'domino effect' in that it would stimulate calls for therelaxation of prohibitions on other drugs, and send a signal tothe community that drug use was acceptable. The Williams Royal Commission recommended that considerationof relaxation of prohibitions on cannabis not occur for 10 years,during which time information about the drug and its use would becollected by National and State Drug Information Centres.Although the Commonwealth government set up a National DrugInformation Centre, the State and Territory centres were notestablished - making the review recommended by Williamsimpossible. Like the Baume Committee report that preceded it, the reportof the South Australian Royal Commission into the Non-Medical Useof Drugs (the Sackville Royal Commission) prompted littlegovernment response to its recommendations. In relation tocannabis, the Commission dismissed the progression theory andremarked that where cannabis users also consumed other illicitdrugs, this was due to the illegal status of cannabis itself. The Committee made wide-ranging recommendations, includingthe repeal of the offence of use or administration of drugs, andthe establishment of drug assessment and aid panels. Some of itsmost radical proposals related to cannabis and cannabis resin. Itrecommended that 'cultivation [of cannabis] for personal use, usein private and small-scale gratuitous distribution in private toadults ...[should] not be a criminal offence ... No distinction... [should] be made between cannabis and cannabis resin, butcannabis oil ... [should] remain subject to a policy of totalprohibition' ([34]South Australia 1979, p375). The Commission found no evidence to 'support the view thatcannabis [was] associated with a tendency towards aggression andviolent crime' ([35]South Australia 1979, p51). In addition, theCommission questioned some of the psychological and physiologicalill effects attributed to cannabis, such as amotivationalsyndrome and psychosis (though it concluded that there was somesmall risk of brain damage). In general, it did not dramatise thepossible adverse effects of cannabis use, recognising theexistence of equivocal research findings and insufficient data. The next major Australian inquiry which touched on cannabiswas the investigation by the Parliamentary Joint Committee on theNational Crime Authority which reported in 1989. Its terms ofreference included the scope and nature of the trade in illegaldrugs, the efficacy of law enforcement, and the costs andefficacy of prohibition. It concluded that: 'If the aim of thepolicy [of prohibition] was to reduce the use of prohibitedsubstances, or even to minimise access to them, it has clearlyfailed' (Australia 1989, p92), And it concluded that 'should thelatest initiatives fail to make any significant inroads on themarket then it would be appropriate to consider some relaxationof the present prohibitionism as an alternative policy' (p123).Before concluding this section, a number of recent inquiries intodrugs should be mentioned. In 1991 the ACT Legislative Assembly Select Committee on HIV,Illegal Drugs and Prostitution tabled its report on Marijuana andOther Illegal Drugs. The focus of the report was on the'effectiveness of the current legal and social controls on drugtaking, with particular reference to marijuana' [36](AustralianCapital Territory 1991, p1). Proceeding from a belief in harmminimisation and the view that drug use can never be completelyeliminated, the Committee recommended that: possession of up to 25g of cannabis no longer be an offence; possession of more than 25g of cannabis and less than 100g of cannabis attract a fine of $150; possession of more than 100g of cannabis should incur a penalty of $5,000 or two years imprisonment, or both; cultivation of five cannabis plants should no longer be an offence; and there should be no offence of self-administration in respect to cannabis. Another recent inquiry into illicit drugs was undertaken bythe New South Wales Legislative Council's Standing Committee onSocial Issues. However, at the date of writing, the Committee'sreport had not been completed and there have been suggestionsthat it will not be (Symonds 1992). In South Australia, aLegislative Council Select Committee on the Control and IllegalUse of Drugs of Dependence has been established. Among otherthings it has been charged with reporting on the effectiveness ofcurrent drug laws in controlling drug trafficking, the costs ofenforcing anti-trafficking laws and the social impacts ofcriminal activity flowing from illicit drug use and trafficking.In Queensland, an Advisory Committee on Illicit drugs wasestablished in the aftermath of the Fitzgerald Committee ofInquiry into Possible Illegal Activities and Associated PoliceMisconduct. The Committee made cannabis the subject of its firstdiscussion paper for a number of reasons. Among these were thefact that cannabis is the most widely used illicit drug and theillicit drug having the greatest impact on the criminal justicesystem. The Committee is now seeking submissions on 'preferredlegislative, enforcement and social responses to the issues ofcannabis use and production' [37](Queensland 1993, p3). Australian laws Before embarking on a description of the development andpresent content of Australian drug laws, it should be stated thatthe Australian Constitution contains no general power tolegislate on crime. While many Commonwealth criminal laws havebeen enacted incidental to the heads of power enumerated in theConstitution, criminal laws have largely been the province of theStates. For this reason, the focus of this section is on Stateand Territory legislation. As[38] Manderson (1993) has remarked, consumption of drugs inthe 19th century was largely a matter of personal choice. Drugs -including the opiates - were available from a wide variety ofsources including medical practitioners, pharmacists,homoeopaths, sellers of patent medicines and grocers. Unlike theopiates, however, cannabis was little known or used in theAustralia until the 1960s. There were some exceptions. Forexample, medicinal use of cannabis occurred in the 19th centuryand to a minor extent, in the 20th century. Cigares de Joy(cannabis cigarettes) were sold over the counter in Australiainto the 20th century [39](Manderson, 1993). However, according to [40]Manderson (1993) 'As late as 1938Smith's Weekly reported "the first appearance inAustralia" of "a Mexican drug that drives men and womento the wildest excesses ... distorts moral values and leads todegrading sexual extravagances"' (p72). This drug was, ofcourse, cannabis. A number of forces coalesced in the development of drug lawsin Australia. The first laws - poisons acts - specified certaindrugs required to be sold by medical practitioners or chemistsand stipulated labelling requirements [41](Carney 1981). However,these labelling requirements did not apply to drugs sold undermedical prescription, to patent medicines or to homoeopathicpreparations [42](Manderson 1993, p9). According to the Joint Parliamentary Committee (Australia1989) these early controls were instituted in response to the useof arsenic in suicides, poisonings and homicides. In 1862, SouthAustralia enacted the first Australian statute regulating thesale and use of poisons [43](Carney 1981). In 1876 New SouthWales and Victoria followed with Sale and Use of Poisons Acts.Most importantly, these early laws generally did not stipulatewho could use drugs or for what purposes [44](Fox & Mathews1992). The first laws conceptualising drugs as a problem wereenacted in the 19th century and were the product of racism andthe temperance movement [45](Carney 1981). This phase oflegislative controls on the supply and use of prohibited drugshas been characterised as involving 'the application of criminalpenalties to certain activities related to drugs, particularlythe supply of opium, which had not previously attracted legalsanctions' [46](South Australia 1978, p33). Early laws singledout opium smoking - a practice of Chinese immigrants who had cometo Australia in the mid-19th century during the Gold Rush. Therewere two targets - the Chinese themselves and the Aboriginalpeople believed to be financially and sexually exploited by theChinese who provided them with opium. In 1891 Queensland passed the Sale and Use of Poisons Actwhich proscribed the supply of opium to Aboriginal people, exceptfor medicinal purposes. Later other States enacted laws directedat opium smoking - South Australia passed the Opium Act 1895, andVictoria passed the Opium Smoking Prohibition Act 1905 and thePolice Offences (Amendment) Act 1908. The Commonwealth, by a 1905Proclamation, banned the importation of opium suitable forsmoking. While racism was a very significant force in the developmentof early Australian drug laws, other influences were also atwork. The late 19th century witnessed a movement away fromlaissez-faire attitudes towards greater interventionism and abelief in the efficacy of law in promoting social and moral goals[47](Manderson 1993). It witnessed a struggle for supremacybetween the medical professional, other health professionals andthe sellers of patent medicines. It also saw the growth of theprohibitionist movement. Prohibitionist movements were notconfined to the United States nor to alcohol - patent medicinesand tobacco were also prohibitionist targets (Manderson 1993). The second phase in the history of Australian drug lawsinvolved domestic implementation of international agreements[48](South Australia 1978). The growth of internationalconventions led an inexorable, although very gradual expansion ofAustralian drug laws to cover cannabis. Australia was not aloneas a nation in feeling the pressure to conform to theseinternational instruments. However, it was subject to additionalpressures from the British government. The United Kingdomrepresented its colonies and dominions at international meetingsand insisted that they comply with international controls.Following the 1925 Geneva Convention, the Commonwealth was thefirst government to succumb to the exhortations of the UnitedKingdom. It proscribed the import of cannabis in 1926 through theCustoms (Prohibited Imports) Proclamation and at the same timebanned the export of cannabis. Efforts to bring the States intoline were less successful. Cannabis use in Australia was not aproblem and there appears to have been little domestic agitationin support of proscription. However, while the response of theStates was slow, it was nevertheless inevitable: It was enoughthat international organisations had called for controls and thatthe calls had been heeded by the United Kingdom Parliament, whoseattitudes in this as in other matters were of paramountimportance to Commonwealth and State legislators (South Australia1978, p6). The first State controls on cannabis use were introduced inVictoria in the Poisons Act 1928, which penalised theunauthorised use of Indian hemp and resin. This was followed bythe Dangerous Drugs Act 1934 (SA), the Police Offences Amendment(Drugs) Act 1935 (NSW), the Health Act 1937 (Qld), a 1950Proclamation under the Police Offences (Drugs) Act 1928 (WA) andthe Dangerous Drugs Act 1959 (Tas). Australia's attitude to drugsand drug laws became entrenched at an early stage. Manderson(1993) has described it very clearly - lack of a domestic problem(and this particularly applied to cannabis) meant thatlegislation was accepted uncritically; no pressure groups existedto stimulate debate or mount opposition, and the absence of adrug problem meant that it was impossible to evaluate the costsand benefits of the prohibitionist model - it was simply assumedthat the model worked effectively: As the structure of modern drug laws ... took shape, eachbrick depending on those beneath it for support and validity, fewremembered or even thought to question why they had ever beenlaid. So effective had the gradual process of entrenchment beenthat alternative approaches soon became unthinkable. What countedwas the preservation of the laws already in place. If they werefailing, the answer was simple - more of the same' [49](Manderson1993, p75). The impact of drug use in the 1960s has been well-documentedand was an international phenomenon. But until this time, druguse was not viewed as a widespread social problem in Australia -rather as contained and containable. The consumption of drugssuch as morphine, pethidine, opium and heroin by dependent userswas chiefly confined in Australia to those with a dependence thatwas therapeutic in its origins or to minority groups - forexample, very old Chinese members of the community. In 1960 Australia reported to the Commission on NarcoticDrugs that some Indian hemp use was occurring in the 'theatricalworld' (quoted in Manderson 1993, p144). But during the 1960s,the nature and extent of illicit drug use - including the use ofcannabis - changed dramatically. It became more widespread, itbecame matter of choice (rather than 'necessity' throughtherapeutic dependence), it was embraced by students and youth,and it was associated with changing moral values and practices,alienation, and challenges to societal values and the politicalorder. It brought increasing numbers of otherwise law-abidingAustralians into contact with the criminal law, criminalpenalties and associated stigmatisation. The use of drugs such ascannabis and heroin came to be regarded both as a symptom ofsocial malaise and a cause of it. The third phase in the history of Australian drug lawscommenced during the 1960s. From that time 'the States beganoverhauling their drug laws and the Commonwealth became much moreactively involved in the field, both by ratifying new conventionsand by revising the provisions of the Customs Act' ([50]SouthAustralia 1978, pp35-6). In addition, in response to treatyobligations, the Commonwealth introduced new federal laws ondrugs - the Narcotic Drugs Act 1967 was the first of these. Atstate level, control of recreational drugs was gradually removedfrom poisons statutes, whose original purpose was to 'regulateand control the supply and distribution of pharmaceuticals andpoisons on public health grounds' ([51]Kirby 1992, p315), andplaced into special legislation. Drug laws and drug policies fromthis time onwards can be characterised as follows. First, a law enforcement approach became firmly entrenched atCommonwealth level with the important role played by Customs,which had no interest in any medical or public health model ofdrug use or supply. Second, penalties were increased. Third, there were changes to basic principles of criminal law- such as reversal of the onus of proof - in order to makeconvictions easier ([52]Manderson 1993). Last, there was a shift in legislative emphasis away fromdrug users to drug traffickers. Both Commonwealth and some Statelaws distinguished between traffickable quantities of drugs(including cannabis) and amounts deemed as being less thantraffickable quantities. For the most part, penalties forcultivation, production and manufacture, possession and use ofcannabis, and possession of drug paraphernalia were substantialduring the 1960s and 1970s. For example, in South Australia thepenalty was $4,000 and/or 10 years imprisonment for knowinglycultivating cannabis (s5(2)(b)) and $2,000 and/or two yearsimprisonment for knowingly being in possession, using oradministering (s5(1)). Debate about cannabis, research that showed the widespreadnature of cannabis use, alarming law enforcement statistics, thework of the early Parliamentary and other inquiries, anddifficulties in administering some drug laws, led to the firstlegislative changes in the middle to late 1970s. Thesedistinguished between simple possession of cannabis and otherdrugs. The first jurisdiction to change law enforcement practicesand then legislation was the Australian Capital Territory. Anon-enforcement policy in relation to simple cannabis possessionoffences was instituted following a number of court cases inwhich the police failed to secure convictions because the PublicHealth (Prohibited Drugs) Ordinance did not contain a definitionof cannabis. In 1975, the Ordinance was amended to include a definition ofcannabis. At the same time the maximum penalty for possession ofless than 25g of cannabis was reduced to $100. Some reforms alsooccurred in the Northern Territory. Under the Prohibited DrugsOrdinance 1977 (NT), a first offender was liable to a fine of$500; while second or third offences of possession were moreheavily penalised, imprisonment was not provided as a sanction.Further legislative change occurred in the 1980s. The Drugs,Poisons and Controlled Substances Act 1981 (Vic) containedslightly less severe penalties for cannabis trafficking than fortrafficking in other illicit drugs. The Drugs, Poisons andControlled Substances (Amendment) Act 1983 set the maximumpenalty for possession of less than 50g of cannabis at $500. Inaddition, s76 of the Act empowered magistrates to award anadjourned bond in certain circumstances in the case of an offenceof possession of up to 50g of cannabis. No conviction could berecorded in the case of a first offender. Section 76 applies onlyto cannabis, not to other drugs, and it does not apply totrafficking offences in respect of any drug. In South Australia, the Controlled Substances Act was passedin 1984. As originally formulated, the Act distinguished betweenoffences involving cannabis or cannabis resin and offencesinvolving other illicit drugs. The Act proscribed (and stillproscribes) the possession, smoking, consumption, administrationor self-administration, manufacture, sale or supply of drugs ofdependence or prohibited drugs, and the possession of drugparaphernalia. Under the 1984 Act, the penalty for possession,smoking or consumption of small quantities of cannabis orcannabis resin was a maximum of $500. For any other drug ofdependence or prohibited drug the maximum penalty was $2,000and/or two years imprisonment. Similarly, some distinctions weremade between cannabis and other drugs in respect of traffickingoffences. More significant reforms came in 1986 with theControlled Substances Act Amendment Act which provided for anexpiation notice scheme. The expiation notice scheme commencedoperation on 30 April 1987. Section 45a(2) of the Act enablesexpiation notices to be issued to adults in certain cases - forexample, when less than 100g of cannabis or less than 20g ofcannabis resin is involved. Notices can be issued in respect ofcultivation that is not for commercial purposes, for smoking orconsumption of cannabis or cannabis resin except in a public orprescribed place, and for possession of equipment used for thesmoking or consumption of cannabis or the preparation of cannabisresin. Payment of the expiation fee before the expiration of 60days from the date of the notice means that no conviction isrecorded against the alleged offender. The fees are $50 forpossession of less than 25g of cannabis and $150 for less than100g of cannabis. In the case of cannabis resin the expiationfees are $50 for possession of less than 5g and $150 for amountsranging between 5g and less than 20g of resin. Cultivation of 10plants or less incurs a fine of $150. It should be noted that atthe same time that the cannabis expiation notice system wasintroduced, amendments to the Act also substantially increasedpenalties for trafficking offences. In addition, amendments tothe Controlled Substances Act in 1990 provide severe penaltiesfor offences such as sale, supply and administration ofprohibited drugs and drugs of dependence, including cannabis, toa child. Although some jurisdictions reformed the law relating topersonal consumption of cannabis, heavier penalties wereintroduced for trafficking offences and a scale of traffickingoffences was commonly provided - for example, traffickable,indictable and commercial quantities. Manderson (1993) puts itthis way: The emphasis on Mr Big as an evil in his own right allowed aless severe approach to drug users by removing them from thecentrality of drug laws. The harsh penalties imposed on marijuanasmokers and other users of drugs could be softened withoutundermining 'the war on drugs' (p185). The focus on the Mr Bigs of the drug world has also enabledlegislatures to enact drug laws which give extensive powers ofsearch and seizure to the police, and which give considerablepowers in relation to the use of listening devices and telephonetaps. While some reforms were put in place in the 1970s and1980s, the picture that emerges nationally is an uneven one. The Drug Misuse and Trafficking Act 1985 (NSW), for example,distinguishes only between cannabis and other drugs in the caseof commercial trafficking. In the case of cannabis the maximumpenalty that can be imposed is $500,000 or 20 years imprisonment,or both. For commercial trafficking in any other drugs, a lifesentence can be imposed. In New South Wales, possession,administration and self-administration of prohibited drugs,including cannabis, are proscribed, as is the possession ofequipment for the administration of prohibited drugs. Personalconsumption offences (involving less than five plants or lessthan 25g of cannabis) make an offender liable to a penalty of$2,000 and/or two years imprisonment. Cultivation, manufactureand production, and supply are prosecuted on indictment. TheDrugs Misuse Act 1986 (Qld) assigns dangerous drugs to Schedulesunder the Act. Drugs like heroin and cocaine appear in the FirstSchedule and cannabis sativa is listed in the Second Schedule.Offences relate to trafficking (s5), supply (s6), production ofdangerous drugs (s8), possession (s9), and possession of drugparaphernalia (s10). In addition, penalties vary in the case of aggravated supplywhich is defined in s6(2) of the Act as including supply to aminor, an intellectually handicapped person, and supply in aneducational or correctional institution. While there aredifferences in the statutory penalties applicable to First andSecond Schedule drugs, they are minor. Under the Drugs Misuse Act Amendment Act 1990, the penaltyfor unlawful trafficking in cannabis carries a penalty of 20years imprisonment, while for First Schedule drugs the penalty is25 years (s5). Possession of cannabis carries a penalty of 15years imprisonment, or 20 years imprisonment if the quantityequals or exceeds 500g or 100 plants (s9). The penalty forpossession of drug paraphernalia is imprisonment for two years.Offenders may be fined in addition to or instead of beingimprisoned (s54) and may be prosecuted summarily for minoroffences (s13). In 1989 the Australian Capital Territory remodelled its drugcontrol legislation, and the Drugs of Dependence Ordinance wasintroduced with the idea of it being used as a model for allother jurisdictions. The Act establishes two classes of drug: prohibited drugs which are subject to special treatment. (According to the Act's Explanatory Statement, prohibited drugs have no medical use and are harmful for recreational purposes); and drugs of dependence, which are distinguished from prohibited drugs in the Explanatory Statement, in that they are said to have a medical use. The Act defines cannabis, cannabis fibre, cannabis oil,cannabis plants and cannabis resin. Schedule 2 to the Act listscannabis, cannabis oil and cannabis resin as prohibited drugs anddefines commercial and traffickable quantities of the drug. Inaddition, cannabis is listed in Schedule 5 as a prohibitedplant.1 The Act makes clear distinctions between personal useactivities and trafficking. It reserves extremely harsh penaltiesfor the latter and contains deeming provisions. It also makesdistinctions in penalties between cannabis and other prohibiteddrugs. Cultivation of prohibited plants, including cannabis, isan offence (s162(2)), as is cultivation for the purposes of saleor supply (s162(3)), sale or supply, or possession for sale orsupply (s165(1)). Possession, self-administration andadministration of cannabis are offences under s171. The harshest penalties are reserved for sale or supply ofcommercial quantities of cannabis - life imprisonment (s165), andcultivation of more than 1,000 plants - life imprisonment(s162(3)). In the Northern Territory, the Misuse of Drugs Act 1990prescribes a penalty of $2,000 or two years imprisonment foradministering cannabis. Possession of less than a traffickablequantity 'attracts penalties ranging from a $10,000 fine toimprisonment for 14 years; possession of a commercial quantityattracts penalties ranging from 14 to 25 years imprisonment. Thepenalties for cultivation offences also depend on the quantitycultivated; commercial quantities carry a 25-year prison term;traffickable quantities carry a seven-year prison term; and othercases attract a penalty of a fine of $5,000 or imprisonment fortwo years' (Australian Capital Territory 1991, p35). Like Queensland, Northern Territory legislation createsseparate offences and penalties in respect of supplying illicitdrugs to children. In the Northern Territory, the penalty is 25years or imprisonment for life (s5). Offences and penaltiesrelating to illicit drugs are covered by the Poisons Act 1971 andthe Criminal Code in Tasmania, and in Western Australia by theMisuse of Drugs Act 1981. In the Australian Capital Territory, changes to the law oncannabis were introduced by the Drugs of Dependence (Amendment)Act 1992. These amendments were by no means as far-reaching asthose envisaged by the Legislative Assembly's Select Committee onHIV, Illegal Drugs and Prostitution (outlined earlier) whichrecommended the removal of personal possession offences involvingsmall amounts of cannabis. However, the amendments do introducean expiation notice scheme that applies to both adults andjuveniles (s171A). Under the amendments, a simple cannabisoffence is defined as: * an offence under s162(2) of cultivatingor participating in the cultivation of not more than fivecannabis plants; * an offence under s171(1) of possessing notmore than 25g of cannabis. A police officer is empowered to servean offence notice on a person believed to have committed a simplecannabis offence. If the prescribed penalty of $100 is paidwithin 60 days, then the offence is discharged and no convictionis recorded. The prescribed penalty of $100 is the same as thatpreviously applying under the Act for possession of small amountsof cannabis. Drug law reform is still an active issue for someAustralians. In 1993, interest in drug laws and social policyresulted in the establishment of an Australian ParliamentaryGroup on Drug Law Reform - a group whose membership includescurrent and former politicians from different political partiesand a range of jurisdictions, medical practitioners, researchersand members of the legal profession. Among the short-term goalsbeing considered by the Committee are the rejection of criminalsanctions for personal use of drugs and the nationwide adoptionof an expiation scheme model for personal use of cannabis([53]Van Raay 1993). Overseas legislation In many European countries, no distinction exists in lawbetween the so-called 'hard' and 'soft' drugs. In a recent studyof 12 EC nations, only the following nations distinguishedcannabis from other drugs: Spain distinguishes between 'substances which can cause serious damage to health and cannabis and its derivatives' ([54]Leroy 1991, p58); Ireland distinguishes between 'cannabis and other narcotic products' ([55]Leroy 1991, p58); The Netherlands distinguishes between 'substances presenting an unacceptable risk' ([56]Leroy 1991, p58) and cannabis; Italian law distinguishes between 'highly addictive drugs (Schedules I and III) and drugs with lesser addictive properties AND cannabis (Schedules II and IV)' ([57]Leroy 1991, p58); and the United Kingdom Misuse of Drugs Act contains three Schedules in which drugs are placed according to their level of risk. Cannabis, some opiates, barbiturates and some amphetamines are classified as Schedule B drugs. Drug use (involving both 'hard' and 'soft' drugs) is notproscribed in Spain, Ireland, Italy or The Netherlands.Possession for personal use is prohibited in Spain, Ireland,Italy and The Netherlands, but lesser penalties are provided whenpossession involves cannabis. In the case of traffickingoffences, laws in Spain, Ireland, Italy and The Netherlandsimpose less severe penalties when trafficking involves cannabis. In the United States, the federal Controlled Substances Actlists cannabis in Schedule 1 - where drugs with a high dependencypotential and no accepted medical use are located. Possession ofa controlled drug attracts a lighter penalty than doestrafficking. Even so, penalties for possession are substantial -a first offender being liable to up to one year's imprisonmentand a fine of between $1,000 and $5,000. During the 1970s, at State level, 11 States adopted a civilpenalty model for possession of small amounts of cannabis forpersonal use. Oregon was the first State to introduce civilpenalty laws in 1973. In general, the maximum penalty forpossession of small quantities of cannabis for personal use inthe 'decriminalised' states is $100. Exceptions are Mississippi($250) and Nebraska ($200). Efforts to recriminalise these activities have been describedas 'concerted' ([58]Reuter 1992), with William Bennett, theNational Drug Control Director, personally appearing before anumber of state legislatures to argue for recriminalisation. In1990, Alaska reintroduced criminal penalties for possession ofsmall amounts of cannabis. In Canada, the federal Narcotic Control Act 1961 has remainedlargely unaltered to this day. There are six basic offences underthe Act. These are: simple possession, trafficking, possessionfor trafficking, cultivation of opium or cannabis, import orexport of scheduled drugs, and prescription shopping ([59]Solomon1988). According to Solomon, apart from the offence ofcultivation, the Act does not differentiate between scheduleddrugs. Cannabis possession can be tried summarily or onindictment. In the case of simple possession offences, summaryconviction of a first offence renders the offender liable to afine of $1,000 and six months imprisonment. In the case of asubsequent offence, summarily prosecuted, the penalty is $2,000and one year's jail. On indictment, an offender is liable toseven year's imprisonment. The Canadian Government did not respond positively to the LeDain Commission recommendation that possession of cannabis nolonger be a criminal offence. However, in 1972 the Criminal LawAmendment Act gave judges a discretion to direct that an offenderbe discharged absolutely or on probation. It appears that lawenforcement officers rarely proceed on indictment in the case ofpossession offences, and that 'judges rarely impose the maximumsentence or anything close to it in cannabis cases' ([60]Solomon1988, p126). In this section, particular attention is devoted to the lawsand enforcement practices of The Netherlands and the UnitedKingdom. Illicit drug laws in both countries have been influencedby existence of international conventions. Initially bothcountries enacted drug laws in the absence of a domestic drugproblem. In The Netherlands illicit drug laws were first introduced inthe Opium Act 1919. Apart from amending legislation in 1928, druglaws remained unchanged until the present Opium Act was passed in1976. Current Dutch attitudes towards illicit drug use -manifested in the Prosecution Guidelines that govern theenforcement of the Act - are said to arise from a number offactors peculiar to Dutch society and history. First, realism andpragmatism. Second, a belief in social pluralism. Third, anideology of normalisation in which 'illicit drugs are seen as alimited and manageable social problem rather than an alien threatforced on an otherwise innocent society' ([61]Leuw 1991, p2).Fourth, is the context of the criminal law itself. Dutch writersstress that the criminal law is not perceived as enforcing socialmorality but rather as 'an instrument of social control, whoseresults must be assessed from case to case' ([62]Ruter 1988, p6). They further report that the criminal law has a minor role inThe Netherlands. Until the introduction of the Opium Act 1976,drug offences in The Netherlands appear to have been activelyprosecuted and severely sanctioned. According to [63]van deWijngaart (1991), cannabis appeared in The Netherlands in the1950s; harsh sentences were handed down, for example - 12 monthsimprisonment for minor cannabis offences; and media coverage wassensationalist. However, despite sentencing practices, an increase incannabis use was reported, especially among Dutch youth. Duringthe 1960s pressure for law reform increased and culminated in1976 with new opium legislation. The present Opium Actdistinguishes between drugs posing unacceptable risks such asheroin, cocaine, LSD and cannabis oil, and hemp products -marijuana and cannabis resin.2 It also decreased penalties forpossession of drugs for personal use, but increased penalties fortrafficking in hard drugs. Overlying the offences and penaltiesin the Opium Act are police and prosecution guidelines which haveproduced a situation that some commentators have described as defacto decriminalisation. These guidelines relate to the'intensity of police custody and preventive detention,prosecutorial alternatives (dismissal, fine, or prosecution) andpenalties involving violations of the Opium Act, and wereestablished by the Procurators-General in 1976' (Marshall et al.1990, p395). The guidelines are made possible by the ExpediencyPrinciple set out in Articles 167 and 242 of the Code of CriminalProcedure. This principle operates where the public good isserved by refraining from prosecution. It can operate for bothindividual offenders and categories of offence. In the case ofthe Opium Act, a number of activities are designated as 'not forprosecution, detection or arrest'. These include: the sale of less than 30g of hemp products; and dealing in, possessing or cultivating up to 30g of cannabis. High priority is given under the guidelines to the detectionand prosecution of traffickers. In Britain, like Australia andThe Netherlands, drug laws were in existence long before theexistence of a widespread domestic drug problem. During World WarI concerns about drug taking by soldiers led to the issuing ofArmy Council orders forbidding the supply of cocaine, heroin,Indian hemp, morphine, and other substances to soldiers except bymedical practitioners. The existence of international conventions resulted in theenactment of the Dangerous Drugs Act 1920 - as a signatory of theTreaty of Versailles, Britain undertook to incorporate the 1912Hague Convention into domestic law. Even at this early stagepenalties were severe. Illegal possession of listed drugs couldresult in a 200 fine or six months imprisonment, or both.Penalties were higher for repeat offenders. The Dangerous DrugsAmendment Act 1923 raised these penalties. However, '... at mostthe total annual convictions and known addicts numbered only afew hundred until the second half of the twentieth century'([64]Howitt 1990-91, p357). The present Misuse of Drugs Act 1971 creates differentclasses of drugs according to their potential for harm andpenalises activities such as possession and cultivation. Cannabisand cannabis resin are Class B drugs and, while subject to lesserpenalties than Class A drugs, still carry substantial penalties.For example, summary prosecution for an offence of possession ofa Class B drug can result in three months imprisonment and/or a500 fine. If the offender is convicted on indictment themaximum penalty is five years jail or a fine, or both.Cultivation of a Class A, B or C drug exposes the offender to apenalty of six months incarceration and/or a 2000 fine onsummary conviction, and up to 14 years imprisonment or a fine, orboth, if convicted on indictment ([65]Fortson 1992). Like TheNetherlands and Australia, the most substantial penalties areavailable for drug trafficking. While imprisonment is availableas a sanction for cannabis possession in Great Britain, itappears that custodial sentences are not imposed for possessionof cannabis for personal use. In addition, enforcement of theMisuse of Drugs Act may vary considerably throughout the nation,especially where cannabis is involved: In an urban area if apoliceman finds a young person in possession of a few grammes ofcannabis he may deal with the matter informally or offer acaution, and no official record will be made. In a country townpossession of exactly the same quantity of the drug might lead toprosecution, a fine, and headlines in the local newspaper'([66]Royal College of Psychiatrists 1987, p125). As in Australia, drug law reform continues to be an issue inEurope. Some reforms to European drug laws have beenforeshadowed. [67]Wodak (1993) reports that: the lead has comefrom municipal authorities. Thirteen cities in Europe have signeda document known as the Frankfort [sic] Declaration which commitsthese municipal authorities to a programme of drug policy reform.Thirty-three other cities have signed an expression of interestand are considering their position. In November, this Declarationwill be signed by the Mayor of Baltimore in the United States(p7). In Italy, voters were asked in a referendum held on 18 April1993 whether drug users should be imprisoned. The referendum wasthe result of changes to drug laws in 1990 which enabled courtsto imprison drug users found guilty of possession of more thanthe 'average daily dose' of a drug (dose media giornaliera)(UNICRI, pers comm). As a consequence of the referendum, suchdrug users are now liable only to administrative sanctions suchas a fine or the confiscation of their driver's licence. Drugtraffickers are still liable to imprisonment. Current international treaties The international treaties relating to cannabis are theSingle Convention on Narcotic Drugs 1961 as amended by the 1972Protocol, the Convention on Psychotropic Substances 1971 and the1988 UN Convention against Illicit Traffic in Narcotic Drugs andPsychotropic Substances (Vienna Convention). The Convention onPsychotropic Substances includes THC, the psychoactiveconstituent of cannabis. As THC is rarely extracted for illicitdrug use ([68]Fox & Mathews 1992), no further attention willbe devoted to it. The Single Convention consolidated a number of previousConventions on narcotic drugs and amalgamated a number ofmonitoring organisations to create the International NarcoticsControl Board. Australia ratified the Single Convention on 1December 1967. Cannabis is not a narcotic drug, but is classifiedas such for the purposes of the Single Convention. This classification has been important in shaping public andpolitical perceptions - that cannabis is dangerous to personalhealth and community safety. Narcotic drugs are listed inSchedules to the Convention. Schedule I contains the majoropioids, as well as cocaine and cannabis. Schedules II and IIIcontain less powerful drugs such as codeine. Schedule IV containsdrugs regarded as having particularly dangerous properties.Cannabis, as well as drugs like heroin, is part of Schedule IV.Articles 36, 4 and 2(5) of the Single Convention are ofparticular importance for the purposes of this report. Article36(1) of the Convention provides that, 'subject to itsconstitutional limitations', each Party shall adopt measures toensure that activities such as manufacture, possession,distribution, sale, transport, importation and exportation ofdrugs 'contrary to the provisions of this Convention ... shall bepunishable offences when committed intentionally ....'. In addition, Article 4 provides that: (c) Subject to theprovisions of this Convention, [Parties are] to limit exclusivelyto medical and scientific purposes the production, manufacture,export, import, distribution of, trade in, use and possession ofdrugs. Cannabis is also located in Schedule IV of the Convention.Article 2(5) requires that: (a) A Party shall adopt any specialmeasures of control which in its opinion are necessary havingregard to the particularly dangerous properties of a drug soincluded; and (b) A Party shall, if in its opinion the prevailingconditions in its country render it the most appropriate means ofprotecting the public health and welfare, prohibit theproduction, manufacture, export and import of, trade in,possession or use of any such drug except for amounts which maybe necessary for medical and scientific research only, includingclinical trials herewith to be conducted under or subject to thedirect supervision of the Party. It must be emphasised, however, that Article 2(5) is notmandatory. Rather, special measures of control can be imposed if,in the opinion of the Party, they are 'necessary' or'appropriate'. Under the Single Convention Parties are requiredto criminalise activities relating to trafficking, subject totheir constitutional limitations. In the past, however, questionshave also arisen about the need for Parties to criminaliseactivities associated with personal use and possession. TheWilliams Royal Commission concluded that to remove prohibitionsagainst cannabis would depart from the spirit and intention ofthe Convention. In Canada, the Le Dain Commission regardedpossession for personal use as falling within the ambit of theConvention. Woltring (1990) also takes this view on the groundsthat 'possession could relate to both possession for traffickingor possession for personal consumption' (p20). However, there is authority (e.g. [69]United States 1972,[70]Noll 1977, [71]South Australia 1978) that 'the Conventiondoes not require signatories to make either use or possession forpersonal use punishable offences, although the creation orretention of such offences would be consistent with the treaty.This is because "use" is not specifically covered byArticle 26 and the term "possession" in that Articleand elsewhere can be read as confined to possession for thepurpose of dealing' ([72]South Australia 1978, p46). Further, the requirement that Parties limit the use of drugsto medical and scientific purposes does not require them to'attain that goal by providing penal sanctions for unauthorized"use" or "personal consumption" of drugs'([73]Noll 1977, p44). In the view of the Shafer Commission,measures such as 'an educational program and similar approachesdesigned to discourage use' could be employed (1972, p167). Whilethe International Narcotics Control Board appears to be equivocalabout this interpretation of the Convention in respect ofpersonal possession, it does not appear to condemn it, merelyremarking in relation to the Single Convention, that Parties: maytake the view that they are not required to establish suchactivities as criminal offences under law. The basis for thisview appears to be that, since obligations relating to penalprovisions appear among articles relating to illicit traffic, theobligations only apply to cultivation, purchase or possession forthe purpose of illicit trafficking (1992, p6). The 1972 Protocolprovides for measures to treat and rehabilitate drug users inaddition, or as an alternative to, punishment. It also contains provisions relating to the InternationalNarcotics Control Board, and international narcotics trafficking.Australia ratified the Protocol on 22 November 1972. Australia'sinternational treaty obligations must now be read taking the 1988Vienna Convention into account. Australia ratified the Conventionwithout reservations on 16 November 1992. While the SingleConvention attempts to contain the supply of illicit drugs bylimiting the use of scheduled drugs to medical and scientificpurposes, the Vienna Convention is directed particularly at drugtrafficking and is designed to provide a system of internationalcooperation to counter trafficking activities. It must be readsubject to the Single Convention. The Vienna Convention was madeagainst a background of international horse-trading, and wasratified domestically in the face of a measure of opposition. An International Conference on Drug Abuse and Illicit Trafficin Narcotic Drugs and Psychotropic Substances was convened in1987. At the Conference there was debate between the consumer,producer and transit states about the content of the treaty.Consumer nations felt that the Convention should target themovement of illicit drugs between states, while producercountries argued that the Convention needed to address drugconsumption - in other words, create obligations for drug-usingnations. As a result, provisions relating to domestic drugconsumption are included in the Convention. Nevertheless, the major thrust of the Convention is towardstrafficking and international cooperation in matters such asextradition, mutual legal assistance, and transfer ofproceedings. Paragraph 1 of Article 3 relating to traffickingoffences states that 'Each Party shall adopt such measures as maybe necessary to establish [them] as criminal offences under itsdomestic law, when committed intentionally'. Paragraph 2 ofArticle 3 deals with cultivation, possession or purchase forpersonal use. In relation to the establishment of criminal offences itswording is different to and more qualified than that in paragraph1. It states: Subject to its constitutional principles and the basicconcepts of its legal system, each Party shall adopt suchmeasures as may be necessary to establish as a criminal offenceunder its domestic law, when committed intentionally, thepossession, purchase or cultivation of narcotic drugs orpsychotropic substances for personal consumption contrary to theprovisions of the 1961 Convention, the 1961 Convention as amendedor the 1971 Convention. In addition, paragraph 4(d) of Article 3 provides that: TheParties may provide, either as an alternative to conviction orpunishment, or in addition to conviction or punishment of anoffence established in accordance with paragraph 2 of thisarticle, measures for the treatment, education, aftercare,rehabilitation or social reintegration of the offender. Notsurprisingly, there are a number of different interpretationsthat can be placed on the provisions of the Vienna Convention asthey relate to personal consumption activities. The International Narcotics Control Board states that the1988 Vienna Convention requires criminal offences to beestablished in relation to possession, purchase or cultivationfor personal use. However, it adds: None of the conventionsrequires a party to convict or punish drug abusers who commitsuch offences even when they have been established as punishableoffences. The party may choose to deal with drug abusers throughalternative non-penal measures involving treatment, education,after-care, rehabilitation or social reintegration([74]International Narcotics Control Board 1992, p4). Other commentators take the view that the Vienna Conventionis a trafficking convention and that, with respect to personaluse activities, a Party may choose not to retain or introducecriminal offences for those activities if such an approach doesnot accord with matters such as 'the basic concepts of its legalsystem'. What then are the implications of the Single Convention,the 1972 Protocol and the 1988 Vienna Convention for publicpolicy options relating to cannabis? Total Prohibition Total prohibition is the policy pursued by many of theParties to the Conventions - including the Australianjurisdictions of Queensland, Northern Territory, Victoria,Western Australia and Tasmania. Some writers describe the Single Convention as prohibitionistin nature ([75]Fox & Mathews 1992); others as 'regulatory asopposed to merely prohibitionist' ([76]Woltring 1990, p19).Whatever the case, extremely stringent measures can be employedby the Parties. In both the Single Convention and the ViennaConvention provisions exist that enable the Parties to 'adoptmore strict or severe measures than those provided for by theconvention if, in [their] opinion, such measures are desirable ornecessary to prevent or suppress illicit trafficking'([77]International Narcotics Control Board 1992, p4). Civilpenalty option. As described earlier, this policy option removescriminal penalties for personal use activities such as possessionand instead imposes civil penalties - most commonly fines.Australia ratified the Vienna Convention after consultations withthe States to ensure that legislation in all jurisdictionsconformed with treaty obligations. While some commentators ([78]Fox & Mathews 1992) arguethat civil penalties such as those provided in the SouthAustralian legislation represent a minor breach of internationaltreaty obligations, this does not appear to be the view of theCommonwealth or of other commentators. There appear to be nointernational law impediments to the civil penalty approach. Partial prohibition. As described by the [79]Sackville Royal Commission (SouthAustralia 1978), partial prohibition distinguishes betweentrafficking in cannabis and activities associated with personaluse such as possession. Partial prohibition would remove allpenalties, both civil and criminal, in respect of personal useand possession activities. These activities would no longer becriminal offences. The removal of offences and penalties forpersonal use and possession activities can be seen asinconsistent with the conventions. Such a conclusion might bereached on an interpretation of the Single Convention along thelines suggested by [80]Woltring (1990), and of the ViennaConvention. It can also be argued that partial prohibition can beaccommodated under the Conventions. The Sackville RoyalCommission (1979, p311) took this view in regard to the SingleConvention - on the basis that the Convention did not encompasspersonal use and possession activities. Partial prohibition couldbe reconciled with the Vienna Convention on the basis of twointerpretations. For those who take the view that the ViennaConvention is a trafficking convention and that there is norequirement that personal use and possession activities becriminalised, there is no obstacle to partial prohibition. Itcould also be argued that partial prohibition could encompass anoption where a criminal offence existed for personal use andpossession activities, but no criminal or civil penalties wereprovided. The existence of a criminal offence would be a signalof society's disapproval of cannabis use. Treatment, education,rehabilitation or social reintegration could be provided insteadof criminal or civil penalties, it being up to State Parties todetermine whether these measures are provided administratively orby statute. Regulatory option Regulatory options might include regulated commercial sale ora government monopoly. In 1979 the Sackville Royal Commissiontook the view that regulation could not be accommodated under theSingle Convention (p311). The advent of the AIDS epidemic andconcern about injecting drug use and disease transmission mayhave contributed to recent interpretations of treaty obligationsthat differ from this view. [81]Woltring (1990) states that it isopen to Parties, within the context of 'medical or scientificpurpose', to: provide for the cultivation of cannabis by a government agency; provide for the manufacture of cannabis by a government agency or private concern under government licence; trade in and distribute cannabis through a government agency or private enterprise under government licence; 'supply or dispense drugs to drug abusers or AIDS/Hepatitis B risk users under appropriate programs' (p20). He goes on to remark that 'While any Party could adopt suchoptions on the basis that they serve the medical or therapeuticobjective of treating drug addiction or abuse, the options couldnot be adopted if their ultimate purpose was to enablerecreational use as distinct from medical or therapeutic use'(p20). Under [82]Woltring's model, regulation could co-exist withtreaty obligations, but only to a limited extent - within amedical model. Supply or dispensation of drugs to drug users formedical purposes is considerably easier to reconcile with treatyobligations in the context of injecting drug use than in relationto cannabis. It might be argued that high THC content of illicitcannabis represented a health risk to users 3, that could beovercome through regulated supply, or that separation of drugmarkets would make it less likely that cannabis users would beexposed to and thus move on to more dangerous drug use involvinginjecting drugs. However, these propositions would be unlikely toconvince most governments or commentators. Free availability. This policy option could not be accommodated under theConventions and would place Australia in breach of its treatyobligations. This discussion of international instrumentssuggests that Australia has some flexibility in considering andimplementing policy options in the context of treaty obligations.However, for some options it might be thought necessary to seekamendments to the Conventions or, indeed, denounce them.4 An important question to be answered is whether Australiandrug laws, so long dominated and directed by influences beyondour shores, and so little attuned to Australia's owncircumstances, should continue to be determined externally. Ascautious an inquiry as the Williams Royal Commission commented,in relation to the Single Convention, that the spirit andintention of the treaty was 'a secondary matter in the sense thatAustralia must first decide what is the correct domestic policyand then shape its international course accordingly' (1980,pC263). References Abel, E.L. 1980, Marihuana: The First Twelve Thousand Years,Plenum Press, London & New York. Australia. Parliamentary Joint Committee on the NationalCrime Authority 1989, Drugs, Crime and Society, AGPS, Canberra.Australia. Senate Select Committee on Drug Trafficking and Drug Abuse1971, Report, Commonwealth Government Printing Office, Canberra.Australia. Senate Standing Committee on Social Welfare 1977, DrugProblems in Australia - An Intoxicated Society?, AGPS, Canberra.Australian Capital Territory. Legislative Assembly Select Committee on HIV, Illegal Drugsand Prostitution 1991, Marijuana and Other Illegal Drugs,Canberra. Australian Royal Commission of Inquiry into Drugs 1980Report, Book C, AGPS, Canberra. Canada. Commission of Inquiry into the Non-Medical Use ofDrugs 1972, Cannabis, Information Canada, Ottawa. Carney, T. 1981, 'The history of Australian drug laws:Commercialism to confusion?', Monash University Law Review, vol.7, June, pp165-204. Caswell, A. 1992, 'Marijuana as medicine', Medical Journal ofAustralia, vol. 156, April 6, pp497-498. Fortson, R. 1992, The Law on the Misuse of Drugs and DrugTrafficking Offences, 2nd edn, Sweet & Maxwell, London. Fox, R. & Mathews, I. 1992, Drug Policy. Fact, Fictionand the Future, Federation Press, Sydney. Hartland, N. 1991, 'The political context', in FeasibilityResearch into the Controlled Availability of Opioids, NCEPH,Canberra. Hartland, N., McDonald, D., Dance, P. & Bammer, G. 1992,'Australian reports into drug use and the possibility of heroinmaintenance', Drug and Alcohol Review, vol. 11, pp175-182. Hindmarch, I. 1972, 'A social history of the use of cannabissativa', Contemporary Review, vol. 22, no. 1276, pp252-257. Howitt, D 1990-1991, 'Britain's "Substance AbusePolicy": Realities and regulation in the United Kingdom',International Journal of the Addictions, vol. 25, no. 3A,pp353-376. International Narcotics Control Board 1992, Report of theInternational Narcotics Control Board for 1992, United Nations,New York. Kirby, M. 1992, 'Drugs - An international prohibition',Commonwealth Law Bulletin, vol. 18, no. 1, January, pp312-320. Leroy, B. 1991, The Community of Twelve and the Drug Demand:Comparative Study of Legislations and Judicial Practice,Luxembourg. Leuw, E. 1991, Drugs and Drug Policy in The Netherlands: ANon-Belligerent Approach, unpublished. Manderson, D., 1993, From Mr Sin to Mr Big: A History ofAustralian Drug Laws, Oxford University Press, Melbourne. Marshall, I.H., Anjewierden O. & van Atteveld H. 1990,'Towards an "Americanization" of Dutch drug policy?',Justice Quarterly, vol. 7, no. 2, June, pp395-421. Noll, A. 1977 'Drug abuse and penal provisions of theinternational drug control treaties, UN Bulletin on Narcotics,vol. 29, no. 4, pp41-57. Musto, D.F. 1991, 'Opium, cocaine and marijuana in Americanhistory', Scientific American, July, pp20-27. New South Wales. Joint Parliamentary Committee upon Drugs 1978, Report intoDrug Abuses, Sydney. Queensland. Advisory Committee on Illicit Drugs 1993, Cannabis and theLaw in Queensland: A Discussion Paper, July, Brisbane. Reuter, P. 1992, 'Hawks ascendant: the punitive trend ofAmerican drug policy', Daedalus, vol. 121, no. 3, pp15-51. Royal College of Psychiatrists 1987, Drug Scenes, RoyalCollege of Psychiatrists. Ruter, F. 1988, The Pragmatic Dutch Approach to Drug Control:Does it Work?, unpublished. Single, E 1989, 'The impact of marijuana decriminalisation:an update', Journal of Public Health Policy, Winter, pp456-465. Solomon, R.R. 1988, 'Canada's federal drug legislation', inIllicit Drugs in Canada: A Risky Business, eds J.C. Blackwell& P.G. Erickson, Nelson, Scarborough, Ontario. South Australia. Royal Commission into the Non-Medical Use ofDrugs 1978, Cannabis: A Discussion Paper, Adelaide. South Australia. Royal Commission into the Non-Medical Use ofDrugs 1979, A Social History of Drug Control, Research Paper 8,South Australian Government, Adelaide. Sproule, D.W. & St-Denis, P. 1989, 'The UN drugtrafficking convention: An ambitious step', Canadian Yearbook ofInternational Law, pp263-293. Stewart, D.P. 1990, 'Internationalizing the war on drugs: theUN Convention Against Illicit Traffic in Narcotic Drugs andPsychotropic Substances', Denver Journal of International Law andPolicy, vol. 18, no. 3, Spring, pp387-404. Symonds, A. 1992, Marihuana Law in NSW - A New Direction,unpublished. Trebach, A.S. & Zeese, K.B. (eds) 1990, Drug Prohibitionand the Conscience of Nations, Drug Policy Foundation,Washington. United States. National Commission on Marihuana and Drug Abuse 1972,Marihuana. A Signal of Misunderstanding, Washington. van de Wijngaart, G.F. 1991, Competing Perspectives on DrugUse: The Dutch Experience, Swets & Zeitlinger, Amsterdam. Van Raay, T. 1993, 'The National Charter for Drug LawReform', paper presented to the Australian Institute ofCriminology Law, Medicine and Criminal Justice Conference, 6-8July, Surfers Paradise. Wodak, A. 1993, 'Prohibition has failed, what next?', paperpresented to the Australian Institute of Criminology Law,Medicine and Criminal Justice Conference, 6-8 July, SurfersParadise. Woltring, H. 1990, 'Examining existing drug policies: The1988 UN Convention. Help or Hindrance?', Criminology Australia,April/May, pp19-20. CliffSchaffer's Home Page WT02-B03-2IA086-000614-B049-181http://206.61.184.43:80/schaffer/Library/studies/aus/can_ch4.htm 206.61.184.43 19970122023636 text/html 43724HTTP/1.0 200 OKDate: Wednesday, 22-Jan-97 02:36:28 GMTServer: WebSitePro/1.1f (S/N wpo-0deb)Allow-ranges: bytesContent-type: text/htmlLast-modified: Saturday, 28-Dec-96 07:15:15 GMTContent-length: 43506 FIVE LEGISLATIVE OPTIONS for cannabis / marijuana Chapter 4. FIVE LEGISLATIVE OPTIONS Introduction Many legislative options are available for cannabis and, asindicated in [1]Chapter 2, much confusion exists in theterminology used to describe them. In this chapter, we outlinethe five broad options available to Australian decision-makers,namely: total prohibition; prohibition with civil penalties for minor offences; partial prohibition; regulation; and free availability. Some readers will be aware that this is the classificationused by the South Australian Royal Commission into theNon-Medical Use of Drugs (the Sackville Commission) whichreported in 1978. We have adopted their approach as it is, in ourview, both precise and comprehensive. It avoids the semanticproblems that often cause much confusion in debates about drugpolicies. In particular, it avoids the terms 'decriminalisation'and 'legalisation', terms which have different meanings fordifferent authorities. The five options listed capture all the approaches whichpeople have in mind when they refer to 'decriminalisation' and'legalisation', as well as other options which these two wordsmay or may not encompass. The five legislative options arediscussed in turn. We follow a consistent format to facilitatecomparisons between them. First we describe the option; anexample of it in operation follows (or, if there is no suchexample, we describe what it would look like if the option wereimplemented); we then outline the rationales which are given orare imputable (both philosophical and pragmatic rationales arecovered); discuss the outcomes and impacts (observed or likely)flowing from its implementation; and in conclusion we evaluatethe appropriateness of the option. Option 1: Total prohibition Under the system of total prohibition the use, possession,cultivation, importation, sale and distribution of any amount ofcannabis are treated as criminal offences. People importing ordealing in cannabis may be liable to severe sanctions, and thoseusing or found in possession of the drug are subject to arrestand prosecution. If convicted, they acquire a criminal record andmay be subject to a variety of sanctions including imprisonment. 'Total prohibition' can take a number of forms. For example,although both The Netherlands and the United States havelegislation that can be described as total prohibition, thedifferences in the strategies used to enforce, or not enforce,the legislation mean that the drug policies in these two nationsare dramatically different. This section will outline thebackground and rationale of American and Dutch drug policies, andwill evaluate them in light of the goals outlined in [2]Chapter2. PART A: THE UNITED STATES: Total legislative and administrative prohibition: Drug lawand policy in the United States This examination of drug policy will focus on the US FederalGovernment's strategy of total prohibition.5 The Federal Controlled Substances Act (CSA) groups drugs intofive categories. These categories are said to be based on thedrugs' perceived potential for abuse, accepted medical use andpropensity to create physiological and psychological dependency,for users (Inciardi 1990). The US Drug Enforcement Agency (DEA)is responsible for classifying drugs and for periodicallyupdating classifications. Cannabis is listed in Schedule 1 of theclassification scheme. Schedule 1 drugs are seen to have a highpotential for abuse, no currently accepted medical use in theUnited States and no acceptable safe level of use under medicalsupervision. Violations of the CSA are separated into two offencecategories: first, the possession of controlled substances; and,secondly, the manufacture, delivery or sale of controlledsubstances. All first possession offences carry a penalty of upto one year's incarceration and a fine of $1,000 to $5,000.Second offences are punishable by more severe sanctions. Thebasic penalty for the manufacture, delivery or sale of less than50kg of marijuana, 100 or more marijuana plants, less than 10kgof cannabis resin (hashish) or less than one kilogram of cannabisoil is punishment by up to five years incarceration and/or a$250,000 fine. Second or subsequent offences are punishable by upto 10 years incarceration and/or a $500,000 fine. The penalty forthe manufacture, sale or delivery of between 50kg and 100kg ofmarijuana is a sentence of up to 20 years imprisonment and/or afine of up to $1 million. Second or subsequent violations ofmanufacture/delivery/sale provisions are punishable by up to 30years imprisonment and/or up to $2 million in fines forindividuals and $30 million for others. The CSA also provides for other sanctions against people whoprofit from drug dealing. An offender can be required to forfeitto the state all controlled substances, raw materials orequipment used to manufacture, import or export controlledsubstances, all conveyances used to transport controlledsubstances, all money and property gained through contraveningthe CSA, and all property used to facilitate violations of theCSA. The proceeds of forfeiture are used to fund drug lawenforcement. Drug policy in the US has, in part, been conceptualised inthe economic terms of supply and demand. Primarily the focus hasbeen on reducing the supply of illegal drugs, including cannabis,through such measures as destroying crops at the source orinterdicting supplies as they enter the US. Cannabis crops, forexample, may be spotted from the air by helicopter, sprayed withherbicide or eradicated by ground teams. Destroying cannabiscrops in other countries, particularly South American, andencouraging other governments to participate in law enforcementefforts, have formed an important part of the American drugstrategy of reducing the supply of drugs. Central to the US Government's policy on reducing demand isthe idea of creating a climate of intolerance towards all druguse through concepts such as 'user accountability' and 'zerotolerance'. 'User accountability' is the idea that individualusers should be made to recognise that their drug use, no matterhow minor it may appear to be, is part of a drug problem thateventually results in the death of some users ([3]Wardlaw 1992).The notion of 'zero tolerance' holds that no drug offence shouldbe allowed any degree of tolerance and makes little distinctionin terms of culpability between the different scales of drugoffences ([4]US Bureau of Justice Statistics 1992). Rationales Pragmatic rationales The eradication of all illicit drug use is the central aim ofUS drug policy and it is thought that prohibition is the mosteffective means of reaching this goal. Cannabis use is seen as apart of a larger drug problem. Prohibition is thought to decreasecannabis usage in the following ways: prohibition discourages people from experimenting with drugs and deters people convicted of drug offences from re-offending; and prohibition causes the price of illicit drugs to increase, making them more difficult to obtain. Philosophical rationales Drug policy in the US is based on a deeply held belief thatall illicit drug use is extremely harmful, both in terms of thedangers that it poses to users and in terms of the dangers thatit poses to the social fabric of American society. There is verylittle distinction made between cannabis and other drugs. In1971, President Richard Nixon declared that drug abuse was'public enemy number one' ([5]Wijingaart 1991, p95) and, morerecently, one commentator has claimed that: Drug use in Americatoday is a major threat to our health, productivity, and qualityof life (Du Pont 1984: xvi, [6]cited in Wijingaart 1991, p101). Section 801 of the Federal Controlled Substances Act statesthat: The illegal importation, manufacture, distribution, andpossession and improper use of controlled substances have asubstantial and detrimental effect on the health and generalwelfare of the American people. In the US, official analysis of the social problemsassociated with drug use has been narrow, and American policymakers have tended to see drugs themselves as the central sourceof all the ills associated with drug use in that country.Analyses of the social context of drug taking or of therelationship between drug taking and poverty have apparently hadlittle impact on the development of drug policy. Central to the official American idea of 'harm' caused bydrugs is that all drugs are 'addictive', and that anyexperimentation with drugs will inevitably result in dependency.Associated with the fear of dependence is the fear, in many casesunrealistic, of the effect that drug use has on individuals.Although not accepting this characterisation, James Inciardi hasdescribed the stereotype of the American drug user in thefollowing terms: 'Dope fiends', as they were called, weresex-crazed maniacs, degenerate criminals, and members of the'living dead'. 'Narcotics', including marijuana and cocaine ...destroyed morality, addicts were sexually violent and criminallyaggressive, they were weak and ineffective members of society;addiction was contagious since users had a mania for perpetuatingthe social anathema of drug taking; and finally, once addicted,the user entered into a lifetime of slavery to drugs ([7]Inciardi1986, p100). It has been claimed that those debating drugs policy in theUS have blurred the distinction between the effects of drug useand the effects of the prohibition of drug use ([8]Wardlaw 1992).Drug use is therefore thought to be inextricably linked toviolent crime, users are conceptualised as criminals, and policytowards any level of drug use is punitive and coercive. Thisphilosophy of drug use is evident in the rhetorical language ofUS policy makers who talk about 'zero tolerance' and who havecalled their drug strategy a 'war on drugs'. Outcomes Although the price of cannabis has increased with thepolicies of prohibition, the increase has not had the intendedeffect of significantly reducing cannabis consumption. Despitehalf a century of total prohibition, cannabis is still the mostwidely used of illicit drugs in the US. Household surveys of druguse conducted by the National Institute on Drug Abuse have foundthat almost 68 million people in the US reported that they hadused cannabis, including 9.7 million who reported that they hadused it in the past month. In other words, some 33 per cent ofthe household population aged 12 years or older reported they hadused marijuana in their lifetimes and 5 per cent reported havingused the drug in the past month. (NIDA, National Household Surveyon Drug Abuse: Population estimates 1991; cited in [9]US Bureauof Justice Statistics 1992, p26). It could be concluded that the prohibition of cannabis hasnot been successful in eradicating or even significantlydecreasing cannabis use in the United States. On the other hand,it could be argued that the policy has prevented an even higherlevel of use occurring. From 1981 to 1987, 5.3 million kilogramsof marijuana were seized, however Customs, Coast Guard and theDEA believe that they seized only 10 per cent of the marijuanaentering the country ([10]Inciardi & McBride 1990, p284).Despite the fluctuations in price that law enforcement effortsmay cause to cannabis markets from time to time, demand forcannabis has, it is claimed, remained relatively unchanged.Nadelmann has argued that 'the greatest beneficiaries of the druglaws are organised and unorganised drug traffickers. Thecriminalisation of the drug market effectively imposes a 'valueadded tax' ([11]Nadelmann 1991). The law enforcement program associated with prohibition hasalso been costly, both in financial and social terms. In 1986 theFederal expenditure on cannabis enforcement was estimated to bearound $800 million, and it is thought to have significantlyincreased since then (Kleiman 1986). This figure does not includestate and local expenditures on law enforcement and criminaljustice. Every year there are 350,000 arrests for cannabispossession alone, making this the third most common cause ofarrest in the US ([12]Kleiman 1992, pp267-8). The social costs of the law enforcement program are alsohigh. [13]Kleiman (1992) claims that the majority of people whoare arrested for buying and using cannabis rarely do anythingelse that might bring them to the attention of the criminaljustice system and that, for many users, being subject to arrestand criminal justice processing is the most substantial risk ofusing cannabis. The consequence of this is that large numbers ofpeople acquire criminal records and are stigmatised for what manywould see as relatively minor offences. Kleiman also argues that the prohibition of cannabisundermines the symbolic value of the criminal law. Since arrestis the most immediate and frequent part of the punishment processfor all crimes, it is important that arrest should retain itssocial meaning both as involving some substantial risk of furtherpunishment (to maintain its deterrent value) and as resultingfrom the doing of some substantial harm (to maintain its moralforce). The fact that simple possession of marijuana is the thirdmost common cause of arrest puts strain on both of these symboliclinks. This contribution to the devaluation of arrest as asanction ought to be counted as a sizeable cost of currentmarijuana laws ([14]Kleiman 1992, p268). It has also been claimed by some opponents of the 'war ondrugs' that one by product of prohibition is the abuse of civilliberties (e.g. [15]Boaz 1990). In the United States, propertycan be seized if a police officer alleges that a small amount ofa controlled substance, including cannabis, is found in theproperty. Forfeiture can occur without indictment or convictionof the owner of the property, a practice that Boaz claims is aviolation of civil rights. The prohibition of cannabis has also had a number ofunintended consequences. It is argued that the patterns ofcannabis use have become more dangerous and the amount ofviolence associated with the cannabis market has increased.First, it is argued that the successful interdiction of cannabisentering the US from overseas has resulted in increasedcultivation and production of cannabis within the country.Nadelmann has claimed that the US has emerged as one of theworld's leading producers of cannabis ([16]Nadelmann 1991, p787).He also argues that international drug traffickers haveredirected their attention from cannabis to cocaine, resulting ina 'glut of increasingly potent cocaine being available and ashortage of comparatively benign marijuana' ([17]Nadelmann 1991,p787). It is also argued that prohibition has caused an increase inthe crime and violence associated with cannabis markets and anincrease in the content of THC (the major psychoactiveingredient) of cannabis. When the majority of cannabis used wasimported from other countries, the distribution system forcannabis was much smaller. The production of cannabis within theUS, it is argued, leads to more small and medium producers with awider, more competitive and possibly more violent distributionsystem (Kleiman 1986; [18]Wardlaw 1992). Domestic enforcementhas, it is argued, resulted in more technology-intensive methodsof cultivation and an increase in the potency of cannabis([19]Reuter 1987). The fact that the sale of water pipes forsmoking cannabis is illegal means that users more often consumecannabis in cigarette papers, which is the form of consumptionmost damaging to their lungs (Reuter 1987). Given the costs of this form of prohibition, and its relativelack of success, it is perhaps surprising that the US drugstrategy enjoys widespread support from the American people. InGallup surveys conducted from 1969 to 1985, people were asked:'do you think the use of marijuana should be made legal or not?'.In 1985, 23 per cent of respondents were in favour, 73 per centopposed and 4 per cent expressed no opinion ([20]Inciardi &McBride 1990, p295). In October 1989 a Time/CNN poll found that79 per cent of the population would be willing to pay highertaxes if the money were used for fighting the 'war on drugs'(Inciardi & McBride 1990, p295). The 'war on drugs' issupported by liberal and conservative politicians alike, publicdebate on drug strategy is rare, and discussion of theappropriateness of drug strategy has been described as 'a parloursport for intellectuals' rather than a subject of general publicconcern. As noted above, during the 1970s a number of US statesremoved the penal penalties for possession of small amounts ofcannabis for personal use (a process referred to in the USA as'decriminalisation'), but this move towards a more liberalapproach was subsequently abandoned. Little information isavailable on the basis of the policy reversal, referred to as'recriminalisation'. Apparently the decisions were made not onthe basis of factual research into the impact ofdecriminalisation, but rather on ideological grounds.Opportunities were available for research comparing theexperiences of the various states, but apparently such researchwas not undertaken, leaving policy to be made without a firminformation base.6 CONCLUSION - THE USA APPROACH The US drug policy does not seem to have met many of thepolicy goals identified in the early part of this report. First, cannabis policy has not been separated from that ofother drugs. Policy makers see only the larger 'drug problem' andhave not recognised the need to have different policies fordifferent drugs. Secondly, in the USA the arguments for the total prohibitionof all drugs are highly emotive; arguments about the consequencesof drug use have not been separated from arguments about morals.Consequently, this has led to the idea that is implicit in muchUS drug policy, that all illicit drugs and consequently all drugusers are inherently criminal and even evil. Theconceptualisation of the drug problem in such uncompromising,black and white terms means that there is little room to makeexceptions for arguably 'soft' drugs such as cannabis. Thirdly, the goals of the 'war on drugs' are not realistic.Kleiman has argued that US drug policy amounts to a 'holy war'against drugs, and as such it is not surprising that the policygoals are far from realistic ([21]Kleiman 1992). Those creatingand implementing the US drug strategy do not talk of 'minimisingthe harm' arising from drug use (as in Australia's National DrugStrategy); rather they aim to completely eliminate drug use, agoal that many would consider to be unreachable. Finally, in [22]Chapter Two of this report, we have suggestedthat the harms caused by the drug control regimes themselvesshould not outweigh the harms prevented by them. With respect tocannabis use it has been argued that the harm caused by controlregimes clearly outweighs the harm caused by the drug([23]Kleiman 1992). It has also been argued that those developingpolicy in the US have failed to make the distinction between theproblems created by drugs and the problems created by prohibition(e.g. [24]Wardlaw 1992). The USA has a number of severe socialproblems associated with drug use, including forcing users intothe criminal milieu, demeaning the criminal law in the eyes ofusers, increasing the number of people with criminal records,increasing the level of imprisonment, and increasing the level oftransmission of the AIDS virus. These problems, and therelatively limited achievements in reducing drug use anddrug-related problems, have prompted ever increasing efforts inthe 'war against drugs'. It is likely, however, that many of thesocial problems are created not by the drugs themselves but bythe strategy of total prohibition. Part B: The Netherlands: LEGISLATIVE PROHIBITION WITH AN ADMINISTRATIVE EXPEDIENCYPRINCIPLE Background Between the mid-1960s and the mid-1970s in The Netherlands,the use of illegal drugs grew from 'almost non-existent toconstitute a serious health and public order problem in urbanareas' ([25]van Vliet 1990). Although the use of cannabis in TheNetherlands came to public attention in the late 1950s, debate ondrug policy only began in earnest when heroin use and theproblems associated with it became increasingly visible between1972 and 1975. Amendments to the Opium Act were introduced in 1976 and canbe seen as heralding a new era in drug policy. Until this timedrug policy in The Netherlands was much like that of othercountries ([26]Wijingaart 1990, p668, cited in [27]Wardlaw 1992,p16). Drug law and policy in The Netherlands The Opium Act of1976 makes a clear distinction between 'drugs presentingunacceptable risks' (heroin, cocaine, LSD, amphetamines) and'cannabis products'. The changes introduced in this legislationincreased penalties for dealing in 'drugs presenting unacceptablerisks' and decreased the penalties for possession and dealing incannabis products. The purpose of the legislation was to separate drug marketsand user groups in an effort to prevent cannabis users frominvolvement in the 'hard' drug scene. Although the legislationfalls clearly within a total prohibition framework, as Dutchcommentators have pointed out 'law in practice is more relevantthan law in books' ([28]Leuw 1991). A clause in The NetherlandsCode of Criminal Procedure, known as the 'expediency principle',states that the prosecution office may decide whether or not toenforce certain laws, to prosecute or to initiate criminalinvestigation on the basis of whether or not such action would be'in the public interest'. Using this clause, the Minister ofJustice issued guidelines in 1976 for the enforcement of druglaws and the investigation and prosecution of breaches of druglaws. Essentially it is these guidelines rather than legislationthat determines drug policy in The Netherlands. [29]Marshall etal. (1990) have noted that the priorities in the guidelinescorrespond to the distinctions made between 'hard' and 'soft'drugs in the Opium Act. High priority is given to detecting theimportation and exportation of drugs that are seen to representan 'unacceptable risk'. Investigation and prosecution of 'soft' drug violations, withthe exception of the import and export of large amounts of suchdrugs, are assigned a low priority (Marshall et al. 1990).According to the guidelines, dealing, possessing or producingsmall amounts (30g or less) of marijuana, do not require policeinvestigation, arrest or prosecution. A low priority is alsogiven to the investigation and prosecution of retail dealing incannabis, and police are only required to confront dealers whenthey advertise publicly or conduct their business in aprovocative manner. As long as there is no sale to minors, noadvertising, no sale of 'hard' drugs, and if the dealing takesplace without causing a public nuisance, then (generallyspeaking) there will be no police intervention. Where there arebreaches of the type outlined above, administrative measures,such as the withdrawal of permits to serve drinks and food, areimposed. If the parties involved persist in contravening theguidelines, they are issued with a warning. Confiscation of thedrugs may be another consequence of continuing breaches of theguidelines. [30]Marshall et al. (1990) report that only veryrarely is imprisonment the consequence of such violations. Theextent to which the guidelines, or the Opium Act, are followeddepends on local circumstances. Sanctions imposed may varybetween different districts of The Netherlands. Rationales Pragmatic rationales The goals or rationales for Dutch drug policy include thefollowing: to promote safer methods of consumption of cannabis; to limit sales of cannabis to specialist sellers; to limit progression from cannabis use to other drugs; to limit the amount of violence in the cannabis distribution system; and to limit the substitution of other (more damaging) drugs for cannabis. Philosophical rationales The 'drug problem' in The Netherlands has always beenrecognised as a complex social problem and as such, lawenforcement and penal sanctions alone have never been seen torepresent a complete solution . During the parliamentary debateon the revised Opium Act of 1976 Irene Vorrink, the Minister ofPublic Health, identified the following aims that form the basisof drug policy in The Netherlands: the central aim is the prevention and amelioration of social and individual risks caused by the use of drugs; a rational relation between those risks and policy measures; a differentiation of policy measures which will also take into account the risks of legal recreational and medical drugs; a priority of repressive measures against the trafficking of drugs other than cannabis; and the inadequacy of the criminal law with regard to any other aspect of the drug problem ([31] Handelingen 1976, cited in Leuw 1991, p10). The aims outlined above illustrate that The Netherlands drugpolicy is characterised by a number of factors. First, thecriminal law was never thought to be a solution to the drugproblem. Government policy with respect to 'hard' drugs isbroadly based and focuses on treatment and assistance for theuser and punishment for the commercial dealer ([32]Marshall etal. 1990). Secondly, it is recognised that the basis of drugpolicy should be to minimise harm rather than eradicate drug use,and thirdly, it is argued that drug policy should not be the samefor all illicit drugs. Cannabis is seen in a different light fromother drugs. Clearly there are pragmatic reasons for thisseparation, as the user markets for different drugs are dividedand users of cannabis are, it is argued, less likely to progressto the use of 'harder' drugs. However there is also evidence that suggests that the use ofcannabis was never perceived by Dutch society to be aparticularly compelling social problem. Leuw claims that: Inaccordance with the legal differentiation between cannabisproducts and hard drugs, drug policy encompassing prevention andassistance developed primarily in reaction to the emerging heroinproblem. The cannabis problem - if there ever had been one seemedto have disappeared from the face of the earth even before theamended Opium Act became effective ([33]Leuw 1991, p725). The separation of cannabis from other drug problems also hashad the effect of making the drug problem more manageable.[34]Van Vliet (1988) is critical of the US style of drug policythat makes no moral or legal distinction between different typesof drug offences or different types of drugs and claims that 'bylumping all these different phenomena together, societies andgovernments help to create a problem which is unsolvable' (vanVliet 1988). Conversely, The Netherlands breaks down the'inextricable' problem into 'manageable bits'. In the mid-1980s, a Government-sponsored research project ledto the development of the concept of 'normalisation' or 'culturalintegration' which added to the sophistication of Dutch drugpolicy ([35]van Vliet 1990;[36] Leuw 1991). 'Normalisation'recognises that some type of drug use is natural to all humansocieties and argues that the eradication of all drug use is anunrealistic policy goal. The reduction of drug use and the socialand individual problems associated with it are felt to be farmore reasonable policy goals. Central to the concept of'normalisation' is the idea that drug users should not bemarginalised from the rest of society. In a speech to the DutchParliament, the State Secretary of Health stated, in 1985, that:Normalisation ... includes the cultural integration of drug usersin society ... This does not mean the elimination of the drugphenomenon as a social reality: it means a change of contextwhich clears the way for a different approach ... drug addictsshould be treated neither as criminals nor as dependent patientsbut as 'normal' people to whom we can make 'normal' demands andwho should be offered 'normal' opportunities ([37]van Vliet 1990,p727). The implications for cannabis policy of 'normalisation' areclear. According to the Dutch, the eradication of cannabis use isan unrealistic policy goal and the creation of a 'deviant status'for drug users means that users are more likely to 'drop out' ofmain stream society and perhaps start using more dangerous drugs.The use of the criminal law to deal with cannabis use wouldmarginalise cannabis users and this would be seen asunnecessarily destructive in terms of its social costs. Outcomes Today it is possible to openly buy and use cannabis in anumber of coffee shops in Amsterdam and other regional centres.Most of these coffee shops do not sell any other drugs and manydo not even sell alcohol. However, the public consumption ofcannabis has been subject to criticism from other countries, whoseem to equate public consumption with increased use. Downes(1988) has claimed that the image of The Netherlands portrayed inthe international media is one of 'a blinkered liberalismbelatedly struggling to cope with the results of its ownpermissiveness' and cites an example of a British journalist whowrote in the Sunday Times that 'Amsterdam has a long history offree-thinking and tolerating most things except law and order ...But the city's tolerance has been worn thin by crime, drug abuseand militant squatters' ([38]Downes 1988, p123). Unsurprisingly, Dutch commentators do not subscribe to theview that their society is on the brink of collapse. They arguethat the 'hash cafes' have been integrated as normal urbanfacilities and do not pose a threat to public order ([39]Leuw1991). The point has also been made that visible drug use onlysignals failure if maintaining an image of a drug-free society isan aim of drug policy (Leuw 1991). In contrast, the Dutch, whoaim to prevent drug users from being marginalised, may seevisible drug use as a sign of success. Despite the impression presented in the international media,most studies suggest that the policies implemented in TheNetherlands have not resulted in any significant increase in druguse or changes in patterns of use ([40]Engelsmann 1989;Wijingaart 1988a cited in [41]Wardlaw 1992, p23). A recent studycombined the results of over 20 Dutch studies that examined thepercentage of the population who had 'ever used' cannabis andcompared them with data from Norway, Sweden and the USA. Theperiod from 1970 to 1988 was examined and the authors concludedthat: The results of the time analysis show that the prevalence ofcannabis use since 1970 decreased, whereas the policy became moretolerant. Since 1979 a slight increase in the use of cannabis canbe observed. A comparison with data from other countries with amore restrictive policy reveals that the use of cannabis in TheNetherlands is on the same level as in Sweden and Norway (around10-15 per cent), but far lower than that in the US (exceeding 50per cent). However the downward trend in these three countriessince 1984 did not occur in The Netherlands ([42]Driesen, van Dam& Olsen 1989, p11 cited in Leuw 1991). The savings made to law enforcement and criminal justicebudgets of not processing large numbers of cannabis offenders aresubstantial and should be seen as one of the primary benefits ofthe Dutch approach to drug policy. In addition, the cannabismarket and distribution system is free from violence ([43]vanVliet 1990). It has also been argued that the Dutch approach has led tosafer patterns of cannabis use. First, the fact that users ofcannabis do not seem to turn to other more dangerous drugs isused as evidence that the policy of the separation of drugmarkets is working ([44]van Vliet 1990). [45]Cohen (1988) arguesthat Dutch cannabis users, unlike their counterparts in the USA,are not likely to ingest the herbicide paraquat in the cannabisthat they consume, and are also more likely to consume the drugin a safer way because the sale of drug paraphernalia such aswater pipes is legal in The Netherlands (Cohen 1988). Cohen hasalso argued that 'the knowledge of how to regulate cannabis usehas become an inconspicuous part of local Dutch youth culturebecause the development of drug use rules was not pushed out ofthe mainstream and into deviant sub cultures' (Cohen 1988, p24). In terms of the goals that Dutch policy makers identified,drug policy in The Netherlands has been moderately successful.However, the Dutch approach to drug policy has not been popularinternationally: Germany and the USA in particular have beenvocal in their opposition. In recent times this has led to theintroduction of tougher drug policies with respect to 'harddrugs' ([46]Marshall et al. 1990), however these pressures havenot yet had any impact on cannabis policy. Indeed, it has beenspeculated that Dutch cannabis policy is unlikely to change as aresult of international pressure ([47]Wardlaw 1992). CONCLUSION - THE DUTCH APPROACH In a variety of ways The Netherlands drug policy meets manyof the criteria outlined in [48]Chapter 2. First, Dutch policy makers have recognised the need to havedifferent policies for different drugs. The idea of separating'drugs of unacceptable risk' and cannabis is based on the ideathat the control regime that appears to be appropriate for oneillicit drug need not apply to others. Secondly, policy makers have managed to separate argumentsabout the consequences of drug use from arguments about morals.In fact, Dutch policy was intended to be 'non-moralistic'([49]Leuw 1991). It has been claimed that, in The Netherlands,drug use has never been seen as a 'moral' issue and it is arguedthat: Political speeches elaborating on the abhorrence of illegaldrugs have seldom been staged. They would appear as quitemisplaced in Dutch political culture. Consequently there are novotes to be won or positions to be conquered by rallying ananti-drug theme ([50]Leuw 1991). Thirdly, this non-moralistic approach to drug policy has ledto the development of realistic policy goals with respect tocannabis use. [51]Leuw (1991) notes that in The Netherlands therehas been no pledge of 'solving the problem' of drug use. Insteadof attempting to eradicate drug use Dutch authorities haveadopted the more pragmatic goal of minimising the risks anddamaging effects of drug use. Of concern to some observers,however, is the Dutch approach of formalising inconsistencybetween the provisions of legislation and its implementation. Anargument can be advanced that this conveys confusing messages tothe community. It is preferable, some would argue, forlegislation and policy on implementation to be aligned so thatboth permit (or proscribe) the use of cannabis in certaincircumstances. Having legislation creating an offence of cannabisuse, along with policy declaring that it is inexpedient toprosecute such offences, seems to be acceptable in the Dutchcontext, although it would possibly be unacceptable in othercultures. We return to this apparent difficulty in the concludingchapter of this report. Conclusion - the total prohibition options The Netherlands has been successful in terms of the goalsidentified by Dutch policy makers. Their policy has not resultedin the increased use of cannabis; indeed levels of cannabis useare markedly lower than those seen in the United States orAustralia. There is little violence associated with the cannabisdistribution system, cannabis users do not seem to progress tousing more serious drugs and the drug is consumed in a mannerwhereby the risks of harm are minimised. Dutch policy is also relatively successful in terms of manyof the policy goals that we discussed above. The separation ofcannabis from other drugs ensures that The Netherlands has a moremanageable drug policy. The goals of policy are realistic andpolicy makers have not confused moral arguments with argumentsabout the consequences of drug use. In contrast, the US drug strategy with respect to cannabisdoes not seem to be particularly successful. Despite considerableeconomic and social costs, cannabis use is far from beingeradicated in the USA. Cannabis users may be consuming the drugin a particularly dangerous manner, the illicit drugsdistribution system (of which cannabis is a part) is associatedwith violence, and law enforcement, criminal justice processingand the imprisonment of cannabis-related offenders costs Americantax payers millions of dollars every year. The USA has not emerged favourably in relation to the goalsidentified in the first part of this report. Apparently Americanpolicy makers have not recognised the need to consider differentpolicy strategies for different drugs, leaving cannabis part ofthe larger, seemingly unsolvable 'drug problem'. Moral argumentshave been confused with arguments about the consequences of druguse, and this has led to the development of unrealistic policygoals and a failure to recognise that the control regime imposedto deal with the problem of cannabis use may be causing more harmthan the cannabis use itself. Examples from the USA and TheNetherlands demonstrate that the legislative option of totalprohibition can be implemented in very different ways. The twocountries have very different philosophical and pragmaticrationales for their policies and, unsurprisingly, the outcomesof the policies have varied considerably. In developing policy, international examples are of benefitto Australian policy makers. It should be remembered, however,that the relative success or failure of drug policies depend asmuch on cultural factors, existing patterns of drug use, andpublic views of drug use, as they do on the soundness of thepolicy. References Boaz, D. 1990, 'The consequences of prohibition', in TheCrisis in Drug Prohibition, ed. D. Boaz, Cato Institute,Washington DC. Cohen, P. 1988, 'Building upon the successes ofDutch drug policy', The International Journal on Drug Policy,vol. 2, no. 2, pp22-24. Downes, D. 1988, Contrasts in Tolerance:Post-war Penal Policy in The Netherlands and England and Wales,Clarendon Press, Oxford. Driessen, van Dam & Olsen 1989, 'Deontwikkeling van het cannabisgebruik in Nederland, enkeleEuropese landen en de VS sinds 1969', Tijidschrift voor alcohol,drugs en andere psychotrope stoffen, vol. 15, pp2-15, cited inLeuw, E. 1991, 'Drugs and drug policy in The Netherlands,' inCrime and Justice: A Review Of Research, vol 14., ed. M. Tonry,University of Chicago Press, Chicago. Engelsman, E. L. 1989,'Dutch policy on the management of drug-related problems',British Journal of Addiction, vol. 84, pp211-218. Inciardi, J.(ed.) 1990, Handbook of Drug Control in the United States,Greenwood Press, New York. Kleiman, Mark A.R. 1989, Marijuana:Costs of Abuse, Costs of Control, Greenwood Press, United States.Kleiman, Mark A.R. 1992, Against Excess: Drug Policy for Results:Alcohol, Cocaine, Heroin, Marijuana, Tobacco, Basic Books, NewYork. Kleiman, Mark A.R & Saiger, A.J. 1990, 'Druglegalisation: The importance of asking the right question', TheHofstra Law Review, vol. 18, 1989-90, pp527-565. Leuw, E 1991,'Drugs and drug policy in The Netherlands,' in Crime and Justice:A Review Of Research, vol. 14, ed. M. Tonry, University ofChicago Press, Chicago. Marshall, I E., Anjewerierden, O. &Atteveld, H.A. 1990, 'Toward an Americanisation of Dutch drugpolicy', Justice Quarterly, vol. 7, no. 2, pp391-420. Nadelmann,E.A. 1991, 'Drug prohibition in the United States: Costs,consequences and alternatives', Notre Dame Journal of Law, Ethicsand Public Policy, vol. 5, no. 37, pp783-808. National Instituteon Drug Abuse 1991, Household Surveys as cited in US Bureau ofJustice Statistics 1992, Drugs Crime and the Justice System, USGovernment Printing Office, Washington. Reuter, P. 1987, 'Whatimpasse? A skeptical view', Nova Law Review, vol. 11, no. 3,pp1025-1040. Single, E. 1989, 'The impact of marijuanadecriminalisation: An update', Journal of Public Health Policy,vol. 10, no. 4, pp456-466. US Bureau of Justice Statistics 1992,A National Report. Drugs, Crime and the Justice System, USGovernment Printing Office, Washington. van Vliet, H. 1988, 'Drugpolicy as a management strategy', The International Journal onDrug Policy, vol. 1, no 1, pp27-19. van Vliet, H. 1990, 'Theuneasy decriminalisation: A perspective on Dutch drug policy',Hofstra Law Review, vol. 18, 1989-90, pp717-750. Wardlaw, G.1992, 'Overview of national drug control strategies' inComparative Analysis of Illicit Drug Strategy, Monograph Seriesno. 18, National Campaign Against Drug Abuse, eds M. Bull, D.McDowell, J. Norberry, H. Strang, & G. Wardlaw, AGPS,Canberra. Wijingaart, Govert Frank van de 1991, CompetingPerspectives on Drug Use: The Dutch Experience, Swets andZeitlinger, Amsterdam. CliffSchaffer's Home Page WT02-B03-3IA086-000614-B049-212http://206.61.184.43:80/schaffer/Library/studies/aus/can_ch5.htm 206.61.184.43 19970122023651 text/html 83826HTTP/1.0 200 OKDate: Wednesday, 22-Jan-97 02:36:42 GMTServer: WebSitePro/1.1f (S/N wpo-0deb)Allow-ranges: bytesContent-type: text/htmlLast-modified: Saturday, 28-Dec-96 07:15:04 GMTContent-length: 83608 Australian Cannabis (Marijuana) Report - Chapter 5 CHAPTER 5: DIVERSION AND COMPULSORY TREATMENT Introduction This chapter covers the two related fields of diversion andtreatment - including compulsory treatment - for drug offenders,particularly where cannabis is involved. Such diversion maysimply involve diversion from the criminal justice system forindividuals involved in minor cannabis offences; it may alsoinvolve diversion to treatment for those who either want, or arejudged by others, to need treatment for drug use sufficientlyserious to bring them into contact with the criminal justicesystem. Diversion is a form of intervention in the lives of offendersprimarily based on humanitarian grounds (i.e. to keep them out ofprison), but also, more pragmatically, to relieve the burden onthe courts and the prisons imposed by the very large numbers ofpeople charged with very minor offences. While diversion from acourt appearance is a mild form of intervention receiving broadcommunity support, diversion to treatment, particularly whenmandated by the court, raises philosophical issues relating tothe degree of intervention the state should be empowered toexercise over people's lives. Compulsory treatment when it takesthe form of civil commitment is the most extreme form ofintervention, and, where ordered for drug offenders, is morallydistasteful to many and the subject of much controversy.Nevertheless, there are legislative provisions for civilcommitment of drug offenders in many countries, includingAustralia. We begin the chapter with a discussion of the concept ofdiversion, then review existing diversion programs in Australiaand overseas, with particular reference to programs involvingtreatment. The subject of compulsory treatment, including civilcommitment for drug offenders, is dealt with next, with anoverview of international legislation and treatment programs,along with such evaluations as exist. The implications of thisfor offenders whose primary drug is cannabis are discussed andsome conclusions are drawn regarding treatment for repeatoffenders. Finally, we present a summary of the major findings forcannabis users resulting from our review of the key Australianand international literature dealing with diversion and treatmentfor drug offenders. The concept of diversion In the US, accordingto Tomasic ([1]1977, cited in Dept of Attorney-General 1982, p6),official use of the term 'diversion' occurred for the first timein the US President's Commission on Law Enforcement andAdministration of Justice. The following are two definitions ofdiversion from the US literature: ... the disposition of acriminal complaint without conviction, the non-criminaldisposition being conditioned on either the performance ofspecified obligations by the defendant, or his participation incounselling or treatment, ([2]Nimmer 1974, cited in Dept ofAttorney-General 1982, p6). ... those formally acknowledged andorganised efforts to utilize alternatives to the initial orcontinued criminal justice processing of alleged offenders, whichare undertaken prior to adjudication but after a prosecutableaction has occurred, ([3]Rovner-Pieczenik, cited in Dept ofAttorney-General 1982, p6). Due to fears, in the case ofnon-trial disposition, of unfairness, lack of proceduralprotection and lack of follow-up treatment to prevent recurrenceof the offence, the Commission recommended formalising theprocedure and adding extra-legal services such as treatment andpreventative education as an integral part of the non-trialdisposition. The total package came to be known as 'diversion'([4]Dept of Attorney-General 1982, p8). The early justifications for diversion included: relief of overburdened courts; avoiding the further criminalisation of first offenders; avoiding the disadvantaging of first offenders on re-entry to society by their being labelled as criminals; providing a preferable way of dealing with certain offenders such as juveniles or drug users, who could be better dealt with in the community than in prisons; and providing cost-benefits to the community and a more humane way of dealing with certain categories of offenders ([5]Dept of Attorney-General 1982, p9). The term 'diversion' when used in relation to the Australiancriminal justice system may incorporate a 'range of related butrelatively exclusive procedures some of which are seen aspotential alternatives to "due process" others asadditions to it' ([6]Williams 1981, p3). Those falling into the'alternatives' classification include: pre-arrest diversion: this amounts to discretionary measures taken by police at the point of apprehension of an offender; and pre-trial diversion (or 'pre-court', in Australia): in this case certain conditions have to be satisfied by the offender, following which the alleged offences are struck off the record. Those falling into the 'additions' classification include: +pre-sentence diversion: this is essentially remand for assessmentand/or treatment; and + post-conviction diversion: in this caseoffenders are directed to some form of treatment-relatedsupervision as a part of their sentence (presumably in lieu ofimprisonment). Prisoners may also be diverted from jail totreatment as a condition of their parole. These additions to dueprocess, therefore, function as increased sentencing options([7]Williams 1981, p3). The subject of diversion has been a neglected area inAustralia, although there have been 'official' diversionaryprograms operating at least since 1977 (in NSW). The termdiversion is applied to a wide variety of programs, and inAustralia can occur pre-court or pre- or post-sentence. Pre-courtdiversion can vary from a police warning or an expiation noticefor a minor drug offence, to referral for drug-treatment as analternative to a punitive sentence. Unlike some countries, in Australia cannabis use andpossession offences are not regarded as very serious incomparison with offences involving 'harder' drugs, and thesubject of treatment for cannabis use has similarly not beenconsidered much of an issue. In fact the legislation in someStates does not cover diversion for treatment on the grounds ofcannabis use alone. If cannabis users are diverted for treatmentit is usually because they are polydrug users, as many of themore serious users are. The main diversion programs operating in Australia will bebriefly described, and an overview presented of diversion in theUS and other countries, with reference to their relevance forcannabis users. Key features of treatment programs for drug usersare discussed, along with the issue of compulsory treatment and,what is known in the United States as, civil commitment. Diversion programs in Australia (10) AUSTRALIAN CAPITAL TERRITORY The ACT Drugs of Dependence Act 1989 (as amended in 1992 and1993) allows as a sentencing option anyone found guilty of acrime to be sent for assessment as to whether they aredrug-dependent and therefore suitable to be referred fortreatment. Those brought to court usually appear on a combinationof charges of different degrees of seriousness. Often a communityservice order may be the sentence or a conviction onrecognisance, which can include a good behaviour bond or apartially or fully suspended sentence. Assessment or treatmentorders are rare and are typically given for such offences asunlawful possession, stolen property offences, burglary and motorvehicle theft (where drug dependence is believed to havecontributed to the criminal behaviour).11 The DODA (Drugs of Dependence) Referral Program works in thefollowing way: anyone committing an offence requiring a courtappearance who seems to defence counsel to have a drug problem(or who claims to have a drug problem) is entitled to have thisfact raised before sentencing. If the court issues an assessmentorder, the client then has to contact the DODA Referral Programwhere a counsellor takes a case history to be sent to theTreatment Assessment Panel. The panel consists of a legal person(usually a solicitor) and two others with extensive knowledge ofdrug and alcohol treatment in the ACT, who are appointed for ayear. The client is assessed and options for treatment putforward. The client then goes to the chosen treatment centrewhich reports back to the panel as to whether the client issuitable or not suitable for treatment. The client then goes backto the panel for a second time at which time the panel looks atthe information from the treatment centre and listens to what theclient has to say, since the client has high input andresponsibility throughout the process. If the client fails tocome back (or fails to attend at any stage) an arrest warrant maybe issued, or the panel may suggest a Breach of Assessment Order.This information goes to the court, where a warrant for arrestmay be issued, or the failure to attend may be brought up whenthe client next comes before the court and the client may losethe right to the alternative to sentencing. This does not happenvery often, as the court usually chooses the treatment order whenthey have the option. The court specifies the length of time atthe treatment centre and periodic reviews by the panel, which canbe every three months. The program tries to be lenient if theclient misses one or two reviews, as the objective is harmminimisation rather than abstinence (unless the client has optedfor abstinence). If the client consistently fails to appear forreview or is not doing well (this is not the usual outcome) it ispossible to breach them. The breach is issued in court but DODAprovides the report on behalf of the panel. Then a summons can beissued and the usual court process (arrest warrant issued) isfollowed. The magistrate primarily concerned with diversion made thefollowing observations: Most drug-related offences are caused by alcohol, often used in conjunction with cannabis, which is particularly dangerous if the offender is driving. The DODA Program does not cover alcohol. There is concern about the danger posed by offenders combining alcohol and cannabis prior to driving (many alcohol-dependent people coming before the DODA treatment panel are also cannabis-dependent). Clients should not be referred for treatment in the case of cannabis use unless assessed as 'seriously dependent on cannabis', in order to screen out those seeking simply to avoid conviction. A distinct preference was expressed for post-court diversion, as opposed to pre-court diversion, so that the court has the opportunity to assess offenders. Offenders may be diverted more than once. The goal is 'harm reduction', and total rehabilitation is not expected after the first treatment. It was confirmed by the magistrate and treatment personnelthat there have been clients coming to the program who complainof cannabis dependence. Personnel at the DODA Referral Programreport that there is very little treatment for cannabis users. Itis usually outpatient treatment and 'is not 100 per centsuccessful'. The treatment they use is adapted from the treatmentfor tobacco, i.e. a process of slow cessation, while keeping adiary of the situations and times of use, with counselling once aweek. Ideally the treatment should be tailored to theindividual's needs. Very few cannabis users would be referred toa residential facility such as Karralika, and if so, it would beon the grounds of polydrug use. The DODA program is the only one of its sort in Australia,and mainly deals with fairly longstanding opiate users withlengthy records. There is a juvenile panel, but this has not beenused much. If magistrates send more juveniles in future, theprogram would be especially relevant for alcohol use. A formalevaluation has not yet been done, but program staff claim thefollowing desirable results: a reduction in criminal activity onthe part of its clients; monitoring their progress rather thanseeing them go to jail; and reducing their drug use. Very fewbecome drug-free, but there is significant harm reduction fromthe social, personal and economic viewpoint. SOUTH AUSTRALIA The drug diversion scheme operating in South Australia wasestablished when the Controlled Substances Act 1984 provided forthe South Australian Drug Assessment and Aid Panel (the panel) asan alternative to the criminal law for illicit drug users.12 Thepanel is only one of 13 penalty outcomes for drug offenders inSouth Australia, ranging from a $50 expiation fee for possessionof small amounts of cannabis and cannabis resin to $1 million andlife imprisonment for the most serious trafficking offence. Theunderlying philosophy is to make a clear distinction between thedrug dealer and the drug user (Gray, Reynolds & Rumbold1992). The new Act came about primarily as a result of therecommendation of the Sackville Commission that drug assessmentand aid panels should be established to which all persons chargedwith simple possession offences involving drugs must be referredbefore a prosecution may proceed. Juvenile Aid Panels were alsoestablished - as an alternative to the juvenile court system -which continue to operate and to provide for the diversion ofsome, but not all, young offenders out of the criminal justicesystem ([8]Gray, Reynolds & Rumbold 1992). The panel provides for absolute diversion in so far as thepanel and its clients, not the courts and prosecutors, determinethe outcome of proceedings. All persons charged with a 'simplepossession' offence (i.e. involving personal use of illicit drugsother than cannabis and cannabis resin and including use orpossession of implements for the use of an illicit drug) must bereferred to the panel, thus precluding any issue of discretion onthe part of courts or prosecutors, and removing the offender fromthe court system ([9]Gray, Reynolds & Rumbold 1992, p129). The panel, however, considers only a limited number ofoffences, and although an amendment to the Act permitted courtsto refer matters to the panel for the preparation of pre-sentencereports, this power has rarely been exercised ([10]Gray, Reynolds& Rumbold 1992, p130). The panel consists of a lawyer and twopeople with extensive knowledge of the problems and/or treatmentof illicit drug use. Hearings are private and proceedingsconfidential in order to create an atmosphere of trust. Clientsare referred from either the police or the courts, more often theformer. Before being dealt with by the panel, the client musthave admitted to the offence and be willing to undertake theassessment and any treatment or counselling which may berequired. The client may choose the option of being dealt with bythe courts. Those who do not appear willing to change their livesand those who do not respond to the initial letter from the panelor attend their appointment are referred back to court. Those dealt with by the panel must undertake to comply withthe directions of the panel and attend panel sessions asrequested over a six-month period.13 At the end of this periodthe panel instructs the court and the police to withdraw thematter, and no record of any drug offence may be usedsubsequently against the client ([11]Gray, Reynolds & Rumbold1992, p129). The major findings of an evaluation of the panel were that: Out of the 1,400 clients seen between May 1985 and September 1991, most were male and in their 20s, directed to the panel for illegal possession of, mostly, amphetamines followed by heroin. The panel did not provide the early intervention hoped for. Although most clients were being offered the opportunity for assessment for treatment for the first time, many already had criminal histories. Intervention at an earlier stage is desirable for a more successful outcome. The amount of polydrug use 'should be seen as a matter of significance and concern. This includes the dangerous - though legal - drugs, alcohol and tobacco, which will often prove more of a problem and potentially more destructive to clients than the illicit drug problem that brought them to the attention of the panel in the first place' ([12]Gray, Reynolds & Rumbold 1992, p133). While cannabis and cannabis resin offences were excluded from the panel's jurisdiction, 'there were indications of extensive and potentially harmful levels of cannabis use among many clients' ([13]Gray, Reynolds & Rumbold 1992, p132). The characteristics of most of the clients were such that the treatment required was based on coping and lifestyle skills 'rather than strategies influenced by models of physiological addiction' ([14]Gray, Reynolds & Rumbold 1992, p132). The panel is only as effective as the treatment and other social supports which are available. The statutory barrier allowing only people over 18 to be seen by the panel means that many have had drug habits for years. Although structured to deal with these cases, the Childrens Aid Panel is not sufficiently a specialist drug assessment and aid body, nor are drugs its primary concern. Overall 'the justification for the panel as a means ofdiverting offenders from the criminal justice system andproviding intervention opportunities is overwhelming' ([15]Gray,Reynolds & Rumbold 1992, p134). Interviews with criminaljustice personnel indicated that the panel is satisfactory fromthe point of view of cutting down on court congestion and fromthe point of view that it is treatment-focused rather thanpunitive. There is also no stigma of a conviction being recorded.However, it seems that within the confines of the Act, the policehave the discretion as to what charge to lay, e.g. if theoffender is known by the police and has an amount of the drugwhich could be trafficked, he may instead be charged withtrafficking. NEW SOUTH WALES Offences relating to alcohol or drug use in New South Walesare covered by the Drug Misuse and Trafficking Act 1985 (NSW).This Act distinguishes between cannabis and other drugs only inthe case of commercial trafficking. Possession and administrationof cannabis are prosecuted summarily and offenders are liable toa penalty of $2,000 and/or two years' imprisonment. Cultivation,manufacture and production, and supply are prosecuted onindictment, an offender being liable to a fine of $2,000 and/ortwo years imprisonment if there are less than five plants or lessthan a quantity of 25g. New South Wales was the first State inAustralia to introduce a drug diversion program. Its current program, the Drug and Alcohol Court AssessmentProgramme (DACAP) is a post-conviction, pre-sentence programwhere offenders on drug-related charges (such as possession of anillicit substance) or drug-involved crime (such as property crimeto finance drug use) are bailed/remanded to attend a treatmentagency and undergo a comprehensive assessment which forms thebasis of a pre-sentence report for the magistrate, containingrecommendations for sentencing, including treatment options([16]Desland & Batey 1990, p796). Successful completion of the treatment program, the length ofwhich is determined by a health worker, finalises the matter([17]Walters & Coventry 1993). A further objective is to'provide drug offenders with a comprehensive assessment that mayencourage them to consider improving their health and socialfunctioning' ([18]Schlosser 1984, pxi). DACAP further attempts through these assessments to match theindividual's drug-related problems to the most appropriate rangeof therapeutic interventions within a legal/health framework(Schlosser 1984).'... the diversion from the Criminal JusticeSystem to the health care system provides to the offender in manycases, the initial insight and confrontation that criminalactivities are directly related to their health. Often thisinsight initiates motivation to address the problems of substanceabuse' ([19]MSJ Keys Young, 1992, p92). DACAP statistics between 1990 and 1992 indicate that, whileheroin was the main drug of concern (after alcohol) in about onecase in five, both in 1990-91 and 1991-92, cannabis was the nextranking drug ([20]MSJ Keys Young, 1992, p96).14 An interview withone of DACAP's clients who had been arrested for possession andsupply of a large amount of cannabis revealed that, although heknew that he had 'a big marijuana problem', he had never beenprepared to do anything about it and that DACAP provided theopportunity and a reason to 'address the issue'. The magistrateplaced this client under supervision, fined him, imposed asentence of periodic detention, with 20 hours at an AttendanceCentre and the requirement to undertake a series of courses onissues such as personal development, money management, drug andalcohol information and education. The client fulfilled theserequirements ([21]MSJ Keys Young, 1992, p118). MSJ Keys Young's recent evaluation of DACAP included theobservations that: Magistrates generally agreed that a DACAP report might be considered appropriate in cases involving a relatively serious and/or repeated offence, where a custodial sentence was a realistic possibility (some used it even where a custodial sentence was unlikely), and where it appeared that drug/alcohol dependency might be a significant factor (1992, p113). It was very desirable to use the pre-sentence 'crisis' period to get the dependency problem acknowledged and, if possible, to start treatment, as if left until after sentence, the chances of success were much less (1992, p105); sometimes it takes a long time for a drug user to recognise dependency (e.g. in the case of cannabis) and an intervention such as that of DACAP can be very beneficial in confronting this. Some magistrates observed that they did not see many people who had been through the DACAP process coming before the court for repeat offences. Important issues were availability of places in treatment and skilled counsellors with broad views of dependency. Regarding the issue of coercion, several evaluations of DACAP have 'tentatively concluded' that the legal coercion into treatment as evidenced in the DACAP program was effective in acting as an early intervention into drug use, generating a younger client less involved with drugs, who is more amenable to an abstinent outcome (Desland & Batey 1988; [22]Schlosser 1984; [23]Bush & Scagliotti 1983; [24]Williams 1981; all cited in Desland & Batey 1988, p51). This is consistent with other studies of court-ordered assessment/treatment for substance use ([25]Salmon & Salmon 1983, cited in Desland & Batey 1987, p51). VICTORIA Victoria appears not to have any government-implementedpre-court drug diversion programs ([26]Walters & Coventry1993). The Alcoholics and Drug Dependent Person's Act 1968 (Vic),s13 provides for bonds under which offenders may be ordered toattend treatment as an alternative to a custodial sentence (Skene1986, cited in [27]Walters 1993, p11). Programs are available foroffenders who are detected to be intoxicated at the time of theoffence and considered by the court to be 'habitually usingintoxicating liquor or drugs of addiction'. The Court Advice and Assessment Programme precipitates acourt report which makes recommendations on the suitability of acommunity-based order, and provides a management plan based onthe offender's level of substance use. Referral to the program isat the discretion of the court, and applies only at themagistrate's jurisdiction, but is not limited to particularoffences ([28]Gray, Reynolds & Rumbold 1992, p130). Inaddition, s67 of the Act allows for a good behaviour bond forfirst offenders so that the number of drug users ending up incourt is not large. A current study being carried out in Victoria by the NationalCentre for Socio-Legal Studies ([29]Walters & Coventry 1993)for the Victoria Police, is considering a pilot pre-court drugdiversion program for 'all first-time drug offenders apprehendedfor use and possession offences regardless of the illicitsubstance'. At the time of detection and arrest these offenderswould be considered 'recreational users', and one option forprocessing such offenders would be a diversion panel. In thiscase it would be up to the panel to assess the nature and extentof drug use and recommend a course of action ([30]Walters &Coventry 1993, p7). WESTERN AUSTRALIA In Western Australia, the Bail Act 1982 provides fortreatment as a condition of bail in the case of a defendant whois suffering from alcohol or drug dependence. Their pre-courtdiversion system, the Court Diversion Service (CDS) has beenoperating since 1988 as a cooperative venture between the WestAustralian Alcohol and Drug Authority (WAADA), the Department ofCorrective Services and non-government drug treatment agencies,coordinated by the WAADA. Any person with a drug dependencyproblem who is charged with a criminal offence is entitled toapply to the court for inclusion in the CDS program. However, itis important to note that persons are disqualified whose primarydrug problem is alcohol or cannabis unless there is evidence ofother current substance use that is a contributing factor.Informal referral and preassessment does occur and clients mayvoluntarily engage with a treatment agency prior to a formalreferral by the court (CDS 1993). CDS policy requires only that aperson admit to substance use, not to an alleged offence, thusthe person can be formally engaged in treatment for an admitteddrug problem and maintain a not guilty plea throughout the legalproceedings. If formal referral does not occur, the CDS is not empoweredto oversee the defendant's drug treatment and no CDS reports canbe provided to the courts on the defendants progress (CDS 1993). When formal referral to the CDS does occur, defendants areinformed of the relevant drug treatment agencies and theirphilosophies, and must choose. They are then required to remainwith that agency unless otherwise instructed by the CDS officer.Court appearances after formal referral are accompanied byinterim reports regarding progress, and at the point of plea orof a finding of guilt the defendant is generally remanded for afull pre-sentence report. The coercive nature of the CDS inengaging drug dependent persons in treatment programs duringtimes of legal crisis is acknowledged, and it is emphasised topotential clients that progress in treatment is only one aspecttaken into consideration by the sentencing judge or magistrate(CDS 1993). CDS personnel expressed the view that, whereas in the earlydays of the program there were mostly self-referrals, now mostare court-generated. People have always had the option oftreatment but clearly the catalyst is often a legal charge. Themore familiar the courts become with the process the more it isused, and it is regarded as being generally well accepted. Pre-court or pre-sentence diversion? As long as personalcannabis use/possession/cultivation remains illegal, thefundamental problem exists of the involvement of policediscretion and variation in enforcement policies from one officerto another and from one jurisdiction to another. Any contactbetween the cannabis user and the police (at street level) orbetween the user and the court has the potential for theindividual to have continuing involvement with the criminaljustice system. Police discretion at street level at the point ofarrest (or non-arrest) is inevitable. Police officers have thediscretion regarding whether or not to issue an expiation notice(in jurisdictions such as South Australia) or (in jurisdictionssuch as Victoria) to choose which (if any) of a number ofpossible charges they will lay, which can vary from possession totrafficking. While this could work in the interests of the offender, itmay also act in a discriminatory fashion, which is why many wouldmake the argument in favour of diversion systems which bring alloffenders before the court, thus guaranteeing them due process.Many lawyers tend to support leaving the conventional criminalprocessing intact 'to ensure that the diversion program does notresult in more coercive treatment of offenders through thenon-judicial exercise of discretion' (Dept of Attorney General1982, p78). In the case of expiation fines, it appears that manyfines are not being expiated.15 Therefore the objective ofrelieving the burden on the courts, while achieved to asubstantial degree, has not yet been 100 per cent successful, andthere is room for improvement in terms of reducing the number ofnon-expiators and consequently removing more offenders from thecriminal justice system. Diversion programs in other countries UNITED STATES The most prominent drug diversion programs in the US are theTreatment Alternatives to Street Crime (TASC) programs,established primarily to try to reduce the crime associated withdrug use (mainly heroin). This national pre-trial diversionprogram was expanded to include all drug users (except thosedependent on alcohol), including juveniles, recruited at allpoints of entry to the criminal justice system (e.g. throughpre-sentence referral, conditional probation, police diversionand conditional parole). The program varies with the differentlegal systems and drug problems existing from State to State. Forinstance, marijuana users and juveniles were excluded inColorado, whereas in Michigan marijuana users were preferred.Overall, however, most programs concentrated on heroin users([31]Dept of Attorney-General 1982, pp10-11). Such programs were not particularly amenable to satisfactoryevaluation and usually were restricted to an examination of howwell program objectives had been met. The results indicated: Dissatisfaction among law enforcement officials because of reduced opportunities for information from defendants regarding drug supplies (an example of the clash of philosophies between health authorities and law enforcement, which can be a factor contributing to failure in many diversion programs; this also indicates the emphasis on the supply reduction approach in the US, which is greater than that in Australia). Most of those diverted did not totally abstain from marijuana use although they reported reduced use (again this was not acceptable from the US total prohibition point of view, but a reduction in use can be seen as a successful program outcome in many treatment programs in Australia). There were fewer arrests and convictions (though marginally) among those diverted. There was some reduction in workload in the case of the prosecutor and the court but greatly increased workloads for the probation service. Purely from the treatment outcome point of view for the individual, the results were encouraging (though lack of adequate data precluded assessment of recidivism over the long term). Individuals' characteristics prior to program entry are an important determinant to successful program outcome (Rovner-Pieczenik cited in [32]Dept of Attorney-General 1982, p14). Criticisms of the program also include: The argument that the workloads of courts and prisons are not really reduced because people are being brought into the criminal justice process who would not have been processed at all, since they would have been handled in the community. Diversion programs are sometimes utilised by prosecutors and courts when less official procedures might accomplish the same objective with less intervention and use of court time. The court is saved time only if the accused would have gone to trial and then to jail. However diversion appears to be more an 'alternative todismissal of charges or probation than to incarceration'(Gorelick 1975 cited in [33]Dept of Attorney General 1982, p16).This view was also shared by the Canadian Law Reform Commission(Dept of Attorney-General 1982). Further criticisms were: That diversion might also come to carry with it a social stigma if it is an 'institutionalised element of the criminal justice system'. Unsuccessful participants may be disadvantaged when returned to the court system. Legal analysts are concerned about the exercise of judicial discretion by non-judicial bodies. Diversion could be seen as an expansion of social control, and the concept of 'need for treatment' has no inherent limitation ([34]Dept of Attorney-General 1982, pp16-17). All of the points made above are also valid for Australiandiversion schemes. A very recent form of pre-court intervention(for the purpose of treatment) operating in the US is the WeekendIntervention Program (WIP) which is reported to be 'highlyeffective in identifying and intervening with persons chargedwith alcohol- and other drug-related driving offences' (Siegal& Cole 1993). The underlying philosophy of the program is that the crisisnature of an encounter with the criminal justice system, ifsuccessfully managed, provides a valuable opportunity tointervene in an individual's life by identifying the clinicalneeds of substance users who are not yet receiving treatment, andin a non-punitive way 'gently' confronting participants with theconsequences of their own drug and alcohol use. The individual isprovided with a diagnostic assessment and treatment programrecommendation 'with a specificity unavailable throughtraditional settings' ([35]Siegal & Cole 1993, p133). Theprogram consists of a three-day residential program to whichpersons involved in a drug or alcohol offence may be remanded bya court or other supervising agency. It consists of 'Marathonsubstance abuse counselling sessions using acognitive-behavioural-oriented approach combined withpresentations structured around a modified health belief model'.This participation in the assessment and referral process itselfis regarded as being able to help prepare the substance user forany treatment to be received ([36]Siegal & Cole 1993,pp133-4). NEW ZEALAND New Zealand has an adult pre-trial diversion scheme whichcommenced operation in 1988. It was developed and is managed bythe New Zealand Police as part of a wider program which entailsan increasing emphasis on the use of discretion by police intheir handling of minor offenders. The scheme is not, at present,statutorily based although the Government is considering thisoption. The scheme is widely accepted by police officers, members ofthe judiciary and practising lawyers, as well as the offenderswho are offered pre-trial diversion. The New Zealand Police havedescribed the scheme in the following terms: The key steps in thescheme are that the offender must be a first offender (there arelimited exceptions in special cases), there is sufficientevidence to charge the offender, and information is then laid andat that stage the offender is considered for diversion. If theoffender meets the criteria [see below] and admits the offence tothe diversion coordinator (a police prosecutor) the court isasked to adjourn the case until the offender has completed therequirements of the diversion scheme. Those requirements mayconsist of paying money to a charity, doing community work,and/or attending specialist counselling depending on what problemthey may have, e.g. drugs, alcohol, anger management, etc. Oncethe requirements have been completed the police ask the court towithdraw the information (personal communication, New ZealandPolice, 17 December 1993). If the court agrees to withdraw theinformation, the offender is not convicted and the police destroythe offender's records, including fingerprints. The criteria for diversion are not rigid; they include thefollowing: The offender should be a first offender. There should be special circumstances which make the offender suitable for diversion. The offence must be non-serious. The offender must admit guilt, show remorse, and be prepared to pay full reparation to the victim. The victim must agree to diversion. The officer in charge of the case [generally the arresting officer] must agree to diversion. The offender must agree to diversion ([37]Young & Cameron 1991, pp9-10). The use of cannabis and the possession of small quantitiesfor personal use are considered to be minor offences, making anoffender eligible for consideration for diversion. (Clearly thecriterion relating to the consent of the victim is not relevantin such cases.) Consultants reviewed the scheme for the NewZealand Police in 1991. They reported that approximately 12 percent of the people dealt with through the diversionary processhad been charged with cannabis possession ([38]Young &Cameron 1991, pp41-6). The review indicated that the scheme wasgenerally very well received by all the parties involved and alsopointed to existing and potential difficulties and to ways inwhich it could be strengthened. The police and the Government arecurrently reviewing the scheme, considering the option of givingit a legislative base and ensuring that it operates in a similarmanner throughout the country. This diversionary scheme, combinedwith an actively implemented policy of cautioning minor offenderswhenever possible (rather than charging them), comprises anenlightened approach to the handling of minor offenders such ascannabis users. OTHER COUNTRIES An overview of international legislation relating todiversion, in countries covered by the World Health Organization([39]Porter, Arif & Curran 1986), indicates that manycountries provide for diversion to drug- and alcohol-dependencetreatment programs both separately and in combination, thecovering legislation falling into a variety of categories (e.g.mental health, public health, criminal or specialised treatmentlaws).16 The legal disposition of drug- or alcohol-dependent personsis frequently covered by the criminal law (e.g. under specifiedstatutory offence) or mental health legislation. In Victoria, forexample, treatment programs for drug and alcohol dependenceinclude provision for both voluntary and involuntary admission,while other provisions governing treatment may be found in roadtraffic laws and the mental health legislation (Porter, Arif& Curran 1986, pp36-37). Porter et al. emphasise theimportance of treatment as a service to the public and theindividual concerned, which should be available at every stage ofthe criminal justice system. Initial contact between the offender and the police can bevery important, as it may create the kind of crisis thatmotivates a person to undergo effective treatment, and the policeshould be 'both legally entitled and encouraged to refer theperson directly to a treatment program, in lieu of arrest, for ashort time until the emergency passes'. They claim that there aredefinite advantages in including treatment provisions in drugcontrol legislation because of the flexibility it gives to thecourts in imposing alternatives to penal sanctions ([40]Porter,Arif & Curran 1986, p116). To summarise some relevant points raised by Porter et al'soverview of international diversion legislation: 1. Cannabis is rarely named specifically in legislation relating to diversion for drug users who commit offences. Usually the legislation refers to 'narcotics', 'opiates', 'alcohol' or 'other drugs'. Although cannabis is usually not specifically singled out (as distinct from alcohol, for example, which is mostly treated in a special class of its own with specialised treatment), it falls within the general class of substances for which many countries legislate compulsory reporting and/or registration followed by referral into a treatment program. 2. There are many precedents among overseas countries for diversion and voluntary or non-voluntary commitment to treatment. There are also examples of such diversion occurring at every stage of the criminal justice process. 3. There is a clear lack of evaluation of programs, which means results cannot be quantified, but the general impression is one of diversion to treatment being more acceptable all round than imprisonment without rehabilitation, which would otherwise be the situation in countries with a total prohibition policy. 4. Civil commitment appears to be common internationally, but in Australia legislative provisions for civil commitment exist only in certain States, e.g. NSW and Victoria. (This is discussed further under the heading Compulsory Treatment for Drug Offenders: Criminal Justice System-Initiated Treatment and Civil Commitment.) 5. There are a wide variety of legislative approaches to treatment and many different routes. Among the problems raised are: 1. The different objectives (sometimes conflicting) of health professionals and legal practitioners, when diversion for treatment is involved. 2. The clear need for evaluation programs and for planning for these when the program is established. The importance is stressed of evaluating treatment programs in terms of the objectives stated in the legislation. It is important to establish realistic and concrete objectives for treatment in addition to the overriding goal of reducing morbidity and mortality. 3. With regard to compulsory treatment, it is acknowledged that it is in conflict with individual liberty and freedom of decision, and it is emphasised that the legislation should lay down the conditions governing participation in voluntary treatment programs, e.g. should the 'voluntary' status be ended if the client is not cooperating? 4. On occasions there may be legislation that is not used or does not work because of lack of suitable treatment facilities and resources. Drug diversion schemes of various types operate in overseascountries. In France, for example, an offender who complies witha court-determined treatment order is not liable to prosecution;in Germany, a period of treatment can be credited against acustodial sentence; in Massachusetts, a court-appointed diversionscheme operates to stay court proceedings ([41]Porter 1986,p171). In some countries, e.g. France and Italy, a personvoluntarily undergoing treatment, on completion is issued with acertificate as evidence to protect against subsequent prosecutionfor offences committed prior to treatment ([42]Leroy 1991). Ofthe 51 jurisdictions surveyed by the WHO, 22 diverted persons fortreatment at one or more of these stages in the criminal justiceprocess: (a) instead of arrest; (b) after arrest, pending trial;(c) after trial in lieu of imprisonment (e.g. suspendedsentence); and (d) correction with imprisonment (e.g. duringconfinement or as a condition of parole) (Porter, Arif &Curran 1986, p57). A major issue for legislators is whether such diversionshould be mandatory. If diversion is mandatory prior to orinstead of trial, this amounts to decriminalisation of theoffending behaviour.17 In Sweden, which allows for compulsorycommitment, there is now legislation in place criminalising druguse and widening the powers of the authorities to take adultalcohol and drug-dependent people into care. Sweden is a countrywith a strong temperance tradition which has led to 'an obsessionwith substance misuse generally'. Faced with the problem of AIDSand with economic difficulties, a 'new moralism' has developed inthis country leading to these harsher drug measures (Gould 1989,p731). Another approach to the handling of cannabis offenders isthat taken in the United Kingdom, where more than half of thepolice constabulary areas have allowed police officers to takenote of drug users found in possession of quantities of drugsconsistent with personal use. Police then have the option not toproceed with a legal charge unless the individual has beencautioned on more than two occasions previously ([43]Wodak 1993). A recent example of a pre-court initiative involving anattempt to bring drug users into contact with treatment is the'Southwark Arrest Referral Pilot Program', funded by the BritishHome Office Local Drug Prevention Team. This three-year pilotprogram, commenced in March 1991, is being carried out toestablish the effectiveness of arrest as an intervention for drugusers wanting help. Police provide arrestees with information onlocal drug referral agencies and cards are sent to all chargedoffenders. Also, drug workers are on call to visit the relevantpolice stations. Though referrals were not numerous, most ofthose participating in referral programs reported reduced druguse in the following 12-month period. The flaw in the program to date is the lack of effort andencouragement on the part of the police. However, it reflects anattempt to bring into a closer working relationship police andlocal welfare agencies in a harm reduction effort rather thansimply to exercise law enforcement against drug users([44]Walters & Coventry 1993, p12). Although the BritishCriminal Justice Act was proclaimed in 1991 with specificsections relating to the treatment of drug and alcohol dependentoffenders (Criminal Justice Act 1991, s69, schedule 1, cited inWalters and Coventry 1993, p11) and allowing for referral andassessment procedures as components of non-custodial orders, itdoes not establish diversionary programs for drug offenders. Compulsory treatment for drug users CRIMINAL JUSTICE SYSTEM-INITIATED DRUG TREATMENT AND CIVILCOMMITMENT A number of literature reviews have concluded that treatmentcan effectively reduce drug use as well as the criminal activitywhich often accompanies it ([45]Anglin & Hser 1990; Gerstein1990; Office of Technology Assessment 1990 in Anglin & Hser1991, p244). There is also increasing evidence that those coercedinto treatment by way of the criminal justice system achieve thesame success as those entering voluntarily (Anglin & Hser1991, p244). The issue for makers of social policy is how to increase thenumber entering treatment, since 'the nature of drug use,especially at abusive and addictive levels, often inhibits orprecludes self-motivation in the user toward voluntarily seekingtreatment' (Anglin & Hser 1991, p247). Many would say that 'when offenders, such as arrestees,probationers, inmates or parolees, are identified as substanceabusers by the criminal justice system, remanding to treatment isa necessary and logical action ... One of the most successful ofcoercive efforts has been civil commitment' (Anglin & Hser1991, p247; see also discussion below of countries which employcivil commitment). Carney, in his Drug Users and the Law inAustralia (1987), points out that, in Australia, civil commitmentpolicies for drug-dependent people date back to the 19th century,and were based on the early view of drug use as a 'disease' forwhich in-patient therapy should be compulsory (1987, p1). As early as 1867, Victoria copied Scotland's move to amendits lunacy laws to allow inebriates to be admitted to 'lunaticasylums', and in 1872 passed the Victorian Inebriates Act, whichwas the first comprehensive Inebriates Act to be enacted outsideAmerica. The other Australian States followed, with legislationin Tasmania in 1873, in South Australia in 1874, in Queensland in1898, in New South Wales in 1900 and in Western Australia in 1903(1987, p3). Much of the Australian State legislation has survivedto the present time. When Queensland was debating its legislationin 1896, the subject of drugs other than alcohol, i.e. 'opium,chloral and other drugs', came up for the first time (1987, p13).Legislation providing for voluntary or compulsory civil admissionto treatment facilities of alcohol or drug-dependent people is inforce in most of the major Australian jurisdictions - but is notmuch utilised. Carney (1987, pp52-53) outlines four approaches tothe regulation of entry to civil treatment schemes for dependentdrug users - the fourth 'applies the classic justifications forthe enactment of criminal law, namely that the actions of theprospective patient constitutes an intolerable degree of harm toother members of the community. Judicial commitment of offenders,and some third party proceedings initiated by police officers,fit this model' (1987, p53). Moving to the United States, the origins of 'civilcommitment' for opiate-dependent (and also alcohol-dependent)people date back to the second half of the 19th century when someof the laws enacted to provide for the civil commitment of thementally ill also permitted civil commitment of people dependenton narcotics ([46]Rosenthal 1988). In the United States civilcommitment generally takes the form, described by [47]Brown(1988, p664), of the direct remanding of the individual to thehealth care system in which civil procedures alone are broughtinto play ... This administrative/judicial action need notinvolve provision of legal counsel, the potential for judgment byone's peers, access to witnesses for one's defense, etc. With some exceptions (see Newman 1986, cited in [48]Brown1988), diversion from the criminal justice system for drugtreatment seems to be acceptable to both health and criminaljustice authorities. However, in democratic countries, civilcommitment of the drug user conflicts with many people's viewsregarding civil rights, the proper relationship of the individualto the State and the use of the health care system for socialcontrol. Regardless, legislation in a number of countriesprovides for such civil commitment for drug use. [49]Porter etal. (1986) point out that in 27 (comprising 32 separatejurisdictions) of the countries they surveyed, there wasprovision for civil commitment under certain conditions, as thereare in 35 American States. It has been argued (Bejerot 1983 & Webster 1986, cited inBrown 1988) that such extreme measures to deal with drug use musthave wide public support. Generally the rationale for such actionis that drug use is a threat to the country's stability (as inSingapore in the case of heroin dependence among young males) ora threat to the country achieving its economic goals, e.g.Malaysia, where the Government decided that the drug problem wasa threat to national security as the country was 'losing itsmanpower to drugs' ([50]Rysavy 1990).18 In 1983, due to an increasing heroin problem in Malaysia, thepowers of police and drug rehabilitation officers were extended,allowing them to arrest and detain persons suspected of usingillegal substances. A positive urine sample resulted in mandatorydrug treatment. Ten per cent of those in treatment in 1989 wereundertaking rehabilitation for cannabis use only. All programswere the same, lasting a maximum of two years with two years'compulsory aftercare, an important part of which was theassignment of a drug-free 'guardian' to act as a role model andto provide positive support. Any infringement of rules duringtreatment resulted in severe punishment, and any drug use afterrelease from treatment resulted in incarceration (Rysavy 1990).Needless to say the program has a high success rate, but isunlikely to fit other countries with cultures differing from thatof Malaysia. Brown summarises the conditions that 'on the basis of othersocieties' actions, have been described as necessary to theimplementation of civil commitment procedures: there needs to be the appearance of risk to the larger society through the subgroup's (i.e. drug users') inappropriate behaviours; there needs to be the capacity to marshal public support for such action; there must be a capacity to identify and isolate the subgroup demonstrating the offending behaviour; the subgroup must be without sufficient political support to withstand the competing political pressure; there must be the machinery to process, detain and confine those whose behaviour is inappropriate or threatening; and there should be a belief in the ability of the community to put in place initiatives that will humanely change individuals' behaviour for their own and for the larger society's well-being ([51]Brown 1988, p676). Brown goes on to say that it is likely that jurisdictionswill retain the option to call upon civil commitment in the eventof a situation arising which has the capacity to 'disrupt thenormal course of society and for which criminal prosecution maybe seen as either inappropriate, unwarranted or infeasible'. Atthe same time, only with the greatest conservatism will civilcommitment be likely to be employed, due to a general distastefor such emergency measures ([52]Brown 1988). The contribution tothe spread of AIDS of intravenous drug use, and its repercussionsfor individual drug users and the wider society, is potentiallyone such situation. Throughout the wide variety of countries providing for civilcommitment for drug use, there have been few studies of theefficacy of such treatment ([53]Brown 1988). However, somestudies have been produced by the US and these are discussedbelow. Generally, in the majority of countries, grounds forcommitment are provided either in mental health legislation orspecific drug legislation. Countries using mental healthlegislation usually include provision for commitment for threatsboth to others and to self. Germany, Japan and Somalia, forexample, provide for civil commitment if the drug-relateddisorder 'constitutes an imminent threat to public safety, orwhen individuals pose a danger to their own life and health'([54]Brown 1988, p666). Bangladesh, on the other hand, specifiesonly the existence of psychiatric disturbance without elaborationof threat, and Trinidad and Tobago emphasise the individual'sinability to provide for himself (Brown 1988). Fifteen out of 43countries surveyed by [55]Porter et al (1986) provide for civilcommitment under legislation specific to drug use, where thecriteria may be limited to evidence of dependence (as in Mexico,Columbia, Peru, Thailand and Malaysia). Some (i.e. Argentina,Italy, Australia and Sweden) also include reference to the threatposed to others and/or to the need for treatment. In Victoria(Australia) under the Alcoholics and Drug Dependent Persons Actof 18 December 1968, an alcohol- or drug-dependent person'suitable for treatment' (i.e. 'who habitually uses drugs ofaddiction to such an extent that he has lost the power ofself-control with respect to the use of drugs of addiction'(Porter et al 1986, p126), may be committed for seven days and,at the discretion of the medical officer in charge of theassessment centre (the decision-making authority), for anotherseven days. A consensus statement issued by the participants at a meetingin the US to examine research findings relating to civilcommitment and mandatory treatment, particularly in relation tohindering the spread of AIDS, found that 'treatment is effectivein reducing intravenous drug abuse and that the length of time intreatment is positively related to treatment success, thecriminal justice system is important for identification andretention of drug abusers in treatment' ([56]Leukefeld & Tims1988). It was further recommended at this meeting that 'the term"compulsory treatment" be used rather than "civilcommitment" to capture a wider range of possibleinterventions, since civil commitment is only one type ofcompulsory treatment. Further, it is essential that candidatesfor compulsory treatment receive appropriate legal protections.'In the US, despite interest in the early 1970s due to 'high ratesof recidivism and criminal justice system over-crowding and theshift away from a rehabilitative philosophy in corrections,programs for drug-abusing offenders have languished in the 1980suntil fairly recently' ([57]Anglin and Hser 1990, p424). However, the 1960s saw the beginning of civil commitment fordrug-abusing offenders in some States of the US. These were basedon the therapeutic community philosophy. There are fewevaluations of treatment for offenders except for these civilcommitment programs, and such programs as have been developed areso recent that they have not been evaluated. CIVIL COMMITMENT IN THE US Compulsory treatment of drug users has been a controversialissue worldwide for decades. In response to two forces, one aimedat more effective treatment of problem drug users and the otherat social control of the problem user, civil commitmentlegislation was enacted in the US in the 1960s and 1970s([58]Rosenthal 1988). Following this, three major treatment programs wereestablished: the California Civil Addict Program, the New YorkCivil Commitment Program and programs under the federal NarcoticAddict Rehabilitation Act (NARA) ([59]Anglin & Hser 1990,p425), enabling large-scale commitment of drug-dependent people.However, relatively few persons were committed under theMassachusetts law, one of the earliest in the country, anddespite civil commitment laws in many other jurisdictions theyremained only statutes on the books (Rosenthal 1988). Since involuntary civil commitment involves a substantialdeprivation of liberty, various aspects of the California and NewYork programs were challenged quite early - the federal programfor involuntary civil commitment of drug users not charged with acrime was not challenged in this way, presumably because thefederal program permitted only relatives to initiate commitment,and few relatives did. Despite challenges to theconstitutionality of involuntary treatment, the Californian andNew York courts held in its favour. They were, however,influenced by the Supreme Court case of Robinson v. Californiawhich did not really involve the constitutionality of involuntarycommitment at all but rather the question of whether it wasconstitutional for a State to make 'addiction' a crime:'Nevertheless, the Supreme Court declared (in a dictum) that aState might establish a program of compulsory treatment foropiate addicts either to discourage violation of its criminallaws against narcotic trafficking or to safeguard the generalhealth or welfare of its inhabitants' ([60]Rosenthal 1988, p641). It has been suggested that because this case did not involvethe constitutionality of involuntary treatment of opiate users,the Supreme Court did not go into that question as deeply as itmight have and, in turn, the California and New York courtsrelied too much on the Supreme Court dictum without delvingdeeply enough into the question. The Supreme Court decisiontherefore meant almost inevitably that in future cases thesubstantive validity of involuntary civil commitment would beupheld (Rosenthal 1988, p643). Under the legislation discussed here anyone found in amedical examination to be dependent on drugs (usually heroin)could be committed. Mostly those committed had been arrested forproperty crimes or drug trafficking and were diverted from theusual criminal processing. Usually there were two phases oftreatment, initially one of imprisonment, plus a period of paroleor monitored community release. During both phases the goal wasreduced drug use and criminal behaviour; vocational training wassometimes added. The California Civil Addict Program was more successful thanthe New York State program, primarily due to better management.The main results of evaluations were that program participantsreduced 'narcotic use and associated property crime' to one-thirdcompared with those not in the program ([61]Lindblad 1988).Overall, studies of the California CAP concluded that civilcommitment and other drug treatment programs, particularlymethadone maintenance, were effective in reducing narcoticsdependence and minimising the associated adverse social effects,the important issue being that the dependence should be broughtinto an environment where intervention can occur over time. In this respect, civil commitment and other legally coercivemeasures were found to be useful where the dependent person wouldnot enter treatment voluntarily ([62]Anglin 1988a). A vital issueis the implementation strategy employed, which can 'ensure orsabotage success' (Anglin 1988a, p539). Although NARA was acomparatively short-lived program superseded by otherlegislation, it provided a national network of treatmentproviders and was regarded as an effective way of bringingnarcotic dependent people into treatment. NARA allowed treatmentfor offenders as a pre-trial civil commitment, rather thanprosecution for drug-dependent people convicted of a specificcrime and for voluntary applicants. Those admitted to the programdid as well or better than those in other programs (Lindblad1988). TASC PROGRAMS IN THE US More recently in the US, coordinated programs have beendeveloped in a number of States to refer 'drug-abusing offendersto community-based treatment in lieu of prosecution or probationrevocation', e.g. the Treatment Alternatives to Street Crime(TASC) program ([63]Anglin & Hser 1990, p428), begun in 1972and by 1988 operating in 18 States (Cook et al. 1988 in Anglin& Hser 1990, p428). This provides community-based treatmentfor drug-dependent offenders who 'otherwise might becomeprogressively more involved with the criminal justice system'(p428). Diversionary dispositions such as deferred prosecution,creative community sentencing, and pretrial intervention are usedto motivate offenders to enter and remain in treatment.Evaluation Such limited evaluation as has taken place (throughthe Treatment Outcomes Prospective Study) indicates that criminaljustice referred clients, because they were monitored, tended tostay in treatment longer than voluntary clients, which is usuallyassociated with more successful treatment outcomes ([64]Anglin& Hser 1990, p429). Although evaluations of treatment are positive, it remains aquestion as to whether improvements would have occurred over timeanyway due to maturation or other outside influences. In terms ofclient characteristics and treatment effectiveness, it was foundthat 'addicts who have a more stable family background, an intactmarriage, a job, a history of minimal criminality, less evidenceof alcohol or polydrug abuse, and less severe psychiatricdisorders are more likely to achieve a better outcome in mostprograms' (Anglin & Hser 1990, p429). Many studies have shown that, while older clients, mostlyopiate users, tend to stay in treatment longer and thereforebenefit most (possibly due to the 'maturing out' effect noted byWinick (1962 in Anglin & Hser 1990, p435), those under 25tend to leave treatment prematurely, thus limiting theirprospects for effective results. In terms of program factorswhich appeared to be most beneficial, the significant ones were:psychotherapy, urine testing, and legal coercion. 'Clientsreferred from the criminal justice system have been shown to stayin treatment longer than other clients' (Collins et al., cited in[65]Leukefeld & Timms 1988, p57) and longer retentionsuggests better treatment outcomes than with other clients (butsee above). Some argue that treatment cannot be effective if the clientis coerced, and the findings are not consistent on this issue.However, the best-designed studies 'generally support theproposition that a collaborative relationship between thecriminal justice system and community-treatment delivery systemsproduces, at an aggregate level, enhanced treatment outcomes'([66]Anglin & Hser 1990, p439). While length of retention intreatment is an important predictor of success it appears that'for many drug abusers, repeated exposure to treatment is moreeffective than one episode' (McLellan & Druley 1977 in Anglin& Hser 1990, p441). Total time in treatment may be more important, when accruedacross treatment episodes, than retention in a single program(p441). In a number of other countries, any illegal drug useincluding that of cannabis is sufficient grounds for recommendingor ordering treatment, implying that some other countries regardcannabis use more seriously than Australia does, and deserving oftreatment. The mode of treatment depends on the profile of theindividual user and on such factors as are mentioned elsewhere inthis report, e.g. whether the person is a polydrug user, lengthof time of use, degree of psychopathology and so forth.Outpatient non-methadone programs which involve clients with alltypes of drug use who tend not to have serious criminalhistories, are the most obvious option for treatment of cannabisdependence. Therapeutic communities are not necessarily specificto any class of drug and could also therefore potentially be ofbenefit to certain cannabis-dependent persons. Since the numbers of cannabis users who have problems isstill small and very few are likely to be seriously enoughdependent to be referred by the court, it is unlikely thattreatment facilities could not incorporate them. Summary of findings A summary of findings from Australian and internationalliterature concerned with diversion and treatment for drugoffenders suggests the following conclusions with relation tocannabis users: While the vast majority of cannabis users do not report any problems, there are increasing reports of individuals both in Australia and in other countries (e.g. the United States and New Zealand) who are seeking treatment for cannabis dependence. It is generally accepted that a prison sentence is unsatisfactory for offenders with drug problems, and diversion with the purpose of treatment is a widely used alternative, welcomed by judges and magistrates. Usually the illegal drug involved is heroin but occasionally cannabis is the offender's primary drug. Criminal justice involvement is seen as providing an opportunity to intervene in drug users' lives in order to confront the users with their drug problems and to bring them into contact with treatment agencies, often for the first time. The earlier the intervention in the users' lives the better, and the longer (or more frequent) the periods of treatment, the more successful the treatment outcome. In some cases merely attending for assessment is sufficient to bring about a change in attitude since the users are often confronted with their drug problem for the first time. While some dispute the value of coercion in getting drug users into treatment, it is often the only way, and there is more evidence to indicate successful treatment results for involuntary than for voluntary clients. This is primarily due to the length of time spent in treatment. Frequently the attitude of an unwilling client will change quite quickly once treatment has begun. The success of diversion to treatment programs depends on the skill and experience of the drug counsellor, the availability of sufficient places in suitable treatment facilities, and close cooperation between health and criminal justice agencies. It would be more cost effective to provide additional funds for the training of counsellors and the provision of suitable facilities than to continue to send repeat drug offenders to prison. Conclusions regarding treatment for cannabis offenders, particularly repeat offenders, are as follows: There are reports from most diversion programs/treatment agencies of individuals being referred for other drug use who also have serious problems in reducing or ceasing their cannabis use. Some of these may also be alcohol-dependent. There appears then to be some demand for cannabis treatment in this country. Interpreting treatment in its broadest and most ideal sense (i.e. as a program personally selected by the client in consultation with a counsellor, tailored to the needs and characteristics of the particular individual), for a repeat offender facing a prison sentence, treatment is a preferable alternative. Treatment appears to have the potential to help offenders restructure their lives in such a way as to avoid breaches of the law which bring them continually into contact with the criminal justice system. In the sense that treatment may be 'compulsory' (i.e. court mandated), while the client must be assessed as suitable for treatment (genuinely motivated to participate, although there may be some initial resistance), the advantage of the compulsory nature of the treatment is that it provides the 'crisis' generally acknowledged as necessary to get most drug users into treatment and to keep them there long enough for a successful outcome. In the case of cannabis use, the earlier the intervention the better, since there is likely to be less criminal involvement and therefore more likelihood of a successful outcome for the client. Young users, particularly juveniles, should receive more attention than they appear to be getting at present in Australia from, for instance, juvenile 'panels' (such as those in South Australia) for whom this is not a major focus. A final consideration regarding the treatment option for cannabis users is the availability of treatment programs and facilities and counsellors of sufficient quality and in sufficient numbers to accommodate those referred from the court system, since this is vital for successful treatment outcomes. Conclusion In this chapter we have discussed the two related fields ofdiversion and treatment for drug offenders. We believe that fewpeople would disagree with the wisdom of diversion from thecriminal justice system for minor cannabis offenders. Further,though some would object that treatment of drug offenders is aform of social control and that the concept of the 'need fortreatment' has no inherent limitation, the evidence suggeststhat, although methodological problems exist in the evaluation oftreatment programs, most of the programs outlined here haveachieved a certain level of success in terms of meeting theirobjectives - which generally means, in the Australian context,reducing the drug use, and associated involvement with thecriminal justice system, of the individual undergoing treatment. Disagreement arises regarding the degree of interventionwhich should be exercised by the criminal justice system, as anagent of the State, in coercing drug offenders into treatment -in its most extreme form, through civil commitment. While theUnited States, for example, indicates considerable support forcivil commitment, in Australia, although commitment exists as alegislative option, there has been reluctance to use it. Thisdecision with respect to the balance between protecting societyand infringing the rights of individuals is a matter for theparticular society involved and the prevailing mores at the time. References Anglin, M.D. 1988, 'A social policy analysis of compulsorytreatment for opiate dependence: Introduction', Journal of DrugIssues, vol. 18, no. 4, pp503-504. Anglin, M.D. 1988a, 'The efficacy of civil commitment intreating narcotics addiction', Journal of Drug Issues, vol. 18,no. 4, pp527-545. Anglin, M.D. & Hser, Y. 1990, 'Treatment of drug abuse',in Drugs and Crime, ed. Tonry & J.Q. Wilson, University of Chicago Press, Chicago, pp393-460, Crime and Justice: A Review of Research, vol. 13. Brown, B.S. 1988, 'Civil commitment-An internationalperspective', Journal of Drug Issues, vol. 18, no. 4, pp663-678. Bush, R. & Scagliotti, L. 1983, 'Programmes for opiateusers at the criminal justice and health care interface, asystems analysis of the New South Wales experience', paperpresented at the Stipendiary Magistrates Conference in New SouthWales, May, pp95-120. C ourt Diversion Service (Western Australia), 1993, Briefsummary of the Court Diversion Service, provided by the WesternAustralia Alcohol and Drug Authority, Central Drug Unit, EastPerth. Department of the Attorney-General & of Justice. NSW Bureau of Crime Statistics & Research. 1982, TheSydney Drug Diversion Programme, The First Two Years. Desland, M. & Batey, R. 1990, 'Criminality of heroinusers presenting to an Australian hospital-based drug and alcoholunit', British Journal of Addiction, vol. 85, pp795-801. Desland, M.L. & Batey, R.G. 1992, 'A 12-month prospectivecomparison of court-diverted with self-referred heroin users',Drug and Alcohol Review, vol. 11, pp121-129. Desland, M. & Batey, R. 1991, 'Legal Coercion andTreatment, Screening for Drug Abuse - A Community Challenge',proceedings of a Conjoint Conference organised by the AustralianAssociation of Clinical Biochemists and the Australian Medicaland Professional Society on Alcohol and Drugs, ANU, Canberra1988, Monograph/The Clinical Biochemist; 5th Maylands, W.A. Australian Association of Clinical Biochemists. Gray, Y.,Reynolds, C. & Rumbold, M. 1992, 'The South Australian DrugAssessment and Aid Panels: An alternative to the criminal law forillicit drug users', in Drug Problems in Society: Dimensions andPerspectives, ed. J. White, pp127-134. Jones, R.T., Benowitz, N. & Bachman, J. 1976, 'Clinicalstudies of cannabis tolerance and dependence', Annals of the NewYork Academy of Sciences, vol. 282, pp221-239. Kleiman, M.A.R. 1992, Against Excess. Drug Policy forResults, Basic Books, New York. Leroy, B, 1991, The Community of Twelve and the Drug Demand.Comparative Study of Legislations and Judicial Practice,Commission of the European Community, Luxembourg. Leukefeld, C.G. & Tims, F.L. (eds) 1988, CompulsoryTreatment of Drug Abuse: Research and Clinical Practice.Rockville, MD, National Institute on Drug Abuse, NIDA ResearchMonograph 86. Lindblad, R. 1988. 'Civil commitment under the FederalNarcotic Addict Rehabilitation Act', Journal of Drug Issues, vol.18, no. 4, pp595-624. McBride, D.C. & Inciardi, J.A. 1993, 'The focusedoffender disposition program: Philosophy, procedures, andpreliminary findings', Journal of Drug Issues, vol 23, no.1pp143-160. Ministry of Welfare, Health and Cultural Affairs/Ministry ofJustice (Netherlands), 1992. The Drug Policy in the Netherlands,Government report, December 1992 version, Rijswijk's/Gravenhage. MSJ Keys Young 1992, Evaluation of NCADA-Funded Drug andAlcohol Services in the Department of Corrective Services and theCommunity Corrections Service, MSJ Keys Young, Surry Hills. New South Wales Bureau of Crime Statistics and Research.1992, New South Wales Recorded Crime Statistics 1991, Sydney. Nowlan, R. & Cohen, S. 1977, 'Tolerance to marijuana:Heart rate and subjective "high"', ClinicalPharmacology and Therapeutics, vol. 22, no. 5, pp550-556. Porter, L., Arif, A.E. & Curran, W.J. 1986, The Law andthe Treatment of Drug- and Alcohol-dependent Persons: AComparative Study of Existing Legislation, WHO, Geneva. Roffman, R.A., Stephens, R.S., Simpson, E.E. & Whitaker,D.L. 1988, 'Treatment of Marijuana Dependence: PreliminaryResults', Journal of Psychoactive Drugs, vol. 20, no. 1,pp129-137. Rosenthal, M.P1988, 'The constitutionality of involuntarycivil commitment of opiate addicts', Journal of Drug Issues, vol.18, no. 4, pp641-661. Rysavy, P. 1990, 'Drug rehabilitation in Malaysia',Australian Therapeutic Communities Association Magazine, October,pp 36-37. Salmon, R. & Salmon, K. 1983, 'The role of coercion inthe rehabilitation of drug abusers', International Journal of theAddictions, vol. 8, pp9-21. Sarre, R., Sutton, A. & Pulsford, T. 1989, Cannabis. TheExpiation Notice Approval, Office of Crime Statistics, SouthAustralian Attorney-General's Department, Adelaide. Schlosser, D. 1984, An Investigation of Court Referrals andVoluntary Referrals at Bourke Street Drug Advisory Service(Sydney, NSW): Main Report, Sydney, NSW Drug and AlcoholAuthority Publication. Siegal, H.A. & Cole, P.A. 1993, 'Enhancing criminaljustice based treatment through the application of theintervention approach', Journal of Drug Issues, vol. 23, no. 1,pp131-142. South Australia Police Department, 1992, Crime Statistics andAnalysis, Supplement to the 1991-92 Annual Report, Adelaide. South Australia. Royal Commission into the Non-Medical Use ofDrugs 1979, Final Report, South Austrlian Government, Adelaide. Tennant, F.S. 1986a, 'The clinical syndrome of marijuanadependence', Psychiatric Annals, vol. 16, no. 4, pp225-42. Tennant, F.S. 1986b, 'Neurophysiology of marijuanadependence', paper presented at Marijuana Dependence: A NationalConference, San Francisco, October. Victoria Police. 1992, Statistical Review 1991/92, Melbourne. Walters, R. & Coventry, G. 1993, A Proposal forEstablishing a Pre-Court Drug Diversion Program in Victoria.Draft Discussion Paper-For Information Only, May, National Centrefor Socio-Legal Studies, Melbourne. Williams, R.J. 1981, The Drug and Alcohol Court AssessmentProgramme (DACAP). Pilot Project: (December, 1979 to December,1980), Final Report to the N.S.W. Drug and Alcohol Authority,Diversion 3/81. Wodak, A. 1993, 'Prohibition has Failed. What Next?', paperdelivered at the Australian Institute of Criminology's Law,Medicine and Criminal Justice Conference, Surfer's Paradise, 6-8July. Young, W. & Cameron, N. 1991, Adult Pre-trial Diversionin New Zealand, Young & Cameron Policy & ResearchConsultants, Wellington. CliffSchaffer's Home Page WT02-B03-4IA086-000614-B049-229http://206.61.184.43:80/schaffer/Library/studies/aus/can_ch6.htm 206.61.184.43 19970122023731 text/html 13419HTTP/1.0 200 OKDate: Wednesday, 22-Jan-97 02:36:55 GMTServer: WebSitePro/1.1f (S/N wpo-0deb)Allow-ranges: bytesContent-type: text/htmlLast-modified: Saturday, 28-Dec-96 07:14:46 GMTContent-length: 13201 Australian Cannabis (Marijuana) Study - Chapter 6 Chapter 6: EVALUATING NEW LEGISLATIVE APPROACHES TO CANNABIS The principle of evaluating new policy and legislation iswidely accepted, but is less frequently observed in practice. InAustralia and most Western nations, little has been done,especially by government agencies, to monitor and evaluate, in asystematic manner, their national drug policies. This is the casein instances where legislation has developed incrementally (as inmost of Australia's States and Territories) and where newapproaches have been implemented following detailed policyreviews (e.g. the Australian Capital Territory's cannabisexpiation notice initiative). Too often evaluation is consideredrelevant only after a policy has been in place for some time andchanges are being considered. To be of most value, new initiatives should be designed andimplemented with an explicit and adequately resourced monitoringand evaluation component built into the initiative from theoutset. In the context of evaluating new legislative approachesto cannabis, we suggest that policy evaluation and programevaluation be considered separately. The bulk of this paper hasaddressed the evaluation of policies, as reflected throughlegislative options. The details of evaluating the implementationof policies, focusing on the programs themselves, are matterswhich need to be addressed after the broad policy issues aresettled and particular new approaches are agreed upon. We provide below an overview of the steps involved in bothevaluative tasks. The National Drug Strategic Plan 1993-97(Ministerial Council on Drug Strategy 1993) provides theframework within which we base our recommendations relating tomonitoring and evaluation. The Plan is explicitly goal-attainmentfocused, the approach that we argued for in [1]Chapter 2, where we highlighted theimportance of clarity in the specification of the goals of drugpolicy, legislation and program implementation. The Plan providesan overarching goal (or 'mission') for Australian drug policy:'The overall mission of the National Drug Strategy is to minimisethe harmful effects of drugs and drug use in Australian society'(MCDS 1993, p6). Policies and programs in specific areas, including cannabis,should be evaluated in a manner consistent with this nationalgoal. Applying goal attainment models of evaluation is a morecomplex task than it sometimes seems to be initially. Substantialtechnical difficulties exist in both designing and conductingevaluation research; part of this is the often complex task ofidentifying policy and program goals. Our discussion in [2]Chapter 2referred to the fact that, in practice, a particular cannabispolicy can relate to goals which are inconsistent: the attainmentof one may militate against the attainment of another. Needschange over time; often policy and legislation are far behind.For a given policy, it is likely that a hierarchy of goals willexist: the mission statement of the National Drug Strategic Planis an overarching goal, one which must be articulated in termswhich encompass other goals such as those concerned specificallywith cannabis. Policy evaluation and decision-making In [3]Chapter 4 we outlined fivebroad policy and legislative options for cannabis in Australia.The approach taken there is a contribution to policy evaluationin this area, and, by extension, a contribution todecision-making. But how are decisions about drug policy to bemade? One approach is the making of ad hoc decisions. This must berejected in favour of more systematic policy choice models. Theliterature differentiates two groups of decision-making modelsfor use by governments: 'rational' and 'incremental' approaches(see, e.g. Corbett 1992, pp59-76; Davis et al.1993, pp157-81).The rational approach, illustrated below, is something of anideal. It is not always easy to implement in practice, but thealternative (making decisions incrementally without everreconsidering the overall needs and patterns of policy responses)is much less attractive. Applying a rational approach todecision-making in evaluating new legislative approaches tocannabis use (as different from evaluating the actualimplementation of new legislation and resulting programs), wesuggest that the following issues be taken into account: The need to examine the sources of the proposal and the context within which it has been presented. The need to clarify just why that approach (rather than a different one) is proposed. The need to identify the goals which the new approach, if implemented, would attain. The philosophical and pragmatic goals should both be specified. Multiple goals may be identified and inconsistencies between them made explicit. The need to assess the likely impacts on key stakeholders, if the approach were to be implemented. For each key stakeholder, assess the likely costs and benefits, both intended and unintended. The need to review the depth, breadth, relevance and quality of the data currently available to assist the evaluation of the proposed approach. Determine whether or not it is, in fact, feasible to reach a conclusion on the value of the proposed policy, given the availability of data to answer questions about the proposal's likely outcomes and impacts. The need to make judgments regarding: (a) the value of the goal or goals; (b) how achievable the goals are; and (c) if the goals are judged to be achievable, how effective, efficient and appropriate are the implementation programs. This systematic approach to policy evaluation is not oftenseen in the development of drugs policy. Nevertheless, in thearea of legislative options for cannabis in Australia, policymakers have the capacity to apply such a process. This should beundertaken as part of the National Drug Strategic Plan's projectto develop a national statement on cannabis, one which includes acontemporary perspective on the most appropriate legislativeoption or options for cannabis. Program evaluation It is beyondthe scope of this report to present details on the techniques ofprogram evaluation. These are to be found in standard textbooks(Brinkerhoff et al. 1983; Hawe et al. 1991; Guba & Lincoln1989; Morris 1987; Patton 1990; Rossi & Freeman 1989). One point to be made, however, is that the evaluationresearch model and techniques employed should be selected on thebasis of answering a precisely defined evaluation question. Ifthe evaluation question is, for example, 'What has been theimpact on policing of a new legislative approach to cannabis',quite different evaluation techniques will be used from asituation where the evaluation question is 'How cost-effectivehas the new approach been', or 'How relevant is currentlegislation to contemporary needs?'. No single approach coversall circumstances. Again, the National Drug Strategic Plan emphasises theimportance of monitoring and evaluation. Under the heading'Policy Approach', it states: The National Drug Strategic Planexplicitly identifies policy objectives and indicators to enablethe effectiveness of the program to be evaluated. The NationalDrug Strategic Plan is committed to the application ofneeds-based planning and evaluation activities to ensure theeffectiveness and efficiency of strategies employed to minimisedrug-related harm (MCDS 1993, p5). We commend those responsiblefor this emphasis, but note that this policy cannot beimplemented without the allocation of a significant level ofresources. The oft-stated policy that evaluation should be anintegral part of all drug-related programs can only be realisedif program budgets include sufficient funds to cover the designand conduct of monitoring and evaluation, and if reporting timeframes are appropriate to the evaluation model being employed.Indicators A related strength of the National Drug Strategic Planwhich is highly relevant to the present review is its focus onindicators of program implementation, short-term outcomes andlonger-term and broader impacts. The indicators selected for thispurpose will depend on the particular initiative being evaluated;accordingly, they cannot be comprehensively described here.Within Australia, the work of Sarre, Sutton and Pulsford (1989)and of Christie (1991) in evaluating the South Australiancannabis expiation notice scheme, and of the Queensland CriminalJustice Commission's Advisory Committee on Illicit Drugs (1993)are examples of the effective use of indicators in the monitoringand evaluation of cannabis legislation. Single's (1989) review ofthe USA experience of marijuana 'decriminalisation' demonstratesthe dearth of information available in that country to evaluatethe legislative changes initiated over the last 20 years.Elsewhere in this paper we have referred to such evaluation dataas are available relating to other nations. Without seeking to beexhaustive, we list here some examples of indicators which aresignificant inputs to policy and program evaluation relating tonew legislative initiatives concerned with cannabis: The impact on social justice in Australian society of the implementation of cannabis legislation. Costs of cannabis controls, including the transfer of resources. The effectiveness and efficiency of the implementation of policies and legislation. Public opinion concerning cannabis. Cannabis consumption patterns and levels. Numbers and characteristics of the people presenting to treatment agencies with cannabis-related health and social problems. Cannabis-related offences. Cannabis-related driving and motor vehicle crashes. THC levels of the cannabis available to consumers. Cannabis-related workplace accidents. Conclusion In this section we have discussed the evaluation of newlegislative approaches to cannabis use in Australia. We havedifferentiated between policy evaluation and program evaluation,and have pointed to the need to develop indicators, tied tospecific initiatives, of activities, outcomes and impacts.Undertaking high quality, systematic policy evaluation concerningcannabis is essential and this paper contributes to that process.Research aimed at developing evaluation techniques and programindicators will be needed as part of the development andimplementation of new legislative approaches in this area. References Brinkerhoff, R. et al. 1983, Program Evaluation, Kluwer-Nijhoff, Boston. Corbett, D. 1992, Australian Public Sector Management, Allen & Unwin, St Leonards. Davis, G., Wanna, J., Warhurst, J. & Weller, P. 1993, Public Policy in Australia, 2nd ed., Allen & Unwin, St Leonards. Guba, E. & Lincoln, Y. 1989, Fourth Generation Evaluation, Sage, Beverly Hills. Hawe, D., Degeling, P. & Hall, J. 1990, Evaluating Health Promotion: A Health Worker's Guide, MacLennan & Petty, Sydney. McDermott, F., Pyett, P. & Hamilton, M. 1991, Evaluate Yourself: A Handbook for Alcohol and Other Drug Treatment Agencies, [National Campaign Against Drug Abuse, Canberra]. Ministerial Council on Drug Strategy (MCDS) 1993, National Drug Strategic Plan 1993-97, AGPS, Canberra. Morris, L. (ed.) 1987, Program Evaluation Kit, 2nd ed. 1987, Program Evaluation Kit, 2nd ed., nine volumes, Sage, Beverly Hills. Patton, M. 1990, Qualitative Evaluation and Research Methods, Sage, Beverly Hills. Rossi, P. & Freeman, H. 1985, Evaluation: A Systematic Approach, Sage, Beverly Hills. Rotem, A. 1985, 'Evaluating programs on drug and alcohol related problems', Australian Alcohol and Drug Review, vol. 4, pp181-186. CliffSchaffer's Home Page WT02-B03-5IA086-000614-B049-247http://206.61.184.43:80/schaffer/Library/studies/aus/can_ch7.htm 206.61.184.43 19970122023742 text/html 9907HTTP/1.0 200 OKDate: Wednesday, 22-Jan-97 02:37:36 GMTServer: WebSitePro/1.1f (S/N wpo-0deb)Allow-ranges: bytesContent-type: text/htmlLast-modified: Saturday, 28-Dec-96 07:14:40 GMTContent-length: 9690 Legislative options for cannabis use in australia:Conclusion Chapter 7. Conclusion This paper has addressed the legislative options availablefor cannabis in Australia, and has argued that choosing fromamong these options requires a process of policy evaluation.Accordingly, the paper first considered the policy frameworkswithin which decision-making occurs, emphasising the necessityfor clarity in the goals that society seeks to attain throughlegislating in this area. The paper places contemporary Australian cannabis legislationwithin its broader context: historical and international. Despitethe work of numerous Royal Commissions and other officialinquiries, much of Australia's legislation concerning cannabisreflects the dynamics of earlier times, when Australia tended tomimic other nations' policies without taking sufficient accountof local circumstances. Our framework of legislative prohibitionwas put in place at a time when there was virtually no cannabisuse in Australia. In the 1990s, when over four millionAustralians report having used the drug and nearly half of themreport having done so during the last year, most jurisdictionsmaintain total prohibition as their legislative stance, eventhough only a tiny proportion of the offenders against theirlegislation will ever be prosecuted. We have reviewed the range of legislative options available,classifying them as: total prohibition; prohibition combined witha civil penalty for personal use, etc; partial prohibitionwhereby personal use, etc., is not an offence, but traffickingand large-scale growing of cannabis remains prohibited; the legalavailability of cannabis under various forms of regulation; and,finally, the option of unregulated, free availability. Each ofthese options is reviewed in terms of its rationale, experienceswith it to date and its impacts. The related topics of the diversion from the criminal justicesystem of people who come to the attention of the police forcannabis offences, and the compulsory treatment of cannabisusers, have also been discussed. Experience to date suggests thatwell-resourced and managed diversionary programs can beeffective, and desirable, alternatives to imprisonment for someoffenders. Very few cannabis users will need treatment, asconceived of through a medical model, simply because of theircannabis use. Many users can benefit, however, from a helpingintervention, the success of which may be potentiated by thecrisis of a 'bust' for cannabis use or related offences. Cannabis is used mainly as a recreational drug and thispattern of use has been the focus of this paper. Forcompleteness, we have included in the appendixes information onthe medical and industrial/agricultural uses of the cannabisplant and its by-products. In doing so, we remind readers that,in drug policies, we are not faced with 'all-or-nothing' choices.Within the range of available policy options lies the possibilityof prohibiting the recreational use of cannabis while permittingits use for other purposes. (This occurs, of course, withopiates: the opium poppy is grown in Tasmania to provide rawmaterial for the manufacture of pharmaceutical products.) Australia's National Drug Strategy provides a policyframework within which new legislative approaches may bedeveloped. Both existing and new approaches have the possibilityof both enhancing and detracting from the achievement of themission of the National Drug Strategy, that of minimising theharmful effects of drugs and drug use in Australian society. Ourreview of the policy options, set out in Chapter4, demonstrates this. No single 'best option' for cannabis legislation exists. Whatis most appropriate will depend upon what goals both policymakers and the community are seeking to achieve. It is not therole of researchers to dictate policy goals; rather we have drawnattention to their importance, outlined an approach to evaluatingthem and described the likely outcomes, in terms of policy goals,of the five broad categories of legislative options which areavailable now. Our review suggests that two of the five legislative optionsdiscussed in Chapter 4 areinappropriate in contemporary Australian circumstances. They arethe options which we have characterised as 'total prohibition'and 'free availability'. The arguments for rejecting theseoptions will not be repeated here as they are detailed in Chapter 4. We point out, however, that the cultivation, possession andsupply of cannabis remain an offence in all Australian States andTerritories (and using it is an offence in most), even thoughcannabis use is commonplace and little evidence exists thatcannabis itself causes significant harm when used in smallquantities. Australian society experiences more harm, weconclude, from maintaining the prohibition policy than itexperiences from the use of the drug. Widespread interest exists in the Dutch approach to drugpolicies. We have categorised them, in this paper, under theheading of total prohibition, as that is the Dutch legislativeposition. However, as detailed above, the application of theprinciple that it is, in their terms, 'inexpedient' to prosecutepeople for minor drug offences (including selling cannabis incertain coffee shops) means that Dutch policy and practice (ascontrasted to legislation) is closer to the regulatory optionthan the total prohibition option. The regulatory option is oneof the approaches which we suggest is more appropriate toAustralian circumstances than is total prohibition. It could be argued that the Dutch approach is a product of adifferent culture and system of administration of criminaljustice. If the Australian States and Territories resolve not toarrest and proceed against people using, possessing or supplyingcannabis, by far the best approach is for this policy to beimplemented through legislation, rather than through anadministrative decision not to prosecute cannabis offenders. Thisis because the Australian system of legal justice is based uponthe principle of legal clarity and consistency in theimplementation of the law. Nevertheless, the reality is that, for a variety of reasons,Australian governments may well prefer to implement the Dutchapproach. A number of precedents exist whereby, especially inareas of moral contention, certain illegal activities, as amatter of policy, are excluded from the purview of the criminaljustice authorities. In the Australian Capital Territory, forexample, we understand that the Director of Public Prosecutionspublicly announced that he would not conduct any prosecutions inthe area of prostitution. Abortion and certain types of gambling(e.g. playing two-up on ANZAC Day) are or were similarly dealtwith. Police general orders frequently remind officers of thedesirability of exercising their discretion not to arrest orsummons a person found committing only a minor offence. Warnings,formal cautions and referral to other agencies are encourageddespite the existence of legislation prohibiting the behaviourinvolved. We suggest, then, that if governments agree that totalprohibition is not the most desirable approach, but are unwillingor unable to legislate to enable a more preferable option to beimplemented, then the Dutch approach is a desirable alternative.It would entail the government, the State/Territory Director ofPublic Prosecutions, or another appropriate authority declaringthat, as from a certain date, no person would be prosecutedbefore the courts for specified (minor) cannabis offences. Wesuggest that this is a legitimate, but not optimal, pragmaticoption currently available to Australian governments. We also reject the legislative option found at the oppositeend of the continuum from total prohibition, the totallyunregulated, free availability of cannabis. Our society is onewhich accepts that governments and others have both the right andthe responsibility to intervene in diverse ways to protect peoplefrom harm and to advance the common good. It would beunreasonable, we suggest, to argue that cannabis should beavailable in an uncontrolled manner: issues of quality control,protection of the young, road safety, etc., demand at least somedegree of control over the drug's availability. We conclude, then, that cannabis law reform is required inthis country. Numerous options for policy, legislation andimplementation processes exist within the broad categories ofprohibition with civil penalties, partial prohibition andrelatively free but regulated availability. We believe, on thebasis of the available evidence, that widely acceptable socialgoals, well attuned to the needs of contemporary Australiansociety, will be attained through the adoption and implementationof policies which lie within these options. CliffSchaffer's Home Page WT02-B03-6IA086-000614-B049-267http://206.61.184.43:80/schaffer/Library/studies/aus/can_app1.htm 206.61.184.43 19970122023752 text/html 9945HTTP/1.0 200 OKDate: Wednesday, 22-Jan-97 02:37:47 GMTServer: WebSitePro/1.1f (S/N wpo-0deb)Allow-ranges: bytesContent-type: text/htmlLast-modified: Saturday, 28-Dec-96 07:16:16 GMTContent-length: 9728 Appendix 1. The Medicinal Uses of Cannabis Contents | Feedback | Search DRCNet Library | Schaffer Library | Major Studies | LegislativeOptions for Cannabis APPENDIX 1. THE MEDICINAL USE OF CANNABIS (19) The medicinal use of cannabis in the ancient world has beenwell documented (Abel 1980). In the United States, cannabis wasfirst mentioned as a medicinal drug in 1843 and by 1852 it wasincluded in the US dispensatory list of medicines. It was thoughtto be beneficial in the treatment of 'neuralgia, gout, tetanus,hydrophobia, cholera, convulsions, chorea, hysteria, depressionand insanity' (Wood & Bache 1854, cited in [1]Abel 1980,p182). In Australia, tincture of cannabis was used in medicineuntil the 1960s, when it was declared a prohibited drug([2]Cartwright 1983). Since the introduction of legislation prohibiting therecreational use of cannabis, its use for medicinal purposes has,in most Western countries, not been popular. However, recentlythe therapeutic benefits of cannabis have received closeattention in the United States. In 1991, Doblin and Kleimanconducted an anonymous survey of the members of the AmericanSociety of Clinical Oncology measuring the attitudes andexperiences of American oncologists concerning the use ofcannabis to treat nausea in cancer chemotherapy patients. Theyfound that, of those oncologists who replied to the survey (43per cent), more than 44 per cent of them reported recommendingthe illegal use of cannabis for the control of nausea to at leastone cancer patient. Some 48 per cent said that they wouldprescribe cannabis to some of their patients if it were legal([3]Doblin & Kleiman 1991). Cannabis has been used as an anti-emetic in the treatment ofAIDS patients and as a painkiller for those suffering fromchronic pain ([4]Grinspoon 1991). It has also been regarded bysome medical practitioners as being effective in reducingintra-ocular pressure in glaucoma patients ([5]Caswell 1992) andin treating epilepsy ([6]Cartwright 1983), Huntington's chorea([7]Moss et al. 1989) and Parkinsonian tremor ([8]Frankel et al.1990). Despite the attention that the medical use of cannabis hasreceived in recent times, legislation in the United States doesnot permit the medical use of marijuana. In the FederalControlled Substances Act, cannabis is categorised as a Schedule1 drug, and as such is described as having a high potential forabuse, no currently accepted medical use and no acceptable safelevel of use under medical supervision. In 1989, organisations such as the (US) National Organizationfor Reform of Marijuana Laws (NORML), the Alliance for CannabisTherapeutics (ACT) as well as various individuals,20 applied tohave cannabis rescheduled so that it could be used for medicalpurposes. The Administrator of the Drug EnforcementAdministration rejected these claims and stated that: It is clear that cannabis cannot meet the criteria ... forsafety under medical supervision. The chemistry of cannabis isnot known and reproducible. The record supports a finding thatmarijuana plant material is variable from plant to plant. Thequantities of the active constituents, the cannabinoids, varyconsiderably. In addition, the actions and potential risks ofseveral of the cannabinoids have not been studied ... (USGovernment, Federal Register, vol. 54, no. 249, 29 December 1989,p53,734). This position has recently been restated by Robert C. Bonner,a later Administrator of the US Drug Enforcement Agency, when heresponded to a subsequent petition lodged by NORML (USGovernment, Federal Register, vol. 57, no. 59, 26 March 1992,pp10,499-10,508). Those in favour of rescheduling the drug argue that, for some,the denial of cannabis as a medicine is particularly cruel.Grinspoon argues that 'sick people are forced to suffer anxietyabout prosecution in addition to their anxiety about the illness... Doctors are afraid to recommend what they know to be the besttreatment because they might lose their reputation or even theirlicence' ([9]Grinspoon 1991). The Australian medical community has not been as enthusiasticabout the therapeutic benefits of cannabis although many arguethat where the drug has been demonstrated to be effective its useshould be permitted. A study done at the Royal Children'sHospital in Melbourne found that THC (the psychoactive ingredientin cannabis) was an effective anti-emetic for some childrenundergoing chemotherapy ([10]Cartwright 1983). Dr LornaCartwright, a lecturer in Pharmacology at Sydney Universitystated: I think there are probably better drugs for medical uses. Thepoint is, though, I think it should be allowed to be used forconditions in which it has been shown to have effect, such as forglaucoma, for children having chemotherapy and for epilepsy. Ialways feel that if something is good even for a small percentageof patients, it should be allowed to be used (cited in[11]Caswell 1992, p498). Another pharmacologist, Dr Greg Chesher, argues that cannabisclearly has therapeutic benefits but that research into thepossible uses of the drug is being hampered by the fact thatcannabis is a prohibited drug (cited in [12]Caswell 1992). Theposition in Australia is different from that in the USA in thatin this country there is no legislation or binding administrativeruling specifically stating that no medical use exists forcannabis.21 Neither does the United Nations Single Convention onNarcotic Drugs, to which Australia is a party, specificallyforbid the medical use of cannabis. In fact the Conventionrecognises that some otherwise illicit drugs may have medicalpurposes and states that cannabis use should be 'subject to theprovisions of this Convention, to limit exclusively to medicaland scientific purposes the...use and possession of drugs'(Article 4(1) (c)). Given that the United Nations Conventions donot specifically proscribe the medical uses of cannabis,introducing legislation that allowed the use of the drug formedical purposes in Australia would be relatively simple. Clausesauthorising the therapeutic use of the drug could simply beinserted into relevant drug legislation and therapeutic productsscheduling. Politically, however, such a change in policy couldbe difficult. As an illicit drug, cannabis has a negative image and is seenas an being an inherently dependence producing, damaging drugthat has no possible benefits. Recognition of the medicalbenefits of the drug may challenge this dominant view ofcannabis. References Abel, E. 1980, Marihuana: The First Twelve Thousand Years,Plenum Press, New York. Cartwright, L. 1983, 'Marihuana', Current Affairs Bulletin,vol. 59, no. 10, pp19-31. Caswell, A. 1992, 'Marijuana as medicine', The Medical Journalof Australia, vol. 156, pp497-498. Doblin, R. E. & Kleiman, M. 1991, 'Marijuana asanti-emetic dedicine: A survey of oncologists experiences andattitudes, Journal of Clinical Oncology, vol. 9, pp1314-1319. Frankel, J.P., Hughes, A., Lees, A.J. & Stern, G.M. 1990,'Marijuana for Parkinsonian Tremor', Journal of NeurologicalNeurosurgical Psychiatry, vol. 53, pp436-442. Grinspoon, L. 1991, 'Marijuana in a time ofpsychopharmalogical McCarthyism' in Searching for Alternatives:Drug Control Policy in The United States, eds M.B. Krauss & E.PLazear, pp379-389, Hoover InstitutionPress, Stanford, California. Moss, D.E., Manderscheid, P.Z. & Montgomery, S.P. 1992,'Nicotine and cannabinoids as adjuncts to neuroleptics in thetreatment of Tourettes Syndrome and other motor disorders', LifeScience, 1989, vol. 44, pp1521-1525. Contents | Feedback | Search DRCNet Library | Schaffer Library | Major Studies | LegislativeOptions for Cannabis WT02-B03-7IA086-000614-B049-284http://206.61.184.43:80/schaffer/Library/studies/aus/can_app2.htm 206.61.184.43 19970122023759 text/html 4076HTTP/1.0 200 OKDate: Wednesday, 22-Jan-97 02:37:56 GMTServer: WebSitePro/1.1f (S/N wpo-0deb)Allow-ranges: bytesContent-type: text/htmlLast-modified: Saturday, 28-Dec-96 07:15:56 GMTContent-length: 3859 APPENDIX 2. INDUSTRIAL AND HORTICULTURAL USES OF CANNABIS APPENDIX 2. INDUSTRIAL AND HORTICULTURAL USES OF CANNABIS Since ancient times the fibres from the cannabis or hempplant have been used to make fabric, rope and paper ([1]Abel1980). In World War II, the USA grew 50,000 acres of hemp, aspart of their war effort ([2]see United States Government 1944,Hemp for Victory), and hemp fibres were used to make rope forships and the canvas used in parachutes. More recently, experimental crops of a low THC-contentspecies of cannabis have been grown in The Netherlands, Italy,Spain, France and Tasmania. Its fibres have been used in theproduction of paper and fabric. Australian groups such as theBusiness Alliance for Commercial Hemp argue that Australia shouldallow the cultivation of hemp for industrial purposes. Theposition is that, if a State or Territory Government authorisesthe growing of cannabis, the Commonwealth will issue a permit forthe importation of seeds, provided that the applicant for theimport permit meets the criteria set out in the Act, such asbeing 'a fit and proper person'. The trade magazine for the US paper industry recently arguedthat hemp has a number of advantages over timber in the area ofpaper production, and there are a number of strong environmentalarguments for the commercial cultivation of hemp. Every fourmonths, each acre of hemp grown will produce 10 tons of fibre. Itcan produce four times the amount of paper per acre than20-year-old trees can, it requires less bleaching than pulp fromtimber and, because it is a very densely growing crop, weeds arechoked and there is less need for pesticides and herbicides([3]Young 1991). In addition, hemp requires less watering andpesticides than cotton and produces a fibre that is argued to bemore durable than cotton fabrics ([4]Cowperthwaite 1993). The United Nations Single Convention on Narcotic Drugs allowsthe cultivation of cannabis for industrial and horticulturalpurposes. Article 28(2) states that 'this Convention should notapply to the cultivation of the cannabis plant exclusively forindustrial purposes (fibre and seed) or horticultural purposes'.Australian drug legislation permits the cultivation of cannabisfor scientific purposes and some limited experimentation hasalready taken place in Australia. However, groups such as the Business Alliance for CommericalHemp argue that the full benefits of hemp production can only beobtained if hemp is grown on a wider scale, and that cannabiswith a very low THC content can be grown for industrial purposes.Legislation permitting the cultivation of cannabis for industrialpurposes could be included in existing drug legislation, however,as with the medicinal use of cannabis, introducing legislationthat recognises the industrial uses of a substance that isthought of simply as a dangerous illicit drug may pose politicaldifficulties for those advocating legislative change. References Abel, E. 1980, Marihuana: The First Twelve Thousand Years,Plenum Press, New York. Cowperthwaite, V. 1993, 'Moral Fibre', Growing Today, June,pp23-27 United States Government 1944, Hemp for Victory, EducationalFilm. Young, J. 1991, 'It's time to reconsider hemp', Pulp andPaper, June. CliffSchaffer's Home Page WT02-B03-8IA086-000615-B001-13http://206.61.184.43:80/schaffer/Library/studies/aus/can_app3.htm 206.61.184.43 19970122023847 text/html 3525HTTP/1.0 200 OKDate: Wednesday, 22-Jan-97 02:38:03 GMTServer: WebSitePro/1.1f (S/N wpo-0deb)Allow-ranges: bytesContent-type: text/htmlLast-modified: Saturday, 28-Dec-96 07:15:51 GMTContent-length: 3308 APPENDIX 3. THE AUTHORS APPENDIX 3. THE AUTHORS David McDonald David McDonald is a Senior Criminologist at the AustralianInstitute of Criminology. He holds the degrees of BA, DipSocWk(Syd), MA (Alta), and GradDipPoplnHlth (ANU). Mr McDonald'sresearch interests lie in the areas of custodial health, policingand drug and alcohol policy. Prior to joining the Institute in1992, Mr McDonald held a research appointment in primary healthcare at the ANU's National Centre for Epidemiology and PopulationHealth. He has wide experience in research, program developmentand evaluation in the drug and alcohol field, having establishedthe Northern Territory's drug and alcohol services and served,for two years, as Director of the NCADA's National Drug AbuseInformation Centre. His publications are mainly in the fields ofalcohol and other drugs, correctional health, primary health careand Aboriginal health. Rhonda Moore Rhonda Moore is a Researcher in the Politics Department atthe University College (UNSW), Canberra. She holds a BA fromSydney University and a Postgraduate Diploma of Librarianshipfrom UNSW. She has worked as a contract researcher in the UK,Canada and Australia, primarily in the fields of criminology andpolitical sociology, and since 1987 has done research on drug usein Australia. Jennifer Norberry Jennifer Norberry BA(Hons), LLB(Hons), Dip Lib is a lawyeremployed at the Australian Institute of Criminology. Her researchinterests include illicit drugs policy, HIV/AIDS and prisons andenvironmental crime. Grant Wardlaw Grant Wardlaw BA, MA(Hons), PhD (Auckland), BA(Soc Sci)(Deakin), Grad Dip Intl Law (ANU). Dr Wardlaw is Director ofWardlaw Consulting Pty Ltd and currently acts as a consultant tothe Commonwealth Attorney-General's Department and a number ofother government agencies. Prior to this, he held senior researchpositions in the Australian Institute of Criminology (1976-1991)and worked as a clinical psychologist with the New ZealandDepartment of Justice (1974-76). Dr Wardlaw has published widelyin the areas of drug policy, drug law enforcement, andepidemiology of drug use. He is a member of the Commonwealth'sDrug Abuse Research and Education Advisory Committee, and anumber of other advisory boards. Dr Wardlaw has led a number ofmajor drug research projects funded by the Australasian PoliceCommissioner's Conference, the National Campaign Against DrugAbuse, and the US Department of Defence. Nicola Ballenden Nicola Ballenden BA(Hons) was employed as a research officeron the project. She is currently completing her Masters at theUniversity of Melbourne. Her research interests include mentalhealth law, drugs and medico-legal issues. CliffSchaffer's Home Page WT02-B03-9IA086-000614-B041-415http://206.61.184.43:80/schaffer/Library/studies/lag/clinic1.htm 206.61.184.43 19970122020149 text/html 12011HTTP/1.0 200 OKDate: Wednesday, 22-Jan-97 02:01:45 GMTServer: WebSitePro/1.1f (S/N wpo-0deb)Allow-ranges: bytesContent-type: text/htmlLast-modified: Saturday, 28-Dec-96 07:03:16 GMTContent-length: 11793 LaGuardia Committee Report -- Clinical Study Contents | Feedback | Search DRCNet Library | Schaffer Library | Major Studies | LaGuardiaCommittee Report The LaGuardia Report THE CLINICAL STUDY PLAN AND SCOPE Interest in the effects of marihuana on the human subjectfollows two main lines: first, concerning what may be calledpleasurable effects which account for its widespread use- andsecond, regarding undesirable effects, including those leading tocriminal and other antisocial acts. In his monograph on marihuana, Walton has reviewed at lengththe literature on hashish experience. He has grouped thesedescriptions as retrospective accounts by professional writersand physicians who have taken the drug through curiosity orscientific interest, reports by physicians concerning patientswho have taken excessive doses, and observations by psychiatristson subjects under marihuana influence. In all of these instancesa dose toxic to the individual had been taken and the effectsdescribed correspond to psychotic episodes of greater or lessdegree. In the literature there are commonly described two basic typesof effect, one of excitation, psychic exaltation, and innerjoyousness, with divorcement from the external world; the other astate of anxiety with fear of consequences, such as death orinsanity. Either one of these types of reaction may beexperienced alone, but usually both are present during theintoxication. They occur in no regular sequence but replace eachother in rapid succession. The euphoric and anxiety states aregenerally accompanied by mental confusion, a rapid flow ofdissociated ideas, and a feeling of prolongation of time andspatial distortion. Sexual desires or phantasies may also occur. The detailed descriptions of the experience vary. Those givenby trained writers, such as Ludlow and Bayard Taylor, are vividand dramatic, embodying sensual, visual, and auditoryillusions-phantasies of overpowering splendor and beauty, on theone hand, and intense suffering and horror on the other. Theauthors, familiar with stories of hashish effects and gifted withstrong imaginative powers, undoubtedly were expectant of muchthat happened. The account given by the eminent Philadelphiaphysician, H. C. Wood, while following the same general pattern,has much less embellishment. He describes a feeling of well-beingand inner joyousness and buoyancy and the performance of anticswhich he knew to be foolish but was unable to control. He wasable to recall no illusions or hallucinations. Later a state ofanxiety came on, developing into an overpowering fear of death. A number of studies by psychiatrists on selected subjects havebeen reported. An excellent example is that of Kant and Krapf.Each acted as subject for the other and the effects of marihuanaare described and analyzed at length. In general, the objectivein such studies is the interpretation of the reactions in termsof disturbances in psychological processes and functionings. Thedescriptions referred to have been given by persons of a highersocial class, well educated and accustomed by training to act inconformity with conventional social behavior. Although a state ofirritability may occur and threats of suicide be made byindividuals of this type under toxic doses of marihuana, it isnoteworthy that in none of the descriptions is there found anexpression of antagonism or antisocial behavior which led to actsof violence or what would be called criminal conduct. Of more direct interest are the publications of WalterBromberg, psychiatrist, Bellevue Hospital,Psychiatrist-in-Charge, Psychiatric Clinic, Court of GeneralSessions of New York County. Marihuana users who are broughtbefore the court or admitted to the hospital come under hisobservation and he has reported at length on the psychiatricobservations of 29 of these who showed psychotic reactions. Hedescribes two types of reactions, one an acute marihuanaintoxication with a psychotic syndrome, the other a toxicpsychosis. Acute intoxication occurs in any individual if themarihuana is taken in sufficiently large doses. It comes onpromptly and passes off some hours later. In marihuana psychosis,the symptoms are much more severe and of longer duration. Hedescribes a number of cases in which the psychotic statecontinued for a number of days and required hospitalization. The toxic psychosis seen in marihuana users occurs at any timeand is of indefinite duration. Bromberg states that therelationship between cannabis and the onset of a functionalpsychotic state is not always clear. The personality factor is ofundoubted importance and other toxic agents, such as alcohol andother drugs, as well as endogenous elements, may be involved. Thesymptoms, except for the longer duration, resemble those observedin persons under marihuana intoxication, but often take on thecharacteristics seen in schizophrenic or manic- depressivepsychosis. A description of 11 cases admitted to Bellevue Hospital isgiven for illustration. The marihuana was taken in the form ofcigarettes. In this group were 5 Negroes, 2 of whom were women, 1Puerto Rican, and 5 whites, one of whom was a Mexican and anothera boy of 16. Except for one of the whites, a homosexual, theywere all of a low intellectual and social order. One of theNegroes was arrested for following women in Central Park. Theothers were admitted at their own request, or were sent in by thepolice or family. Three of the group had definite sexualstimulation but in none was there an outburst in the form of anattack on women. The Puerto Rican became confused and excited andbegan chasing people with an ice pick. Shortly after hisdischarge he was readmitted to the hospital, was diagnosed asdefinitely psychotic, and was transferred to a state hospital asa schizophrenic. The majority of the group, 8 in fact, hadpsychopathic personalities and 3 of these were transferred tostate institutions for further care. The group as a whole isrepresentative of those who come into the hands of the policebecause of abnormal conduct and who are the source of thesensational newspaper and magazine stories. Bromberg's findings concerning the lack of a positiverelationship between marihuana and crime are described in thesociological section of this study. In marihuana literature, the action of the drug is usuallydescribed from retrospective observation of the effects on asingle individual. Relationship to varying dosage, to thesubject's personality and background, to environmental conditionswhen the drug was taken, is given little if any attention. It isthe lack of information concerning these and other factorsinvolved in marihuana reaction which has given rise to thepresent confusion regarding its effects. The clinical study here described was designed to affordinformation not found in marihuana literature but necessary forany comprehensive view of marihuana action. For obtaining thisinformation there were these requisites: an adequate number ofsubjects for the study, a clear understanding of the mental andphysical make-up of each subject, a uniformity of environmentalfactors, accurately graded dosage of marihuana, and standardizedmethods of obtaining and recording marihuana effects. In additionto defining the usual and unusual effects of marihuana, as shownby subjective and objective symptoms and alterations in behaviorand in physical reaction, the study was expected to answerquestions which must arise in consideration of the problem as awhole. Of special importance are these: Do marihuana users showfundamental traits differentiating them from non-users? Do userspresent evidence of psychological or physical damage directlyattributable to the drug? What are the pleasurable effects whichaccount for the widespread usage of marihuana? To what extentdoes it lead to antisocial or dangerous behavior? The sections covering the clinical study are under thefollowing headings: A. Medical Aspects 1. Symptoms and Behavior 2. Organic and Systemic Functions B. Psychological Aspects 1. Psychophysical and Other Functions 2. Intellectual Functioning 3. Emotional Reactions and General Personality Structure 4. Family and Community Ideologies C. Comparison Between Users and Non-Users from theStandpoint of Mental and Physical Deterioration D. Addiction and Tolerance E. Possible Therapeutic Applications Organization for the Study The clinical studies were carried out at the Welfare Hospital(1) a New York City hospital for chronic diseases on WelfareIsland. The quarters assigned to the study consisted of a ward ofeight beds for the group to be studied at any one period, anadjoining ward of two beds for the study of individuals of thegroup, three additional rooms with equipment for specialexaminations, and a diet kitchen for the preparation of thesubjects' meals. Four female nurses were employed and the subjects in thelarger ward were under constant supervision. In addition toroutine records, each nurse reported the behavior of the subjectswhile she was on duty. Guards were assigned from the Departmentof Correction and the New York City Police Force for the subjectsdrawn from the Riker's and Hart Island penitentiaries and theHouse of Detention for Women. The facilities of the Third Medical Division laboratory wereused for general clinical laboratory examinations and for moredetailed study of organ functioning. For measurement ofpsychological reactions, special apparatus was provided. Adescription of equipment used for each division of the study isgiven under its proper section. Contents | Feedback | Search DRCNet Library | Schaffer Library | Major Studies | LaGuardiaCommittee ReportWT02-B03-10IA086-000614-B042-69http://206.61.184.43:80/schaffer/Library/studies/lag/organic.htm 206.61.184.43 19970122020248 text/html 18172HTTP/1.0 200 OKDate: Wednesday, 22-Jan-97 02:02:42 GMTServer: WebSitePro/1.1f (S/N wpo-0deb)Allow-ranges: bytesContent-type: text/htmlLast-modified: Saturday, 28-Dec-96 07:02:05 GMTContent-length: 17954 LaGuardia Committee Report -Organic and Systemic Functions Contents | Feedback | Search DRCNet Library | Schaffer Library | Major Studies | LaGuardiaCommittee Report LaGuardia Committee Report on Marihuana ORGANIC AND SYSTEMIC FUNCTIONS Samuel Allentuck, MD The functions of the body organs and systems were studied inthe manner common to hospital practice according to the methodsand with the equipment in use at Welfare Hospital. The study wasdesigned to show not only the effects of varying doses ofmarihuana but also whether subjects who had long been users ofthe drug gave evidence of organic damage. The tests were madebefore the drug was administered, during its action, and often inthe after period. The heart and circulation, blood composition, kidney, liverand gastro-intestinal function, and basal metabolism receivedspecial consideration. SUMMARY The most consistent effect of marihuana observed in thisdivision of the study was an increase in pulse rate which beganshortly after the taking of the drug, reached a peak in about twohours, and gradually disappeared. In-a few instances a temporarysinus tachycardia or sinus bradycardia was noted, but except forthese there were no abnormalities in rhythm. The increase inpulse rate was usually accompanied by a rise in blood pressure. There was in general an increase in the blood sugar level andin the basal metabolic rate, quite marked in some subjects, butin the majority the levels reached did not exceed the high normallimits. An increase in the frequency of urination was often observed. There was, however, no appreciable increase in the totalamount of urine passed during the drug action. Hunger and an increase in appetite, particularly for sweets,was noted in the majority of the subjects, and the taking ofcandy or sweetened drinks brought down a "too high"effect of the drug. Nausea and vomiting occurred in a number of instances,diarrhea only during psychotic episodes. On the other hand, the blood showed no changes in cell count,hemoglobin per cent, or the urea nitrogen, calcium and phosphorusfigures. The figures for the circulation rate and vital capacityand the results of the phenolsulfonphthalein test for kidneyinfection and the bromsulfalein test for liver function were notdifferent from those of the control period. Theelectrocardiograms showed no abnormalties which could beattributed to a direct action on the heart. In the fewobservations on gastric motility and secretion no evidence ofmarihuana action on these functions was obtained. The positive results observed, increase in pulse rate andblood pressure, increase in blood sugar and metabolic rate, urgeto urinate, increased appetite, nausea and vomiting, anddiarrhea, were not intensified by an increase in dosage, for theycould occur in an equal degree after the administration of any ofthe effective doses within the range used. All the effectsdescribed are known to be expressions of forms of cerebralexcitation, the impulses from this being transmitted through theautonomic system. The alterations in the functions of the organsstudied come from the effects of the drug on the central nervoussystem and are proportional to these effects. A direct action onthe organs themselves was not seen. Psychological Aspects PSYCHOPHYSICAL AND OTHER FUNCTIONS Robert S. Morrow, PH.D. In this phase of the study an effort was made to determine theeffect of marihuana on various psychomotor and some specialmental abilities. Appraisal of these effects was made whereverpossible through the use of standardized tests. A number ofdifferent tests were originally tried under varying experimentalconditions on the group of 5 volunteer subjects who had neverbefore taken marihuana. Only those tests were retained which, inthe course of this preliminary investigation demonstrated thegreatest potentialities. With the tests finally selected it washoped to measure the effect of marihuana on the followingfunctions. FUNCTIONS AND CAPACITIES TESTED Static Equilibrium This was measured by means of the MilesAtaxiameter, which is an instrument for recording body sway. Thesubject remains stationary in the ataxiameter with his hands athis sides and his feet together while a system of pulleysattached to a helmet on his head records the direction and degreeof movement. The subject's score is the cumulative sway in alldirections measured in millimeters. This test was applied to eachsubject for two minutes with his eyes open and two minutes withhis eyes closed. Each trial was followed by a rest period of fiveminutes. Hand Steadiness Hand steadiness was measured by means of theWhipple Steadiness Tester which consists of a metal disk with ahole 3/16 of an inch in diameter, connected in series with drycells, an electric counter, and a stylus. The subject wasinstructed to hold the stylus in the hole for two minutes withouttouching the metal sides. Each contact with the side of the holewas recorded and the total number of contacts gave an index ofunsteadiness of hand. Speed of Tapping Speed of tapping was measured in somewhat thesame manner as was hand steadiness. The Whipple Apparatus wasused, the tapping board replacing the steadiness disk and athicker and heavier stylus replacing the steadiness stylus. Thesubject tapped repeatedly on the metal plate for two minutes andthe total number of taps was recorded on the counter, therebygiving a measure of motor speed. Strength of Grip The Collins Dynamometer was used to measurethe subject's strength of grip. Three trials were made for eachhand and the scores averaged. Simple and Complex Hand and Foot Reaction Time Specialapparatus was constructed to measure simple and complex hand andfoot reaction time. To measure simple hand reaction time, thesubject was instructed to press down on a telegraph key andremove his hand as quickly as possible when a red light appearedon the board which stood directly before him. A Cenco counterrecorded the reaction time, that is, the time which elapsedbetween the presentation of the stimulus and the response. For the measurement of simple foot reaction time, the subjectpressed down on a pedal with his foot, removing it as quickly aspossible when the red light appeared. For the measurement of complex (choice or discrimination) handand foot reaction time either a red or a blue light served as astimulus. The subject had no advance knowledge as to which colorlight would appear. For measuring the response with the hand, thesubject pressed down on the telegraph key with the right handand, at the sight of the red light, moved the peg from the redcompartment into the center (neutral) compartment with the lefthand, then removed the right hand from the key; at the appearanceof the blue light, he moved the peg from the blue to the neutralcompartment. For measuring complex foot reaction time, theprocedure was similar to that for estimating the hand reactiontime except that the right foot and the pedal were substitutedfor the right hand and the telegraph key. Each subject made fifteen trials for each of the fourvariations. Musical Aptitude Musical aptitude was determined by means ofthe Kwalwasser- Dykema Music Tests. The eight tests administeredwere the tonal memory test, the quality discrimination test, theintensity discrimination test, the tonal movement test, the timediscrimination test, the rhythm discrimination test, the pitchdiscrimination test, and the melodic taste test. The sum of thescores for these separate tests was used to give a total scorefor musical aptitude. Auditory Acuity By means of the Galton Whistle, the subjects'limits of auditory acuity were gauged for both ascending anddescending frequencies. The final score was the average of the results of three trialsin each direction. Perception of Time An attempt was made to appraise thesubject's facility in estimating time by asking him to statewhen, after a given signal, he thought the following intervalshad elapsed - fifteen seconds, one minute, and five minutes.Several trials were given for each time interval and the averageof the results of the trials was taken as the final score. Perception of Length Subjects were asked to estimate thelength of lines which were 3 inches, 5 inches, and 8 inches inlength and to draw lines of 3 inches and 7 inches. The Subjects Fifty-four subjects were used in this part of theexperiment, 36 marihuana users and 18 non-users. The two groupswere equated approximately for the following factors: age,height, weight, years of formal education, and number of arrests.The age range for the user group was from 21 to 45 years with27.9 years as an average, the age range for the non-user groupwas from 22 to 43 years with 29.8 years as an average. The rangein height for the users was from 54 to 75 inches with a mean of67.5 inches- for the non-users the range was from 60 to 71 incheswith a mean of 66.8 inches. Range in weight for the users wasfrom 123 to 178 pounds with 151.3 pounds as the mean, for thenon-users from 115 to 180 pounds with 149.5 pounds as the mean.The schooling of the user group ranged from no education at allto 10 years with a mean of 7.1 years, that of the non- usersvaried from 6 to 12 years with a mean of 8.3 years. As regardsthe number of arrests, the range for users was from 1 to 20 witha mean of 5.1 and for the non-users from 1 to 15 with a mean of5.3. The two groups differed radically with respect to race. Of the36 marihuana users, 11 (31 per cent) were white, 18 (50 per cent)were Negroes, and 7 (19 percent) were Puerto Ricans. Of the 18non- users, 12 (67 per cent) were white, 6 (33 per cent) wereNegroes, and none were Puerto Rican. In addition, the user group was analyzed with respect to theage when the marihuana habit was begun, the duration of thehabit, the number of marihuana cigarettes generally smoked perday, and the period of deprivation. The variation of the habit asalready described for the entire group of users applies to the 36subjects studied here. Procedure The tests were first administered to the subjectsbefore they had taken marihuana, then about a week later whenthey were under the influence of 2 cc. of marihuana, and finallyanother week later after 5 cc.(1) of marihuana had beenadministered. On each occasion the psychomotor tests for staticequilibrium, hand steadiness, tapping, strength of grip, andreaction time were repeated at hourly intervals for eightsuccessive hours in order that the time-effects of marihuanamight be determined.(2) The other tests, that is, those measuringmusical ability, auditory acuity, visual ) memory, and perceptionof time and length were given to the subjects while in theundrugged condition and from three to four hours after the drughad been administered. The music tests were given under normalconditions and after 5 cc. of marihuana had been administered,but not under 2 cc. dosage. In almost all instances the marihuana was given in the morningshortly after breakfast and generally after a day when no drughad been taken in order that "hangover" effects mightbe avoided. For the most part the subjects rested and did littleor nothing except the prescribed tests on days when marihuana wastaken. The equilibrium, steadiness, tapping and strength of griptests were given together on one day and the different forms ofthe reaction- time test on another day. Ordinarily four or fivedays elapsed between retests. In addition to being tested after standard doses of themarihuana concentrate had been ingested, 11 users and 9 non-userswere tested after smoking marihuana cigarettes.(3) The cigarettesweighed from 4 to 8 grains each. Most of the subjects smoked fivecigarettes, two non-users smoked only three, and one nonusersmoked four. The tests with cigarettes were given atquarter-hour, half-hour and hour intervals. (1) A dose of 5 cc. of marihuana proved "too much"for many non-user subjects in the sense that ingestion of thisamount was often followed by nausea and general symptoms ofmalaise which interfered with further testing. For this reason the higher dose for non-users was sometimesreduced to 3 cc. or 4 cc. In all, only 6 of the non-user subjectstook the S cc. dose. Accordingly, although the higher dosage isreferred to as S cc. it should be noted that the actual amountused varied from 3 cc. to 5 cc. (2) The scores for the first 25 users and 6 non-users wereobtained every half hour, but since there was little differencebetween the half-hourly and hourly results it was decided torecord hourly scores only, except for the first half hour. (3) A short experiment in which placebos were employed wasalso tried on these subjects. An attempt was made to have theplacebos simulate the marihuana as much as possible butunfortunately the placebo pills had a distinctive taste whichrendered them easily identifiable. The subjects referred to themas the "licorice" pills or the "blanks."While the experiment was completed and resulted in someinteresting findings, the factors which might have invalidatedthe results were so serious that these experiments are notreported at this time. Summary and Conclusions 1. The effect of marihuana on the psychomotor functionsdepends primarily on the complexity of the function tested.Simpler functions like speed of tapping and simple reaction timeare affected only slightly by large doses (5 cc.) and negligibly,if at all, by smaller doses (2 cc.). On the other hand, the morecomplex functions like static equilibrium, hand steadiness, andcomplex reaction time may be affected adversely to a considerabledegree by the administration of both large and small doses ofmarihuana. 2. The function most severely affected is body steadiness andhand steadiness. The ataxia is general in all directions ratherthan predominant in any particular axis. 3. The effects produced by larger doses (5 cc.) aresystematically, though not necessarily proportionately, greaterthan those brought about by small doses. 4. The time required by the drug to exert its maximum effectvaries somewhat with the function and size of dose, but, on thewhole, time curves for both functions and dosages have similarityof form The effect of the drug begins from one to two hours afteringestion and reaches its peak at the fourth hour, after which itdeclines so that by the eighth hour most of it is dissipated. 5. When marihuana is taken in cigarette form the psychomotoreffects are similar in character and trend to those observedafter the ingestion of the drug but they occur much sooner andtaper off more quickly. 6. The effects seem to be essentially the same for women asfor men, except that women are sometimes affected maximally atthe second or third hour after the drug is administered. In womenthe return to the normal condition is in some instances quickerand more abrupt than it is in the men. 7. Non-users generally seem to be more affected by the drugwhen it is ingested than are users. 8. Auditory acuity is notaffected by marihuana. 9. There is no evidence that musical ability, of non-musiciansat least, is improved by marihuana. The ability to estimate short periods of time and short linear distances is not measurably affected by the ingestion of marihuana. Contents | Feedback | Search DRCNet Library | Schaffer Library | Major Studies | LaGuardiaCommittee Report WT02-B03-11IA086-000615-B001-396http://206.61.184.43:80/schaffer/Library/studies/nycla/nycla.htm 206.61.184.43 19970122024418 text/html 118779HTTP/1.0 200 OKDate: Wednesday, 22-Jan-97 02:44:00 GMTServer: WebSitePro/1.1f (S/N wpo-0deb)Allow-ranges: bytesContent-type: text/htmlLast-modified: Monday, 16-Dec-96 07:34:08 GMTContent-length: 118562 New York County Lawyers' Association Drug Policy TaskForce DRCNetOnline Drug Policy Library Report and Recommendations of the Drug Policy Task Force October, 1996 Table Of Contents Introduction List of Participants I. Failure of Contemporary Drug Policy to Meet its Stated Objectives II. The Costs of Current Drug Policy A. Economic Costs B. Social Costs III. Public Health Consequences of Current Drug Policy IV. The Relationship of Drug Policy to Violent Crime V. Drug Policy, Drug Law Enforcement and People of Color VI. The Impact of Current Drug Policy on Women VII. Effects of Contemporary Drug Policy on the Integrity of Government Task Force Recommendations I. Pursue Alternative Models in Establishing Future Drug Policy II. Provide Immediate Sentencing Relief and Additional Judicial Discretion in Criminal Prosecution of Drug Cases III. Reduce the Harms Associated With Substance Abuse and Drug Prohibition IV. Concentrate Law Enforcement Resources on Reducing Violent Crime and Prosecution of Violent Criminal Offenders V. Reshape the Drug Policy Debate -- Return to Objective Analysis and Realistic Goals VI. Implement Public Education Campaign on Drug Use and Substance Abuse VII. Decriminalize Marijuana VIII. Reverse Encroachments on Civil Rights and Restore "Due Process of Law" IX. Provide Alternative Social and Economic Opportunity for Inner City Youth X. End War on Youth and Inner City Communities -- Restore Confidence and Integrity in Government Bibliography Footnotes Introduction The Drug Policy Task Force, sponsored by the New YorkCountry Lawyers' Association, commenced its operations in theFall of 1993. The Task Force was established as a"blue-ribbon" panel of prominent and respectedindividuals, each known for his or her work, insights andinvolvement in the area of drug policy reform. The stated purpose of the Task Force has been to developand urge implementation of rational and workable alternatives tocurrent drug policy on both the state and federal levels. In an effort to develop a comprehensive and well-balancedapproach to future drug policy, participants of the Task Forcewere drawn from various disciplines, including legal, medical andacademic, as well as from each branch of government --legislative, judicial and executive. After extensive study, public hearings, discussion andanalysis of various issues within the broad scope of the drugpolicy debate, this working body now offers its "Report andRecommendations" for public consideration. The work of the Task Froce, toward development of acomprehensive, multidisciplinary approach to an effective andresponsible drug policy, and in tackling the difficult issuesinvolved in this important area, is ongoing. The "Report andRecommendations" which follow should be read and consideredin the context of the continuing nature of this endeavor. Respectufully, Alan B. Fischler Chair October, 1996 (This report has been approved and adopted by the Board ofDirectors of the New York County Lawyers' Association. NYCLA isone of the largest local bar associations in the nation.) Additional copies of this report are available at a cost of $4each. Please contact: New York County Lawyers' Association 14 Vesey Street New York, N.Y. 10007 Tel. (212) 267-6646 Fax (212) 40-NYCLA or The Drug Policy Foundation 4455 Connecticut Avenue, N.W. Suite B-500 Washington, D.C. 20008 Tel. (202) 537-5005 Fax (202) 537-3007 (You may contact the Chair of the NYCLA Drug Policy TaskForce directly by E-Mail at AlFischler@aol.com.) List of Participants Return to Table of Contents Charles D. Adler, Esq. President Center for Community Alternatives Hon. Sal F. Albanese Member, N.Y.C. City Council Robert M. Baum, Esq. Attorney-in-Charge, Legal Aid Society Hon. Harold Beeler Justice, N.Y.S. Supreme Court New York County Kildare Clarke, M.D. Kings County Medical Center David C. Condliffe Executive Director The Drug Policy Foundation Norman Corenthal, Esq. Borough Chief, N.Y.C. Law Department Family Court Division, Queens County Hon. Stephen G. Crane Justice, N.Y.S. Supreme Court New York County Hon. Lewis L. Douglass Justice, N.Y.S. Supreme Court Kings County Prof. Ernest Drucker, Ph.D. Director, Division of Community Health Montefiore Medical Center Albert Einstein College of Medicine Sheila Dugan, Esq. Attorney, Manhattan Hon. Laura Safer Espinoza Judge, N.Y.C. Criminal Court New York County Lynn Fahey, Esq., Former Deputy Attorney-in-Charge, Legal AidSociety, Criminal Appeals Bureau Alan B. Fischler, Esq. Chair, NYCLA Drug Policy Task Force Hon. Joseph L. Galiber* N.Y.S. Senator, Bronx Co. Robert Gangi Executive Director Correctional Association of New York Hon. Abraham Gerges Justice, N.Y.S. Supreme Court Kings County Prof. Shanara Gilbert* Associate Professor CUNY School of Law Prof. Keri A. K. Gould Director, Externship Programs Fordham University School of Law Diane Gover Special Assistant for Public Safety Office of the Manhattan Borough President Linda Kenepaske, Esq. Attorney, Manhattan Hon. Whitman Knapp Judge, U.S. District Court Southern District of New York Hon. Joseph R. Lentol Member, N.Y.S. Assembly Michael Z. Letwin, Esq. President Association of Legal Aid Attorneys David C. Leven, Esq. Executive Director Prisoners' Legal Services of New York Juliette S. Levin, Esq. Attorney, Manhattan Hon. Yvonne Lewis Justice, N.Y.S. Supreme Court Kings County Rhea Schaenman Mallett, Esq. Project Director Correctional Association of New York Hon. William I. Mogulescu Judge, N.Y.C. Criminal Court New York County John P. Morgan, M.D. Professor of Pharmacology CUNY Medical School Patrick V. Murphy Director, Criminal Justice and Public Policy Programs U.S. Conference of Mayors Ethan A. Nadelmann, J.D., Ph.D. Director Lindesmith Center Leonard Noisette, Esq. Project Director Neighborhood Defender Service of Harlem James Ostrowski, Esq. Attorney, Buffalo JoAnne Page Executive Director Fortune Society Carol Shapiro Project Director Vera Institute of Justice Thomas Sheehan, Esq. Attorney, Queens County Jesse Sligh, Esq. Executive Assistant District Attorney Office of the Queens County District Attorney Hon. Robert W. Sweet Judge, U.S. District Court Southern District of New York Deborah Weich, Esq. Secretary, NYCLA Drug Policy Task Force Hon. Jack B. Weinstein Senior Judge, U.S. District Court Eastern District of New York Lynn Zimmer, Ph.D. Associate Professor of Sociology CUNY at Queens College * We mourn the passing of Joseph L. Galiber, a tireless andarticulate advocate of reason, whose voice shall be sorelymissed. We also regret the loss of Shanara Gilbert, and shallmiss the thoughtful contributions she made to our discussions. I. Failure Of Contemporary Drug Policy To Meet Its Stated Objectives Return to Table of Contents It has become a widely accepted fact that drug policy, asemployed during the past three decades by the federal government,and in state and local jurisdictions throughout the UnitedStates, has largely failed to meet its stated objectives. Current drug policy relies on an "enforcement" or"penal" model, emphasizing interdiction, arrest,prosecution and incarceration of both distributors and users ofcontrolled substances as its primary "weapons" in whathas often been characterized as a "war on drugs."Commonly known substances generally designated as"controlled" or illegal include: hallucinogens(marijuana, hashish, mescaline and LSD), stimulants (amphetaminesand cocaine), and depressants (opium, heroin and barbiturates).(1) Notwithstanding the vast public resources expended on theenforcement of penal statutes against users and distributors ofcontrolled substances, contemporary drug policy appears to havefailed, even on its own terms, in a number of notable respects.These include: minimal reduction in the consumption of controlledsubstances; failure to reduce violent crime; failure to markedlyreduce drug importation, distribution and street-level drugsales; failure to reduce the widespread availability of drugs topotential users; failure to deter individuals from becominginvolved in the drug trade; failure to impact upon the hugeprofits and financial opportunity available to individual"entrepreneurs" and organized underworld organizationsthrough engaging in the illicit drug trade; the expenditure ofgreat amounts of increasingly limited public resources in pursuitof a cost-intensive "penal" or"law-enforcement" based policy; failure to providemeaningful treatment and other assistance to substance abusersand their families; and failure to provide meaningful alternativeeconomic opportunities to those attracted to the drug trade forlack of other available avenues for financial advancement. (2) Moreover, a growing body of evidence and opinion suggests thatcontemporary drug policy, as pursued in recent decades, may becounterproductive and even harmful to the society whose publicsafety it seeks to protect. This conclusion becomes more readilyapparent when one distinguishes the harms suffered by society andits members directly attributable to the pharmacological effectsof drug use upon human behavior, from those harms resulting frompolicies attempting to eradicate drug use. (3) With aid of these distinctions, we see that present drugpolicy appears to contribute to the increase of violence in ourcommunities. It does so by permitting and indeed, causingthe drug trade to remain a lucrative source of economicopportunity for street dealers, drug kingpins and all thosewilling to engage in the often violent, illicit, black markettrade. Meanwhile, the effect of present policy serves to stigmatizeand marginalize drug users, thereby inhibiting and underminingthe efforts of many such individuals to remain or becomeproductive, gainfully employed members of society. Furthermore,current policy has not only failed to provide adequate access totreatment for substance abuse, it has, in many ways, rendered theobtaining of such treatment, and of other medical services, moredifficult and even dangerous to pursue. (4) The appropriate goal of any drug policy must be to decreasethe prevalence and spread of harmful drug use and substanceabuse, and to minimize the harms associated with such problemswhere they are found to exist. (5) Additionally, any policy whichcreates more harmful results than the societal problems itproposes to solve, must be re-evaluated in terms of theadvisability of further pursuit of such policy. Further, tojustify continuation of any public policy, the costs incurredmust always be weighed against the benefits derived. It is withinthis context, and with these criteria in mind, that presentapproaches to drug policy must be objectively assessed and, whereappropriate, alternative models for future policy evaluated andconsidered. (6) In making its assessment, the Task Force has concluded thatcontemporary drug policy has failed by virtually every objectivestandard. Accordingly, we call for a dramatic shift in thinkingand approach in development and implementation of future drugcontrol efforts. At this time, although not recommending"decriminalization" or "legalization" of mostsubstances currently designated as "controlled" underfederal and state penal statutes, the Task Force does urge thatcertain incremental steps be taken to alleviate the more easilyresolved economic and social costs associated with current drugpolicy. These include: the decriminalization of marijuana;further measures attempting to separate the "hard" drugmarkets (e.g., for heroin and cocaine), from markets for"soft" drugs (e.g., marijuana and hashish); thedownward modification of existing draconian sentences for othernon-violent drug offenses; the elimination of mandatory minimumsentences in drug cases; and increased judicial discretion in thesentencing of drug offenders, with further reliance upon drugtreatment and other diversionary programs as alternatives toincarceration for the non-violent drug offender. Moreover, wehighly recommend the further study and serious consideration ofother alternative, non-criminal, regulatory drug controlmeasures, developed in accordance with a "publichealth" rather than a "penal" model of drugpolicy. II. The Costs Of Current Drug Policy Return to Table of Contents A. The Economic Costs Whether viewed in isolation or on balance with the benefitsderived, there can be no question that the economic costs ofcontemporary drug policy, as employed on the federal and statelevels, have proved unacceptably high. Indeed, as we face afuture of increasingly limited resources, the continuation ofpresent policy, with overwhelming emphasis on the arrest,prosecution and incarceration of drug offenders, will produceexponential growth in expenditures required to accommodate andmaintain this policy. (7) As a result of the stepped up incarceration of "drugoffenders" during the past three decades, since the early1970's, our nation has seen an alarming increase in the number ofindividuals incarcerated within its borders. (8) Meanwhile, inaddition to all other resources utilized, the need for additionalprison beds and increased correctional budgets has also grownexponentially, on both state and federal levels. (9) Other unacceptably high costs in the present"penal-based" model of drug policy have been: courtbudgets strained beyond capacity, affecting the ability of ourcourt systems to adequately address both criminal and civil casescoming within their respective jurisdictions; large portions offederal, state and local law enforcement resources devoted todrug interdiction, arrest and prosecution; large portions offederal and state prosecutors' budgets devoted to drug cases;increased costs for court appointed public defenders; and growingbudgets for other national and international drug enforcementefforts -- all exacting a substantial drain on the increasinglylimited financial resources of the nation. Further, the exponential growth in the number of individualsincarcerated throughout the nation has already, and willincreasingly, cause incalculable economic costs in terms of: lostproductivity of those individuals incarcerated; state support offamilies deprived of breadwinners; and the economic decline ofimpoverished communities through incarceration of great numbersof those in the prime of their productive lives, and theirreduced earning capacity upon release from prison. B. The Social Costs The adverse effects of current drug policy have been felt mostprofoundly in the urban centers of our nation. The imposition ofpenal sanctions for drug possession and sale has proven awoefully ineffective and otherwise harmful means of attempting tocontrol substance abuse in communities where, for some, drugs areoften the only escape from the harsh realities of poverty. In aclimate where there is no treatment on demand, criminalizing thesubstance abuser may be viewed as profoundly inhumane andcounterproductive. Imprisoning individuals for drug use causes further detrimentto those individuals and their families, destroying familycohesion and undermining rehabilitation efforts. (10) Theincrease in fatherless and motherless homes, which the currentpolicy of emphasis on incarceration causes, is extraordinarilydisruptive to the family unit, where often, those harmed the mostare the children. The separation of children from their primarycaretakers due to long term imprisonment, often results in amarked decline in the quality of shelter, nutrition, medicalassistance and emotional nurturing. Studies have shown thatchildren whose primary caretakers have spent significant amountsof time in prison are more likely to manifest symptoms ofanxiety, depression, behavioral difficulties and juveniledelinquency, which may often be followed by adult criminalactivity. (11) Many of these children, often left in the care ofless able caretakers, have turned to peer relationships withgangs, seeking to establish a family substitute. (12) The criminalization and consequent stigmatization of drugusers, whether or not accompanied by a period of incarceration,"marginalizes" users, since a criminal record decreasesthe likelihood of successful employment and completerehabilitation, while continuing to impact upon family finances.This, in turn, exacerbates financial and social instability inhouseholds, and financial and emotional instability inneighborhoods, while burdening otherwise stretched resources ofpublic assistance programs. Moreover, the increased enforcement of civil forfeiture lawshas further undermined the security and stability of families.Recognizing a growing trend of evictions and asset forfeiture asa further weapon employed in the "war on drugs," entirefamilies have lost and continue to lose homes and othersubstantial assets for the acts of a single household member,thereby punishing even drug-free members of the community. (13) The black market created by drug prohibition turnsneighborhoods into war zones -- through turf wars over the hugeprofits to be made in the illicit drug industry, violentaltercations over drug transactions gone bad, and battles betweenlocal drug dealers and law-enforcement officers. The increase inviolent street crime which this situation engenders, aggravatedby the experience of violent prison culture which incarceratedoffenders bring back to their neighborhoods upon release, createsa dangerous situation for all members of inner city communities. Moreover, the street culture of guns and violence spawned bythe drug trade spills over into other social interaction in urbanneighborhoods, with violence becoming a commonly accepted mode ofconflict resolution. Community residents live in fear of theviolent street culture generated, in large part, by theblack-market drug trade, and the increased incidence of innocentpedestrians struck in the cross-fires or by stray bullets frombattles involving participants in the drug trade. (14) History has shown us that even in an atmosphere of prohibitionand criminalization of drug dealing, participation in the drugtrade will continue to be widespread, since it indisputablyprovides the greatest entrepreneurial opportunity to many inpoorer communities. There is a strong economic motivation foryoung people and those who might otherwise be legally employedand law-abiding to engage in the sale of drugs, due to the highprofits generated by the illicit industry in an environment ofdrug prohibition, and the dearth of opportunities for poor,uneducated youth in the legitimate job market. Harsh sentencing laws themselves lead to the activerecruitment of children and first time offenders (frequentlywomen - "drug mules") into the drug trade, so thatdealers themselves can escape such penalties. (15) Evidencefurther reveals, that due to the great economic incentivesrepresented by the illicit drug trade, when one street dealer istemporarily incapacitated by incarceration, there is a readysupply of others waiting in the wings to fill the gap in themarket. As such, not only does the widespread incarceration oflow-level drug dealers fail to deter others from entering intothe drug trade, it arguably draws more individuals into theillegal trade than would otherwise occur without the periodicremoval of many of its participants. (16) Moreover, the deterrence rationale of harsh sentencing doesnot necessarily operate among the drug dealing community as mightbe anticipated, where many assume the extraordinary risks alreadyinvolved in the violent but lucrative illicit drug trade. As oneobserver has noted: "Apprehended dealers are replaced from a seemingly bottomless pool, for jail is not a deterrent to those who daily risk death in the drug trade." (17) Additionally, with respect to users of certain controlledsubstances, it appears questionable that conventional deterrencetheory can be meaningfully applied where substance abuse may beaccompanied by physical addiction. Finally, a social byproduct of the misplaced allocation offinancial resources which concentrates huge expenditures on theapprehension and imposition of penal sanctions on drug users andlocal drug dealers, is a clogged criminal justice system unableto focus on society's larger crime problems. Courts jammed withdrug cases inevitably results in insufficient resources availableto properly attend to these and other more serious crimesappearing on overburdened court dockets. This logjam leads toinstances of "revolving door" justice even for violentcriminals, since the system simply cannot handle the overload.(18) A further result of these conditions is a perceivedtrivialization of violent crime itself, reinforced by a penalscheme which punishes drug crimes as severely or more severelythan many criminal acts of violence. III. Public Health Consequences Of Current Drug Policy Return to Table of Contents The Task Force views substance abuse as, first and foremost, a publichealth issue. Accordingly, it appears that problems ofsubstance abuse would be more appropriately and effectivelyaddressed within our health care delivery systems, rather than byour law enforcement agencies, courts and correctionalinstitutions. The emphasis on a "penal" model of drug controlresults in reduced funding for drug treatment facilities. This isan unfortunate irony, since, as concluded by RAND researchers ina 1994 report, a dollar's worth of drug treatment is worth sevendollars spent on the most successful law-enforcement efforts tocurb the use of cocaine. (19) Moreover, the fear of arrest, stigmatization and even removalof their children from homes, (20) discourages substance abusersfrom taking advantage of those health care and counselingfacilities which are available. (21) Pregnant women who aresubstance abusers are deterred from seeking adequate prenatalcare, resulting in unhealthier children. A single positive drugtest result during pregnancy can trigger mandatory reportingrequirements. Therefore, the current policy of criminalization ofdrug use amplifies potential health hazards of substance abuse,and inhibits access to treatment, even for non-drug use relatedhealth care. Since possession and sale of any controlled substance isillegal, dangerous drugs (which despite criminalization are stillwidely available on the black market) are completely unregulated.Under a scheme of criminalization, regulatory control is ceded tounderworld figures, including violent, predatory and oftenruthless criminals. This total lack of quality control of illicitdrugs on the market results in more dangerous, adulterated drugsbeing produced and consumed, which, in turn, causes more diseaseand death from the use of controlled substances than would occurif the production and distribution of these drugs were regulatedby, for instance, U.S. Food and Drug Administration safetyregulations, warnings and other labeling requirements. (22) The "zero tolerance" approach to the "drugproblem," with its primary emphasis on law enforcement andpenal sanctions, results in an absence of any quality control forillegal drugs widely consumed throughout the nation, and a lackof information concerning safer drug use. This presents furtherserious health costs brought on by current drug policy, whichignores the reality that some degree of drug use in our societyis inevitable. This lack of public education and safetyregulations dramatically, and unnecessarily, increases the healthrisks involved in the consumption of those drugs presentlydesignated as illegal. Accordingly, it appears that present drug control lawsthemselves, have directly led to an increase in the health risksassociated with drug use and substance abuse. In addition tothose dangers posed by lack of quality control and safetyregulations governing illegal drugs, drug paraphernalia laws,together with a failure to promote needle exchange programs, haveresulted in the preventable spread of AIDS and other similarlytransmitted diseases to users, their partners and children. (23) Moreover, easier interdiction of marijuana, (with a largermass than other controlled substances), causes greater relativeavailability of "harder," stronger, more dangerousdrugs (e.g., cocaine and heroin), which are easier to conceal,transport and distribute. Additionally, increased dangers to ouryouth and others who may consume "soft" drugs, (e.g.,marijuana and hashish), result from failure of current policy toseparate out the markets for "hard" drugs from thosefor "soft" drugs. Therefore, since consumption of allof these drugs is illegal, (and distributed in the same"black-market"), those who only purchase and smokemarijuana, for instance, are inevitably forced to come in contactwith a more dangerous criminal element in order to obtain thisrelatively harmless substance. (24) Violence associated with the illicit drug trade createssubstantial public health problems, in the form of injuries anddeath. These health problems arise from effects of drugprohibition rather than substance abuse per se. Evidencesuggests that gunshot wounds (due to "drug-traderelated" violence) are more prevalent than overdoses("drug-induced" injuries) in inner city hospitalemergency rooms of major metropolitan areas. (25) Moreover, inaddition to the empirical evidence, our nation's experience withalcohol prohibition suggests the validity of these observations.Once prohibition ended, so did the violence associated with blackmarket alcohol distribution. (26) "Drug prohibition" also causes an increased demandfor more potent legal substances, like alcohol, which isdecidedly more harmful than certain controlled substances, mostnotably, marijuana. (27) Moreover, current drug policy is foundto be, in ways, arbitrary and inconsistent, since it has beenproven that among the most dangerous commonly consumed drugs aretobacco and alcohol, both of which are legal. (28) Finally, current drug policy discourages research intopotentially therapeutic effects of psychotropic drugs, (29) e.g."medical marijuana," which is known to alleviate thesuffering of cancer patients and to be therapeutically beneficialin treatment of certain other diseases. (30) IV. The Relationship of Drug Policy to Violent Crime Return to Table of Contents There exists a large and growing body of respected opinion andcredible evidence which suggests that contemporary drug policyhas failed to deter or reduce the prevalence of violent crime inour communities, notwithstanding harsh treatment of drugoffenders under present "penal" or "lawenforcement" based policy. Indeed, many observers haveconcluded that the current form of "drug prohibition"has generated a great deal of violence, much of it armedviolence encountered in the lucrative underworld drug industry,and some deriving from law enforcement efforts themselves in the"war on drugs". In analyzing these issues, we take great care to distinguishbetween violence caused by actual drug use or substance abuse("drug-induced" violence), and violence caused as abyproduct of the high stakes involved in the illicit drug trade("drug trade" or "drug prohibition" relatedviolence). (31) This distinction is critical, because unless thecauses of crimes and violence are accurately identified, noeffective solutions can be found. There is no doubt that some forms of drug use may result inundesirable, unacceptable and anti-social behavior. (32) However,it appears that the overwhelming causes of violent crimes, whichoften find categorization under the heading of "drugrelated," are caused by various factors unrelated to actualpharmacological effects of controlled substances upon humanbehavior. (33) Rather, much of the violent crime can be said tobe "drug prohibition-related," insofar as it resultsfrom the high costs, huge profits and great stakes involved inthe world of drug commerce as is carried on in cities, states andnations throughout the world. (34) Moreover, the complete banningof all forms of use and sale of controlled substances, includingmarijuana and hashish, has fostered an underworld black market,for both "hard" and "soft" drugs, whereviolence and weapons possession is part and parcel of doingbusiness under conditions of illegality. In cities throughout the United States, we find aproliferation of armed violence resulting from "turf"wars for control of territory for lucrative drug sales, togetherwith regularly recurring dangerous and deadly altercations overdrug deals gone bad. In addition to this community-basedviolence, there are "shoot-outs" between drug dealersand law enforcement officers, the latter developing the need forgreater and more powerful weapons, only to be matched and thensurpassed by those in the drug trade who have enormous profits,and personal liberty, at stake. The net result of thesecircumstances has been an extraordinary casualty rate for thoseinvolved in the drug trade, (35) injury and death to innocentbystanders "caught in the crossfires," injury and lossof life to law enforcement officers, and a prevailing atmosphereof violence in many inner city communities. A further byproduct of these conditions is an increase ofweapons possession, and thereby, the weapons trade, where use andsale of dangerous and increasingly powerful weapons haveproliferated. This widespread possession and use of dangerous anddeadly weapons has further resulted in the increase of armedviolence in our communities, not always directly related to localdrug wars, but fostered by the undercurrent of violence, guns andmoney supported by the drug trade. We note other ways in which current drug policy is likelyserving to exacerbate rather than alleviate violence in ourcommunities. Over the past decades, stepped up law enforcementefforts, disproportionately carried out in our inner citycommunities, have resulted in large and increasing numbers ofminority youth being brought within control of the criminaljustice system. It is reported that almost 1 in every 3 youngblack men in the U.S., between the ages of 20-29, is presentlywithin the control of the criminal justice system -- either inprison, on parole or on probation. (36) This figure is up fromapproximately 1 in every 4 as reported just 5 years ago. (37)Together with the destabilization of families and communitiesaffected by wholesale removal of young men from their ranks, manyindividuals arrested and incarcerated for the inherently"non-violent" offenses of drug possession or sale, arethen exposed to the violence of prison culture. This violence is,in turn, brought back to the communities to which these membersinvariably return. Current drug policy's emphasis on drug arrests, prosecutionand incarceration, also indirectly increases violence bydiverting law enforcement, court and other criminal justiceresources from concentration on violent crime and violentcriminal offenders. Further, institutional pressures bear uponprosecutors to concentrate on drug case, since the availabilityof paid and trained police and other law enforcement officers, asprimary witnesses in such cases, renders prosecution of drugcases easier and the statistical rates of conviction (or return)more favorable. (38) This is not to discount the politicalemphasis often placed on prosecution of drug cases, nor, ofcourse, the obligation of prosecutors to process those cases inwhich legally supportable arrests under current law have beenmade. The net result has been a dramatic shift in the proportionof "non-violent" to "violent" offendersincarcerated in jails and prisons throughout the United States --such shift decidedly toward imprisonment of"non-violent" drug offenders, (39) further stretchingresources and limiting the ability of correctional institutionsto hold and maintain "violent" offenders within theirwalls. (40) On a more global level, there can be no question that theimmense fortunes to be made by involvement in the underground,black market world of drug commerce, has resulted in enormouspower and wealth for national and international narcotics cartelswhich, in the experience of various smaller nations, hasthreatened national security itself. (41) It is clear, therefore, that the most dangerous threats to oursecurity relating to drugs -- in our cities, throughout ournation and even, internationally -- derive not from thepharmacological effects of drug usage, but from the violenceengaged in and power amassed by an entire industry of underworldfigures, driven by the high costs and huge profits to be made inthe illicit drug trade. Searching our nation's history for similar experiences fromwhich we may draw guidance, we turn, as many studying this issuehave, to our national experience with alcohol prohibition duringthe early 20th century. (42) During that era of alcoholprohibition, it was the illegality of that"controlled substance," alcohol, which drove up itscosts, caused a lucrative black market to develop, and supporteda widespread growth in wealth and power for underworld figuresand organizations. (43) This, in turn, brought on violence --between competing bootleggers and racketeers, and between theseunderworld interests and law enforcement officers -- as well asother related and unrelated violence, much as we see today withrespect to the drug trade, although on a much larger scale. Inthe case of drugs and "drug prohibition," theillegality of these substances has supported and perpetuated theviolent culture and dangerous cartels which have profited fromthe resulting economic circumstances. As one commentator hasremarked: "People aren't killing each other because they are high on drugs, any more than Al Capone ordered the execution of rival bootleggers because he was drunk." (44) In the final analysis, it appears evident that our nation'sdrug policy has not only failed to resolve the problems ofviolent crime, it has served to exacerbate them. Indeed, ournation's "war on drugs," as it has come to be known,has likely had the net effect of causing a more dangerous"war" to rage within our communities, with the onlyvision of the future appearing to be, if present trends continue,an increase in violence, the proliferation of weapons, a steadysupply of new community based drug dealers, and the continuedgrowth of ever-more dangerous "kingpins" and underworldorganizations -- all driven by the engine of the lucrative,illegal drug trade. It follows, therefore, that forms of"decriminalization," "legalization," orending "drug prohibition," must be seriously consideredas alternative directions for future drug strategy, howeverradical such ideas may presently appear. (45) Accordingly, theTask Force urges the further study of alternative, non-penalbased models, in development of future drug policy. In summary, it is abundantly clear that, whatever the harmspresently caused by use and abuse of "controlled"substances in our nation, many of the more pressing concerns withrespect to violence in our communities are unlikely to be solveduntil we find a way to take the profit out of the black marketdrug trade itself. If we continue to fail in addressing theseissues in an objective, rational and progressive manner, we mayfind ourselves devoured by a larger, more dangerous beast of ourown creation. V. Drug Policy, Drug Law Enforcement And People Of Color Return to Table of Contents The empirical evidence available clearly demonstrates that theadverse effects of current drug policy impact disproportionatelyon people of color. Although it is estimated that over 80% ofdrug users are white, minorities comprise 74% of thoseincarcerated for drug offenses. (46) Therefore, the injusticesinherent in the enforcement and criminal prosecution of drugoffenses impact more profoundly on communities of color. Mandatory drug sentencing laws and the mass guilty pleas theyentail lead to insufficient checks on improper police activity,since, generally, no trial or suppression hearings occur when adefendant pleads guilty, at which forums improprieties on thepart of law enforcement officers may be exposed. Civil rights areeroded with the creation of additional exceptions to the FourthAmendment's bar on warrantless searches (in what has effectivelybecome the "drug exception" to the U.S. Constitution),while discriminatory stereotyping regarding the profile of a drugdealer leads to the more frequent search and seizure of people ofcolor. Further, vaguely worded loitering and curfew laws,intended to curb drug dealing, are disproportionately enforced oninner city streets. Other factors lead to a disparity in the racial makeup ofthose arrested for narcotics offenses. Wealthier white drug usersmake their purchases behind closed doors, in business districtsand in more isolated suburban communities, away from the eye oflaw enforcement agents -- and therefore, more frequently escapedetection. On the other hand, street dealers, and many drug usersin inner city neighborhoods are considerably more exposed. At the same time, a statistically high number of drugprosecutions result in convictions. This is largely due to the"professional" nature of witnesses involved innarcotics cases, and because drug offenders are typicallyapprehended as a result of "buy-and-bust" operations orpursuant to "observation sales," where police set upoperations in designated "high crime" neighborhoods, soas to make undercover purchases from street dealers, and/orobserve and apprehend individuals involved in street sale andpurchase of narcotics. (47) Additionally, such community based"buy-and-bust" and other similar operations tend toconcentrate on low level dealers and users rather than the drugkingpins, since street sellers and purchasers are simply easierto locate and apprehend. Current drug policy has other irrational and discriminatoryconsequences, e.g. the disparate treatment of crack-cocaineoffenders (generally poor people of color), versus powder-cocaineoffenders (generally white, middle-upper class), and theinequitable prison sentences which this duplicity engenders. (48) Due to lack of other forms of attention, by government andprivate industry, inner city neighborhoods have become thebattleground for much of the drug trade, including enforcementefforts by police. Moreover, the great sums of money involved inthe illegal drug trade encourages police corruption, leading to abreakdown of appropriate law enforcement efforts in thesecommunities. Furthermore, broadly drafted civil forfeiture andother similar laws, providing for the eviction of entire familieswhere one of its members may be involved in drug dealing, (49)are more frequently enforced in poor communities, leading togreater hardship in communities where higher numbers of black andLatino people reside. In summary, many of the social costs outlined in Section II(B)above, are more profoundly felt in minority communities, to wit:high incarceration rates, increase in fatherless and motherlesshomes; active recruitment of children into the drug trade so thatdealers can escape harsh penalties of the drug laws; greaterfinancial and emotional instability in households; greaterfinancial and social instability in neighborhoods;criminalization and stigmatization of many young members of thesecommunities, affecting their future employability; serious injuryto innocent bystanders caught in the "cross-fires" ofrival drug dealers and their battles with police; and a pervasivestreet culture of guns and violence growing out of the drug tradeaffecting other forms of social interaction in urbanneighborhoods, with violence becoming a commonly accepted mode ofconflict resolution. Since current drug policy so profoundly and disproportionatelyimpacts upon people of color, review of present laws must beundertaken to remove any discriminatory bias, and steps taken toensure that whatever drug control laws and strategies areemployed in the future, that they are fairly conceived andeven-handedly enforced. VI. The Impact Of Current Drug Policy On Women Return to Table of Contents Women, particularly minority women, have disproportionatelyfelt the adverse impact of the harsh drug sentencing laws. (50) Astudy of female "drug mules" was conducted by theCorrectional Association of New York, (51) focused onprosecutions occurring in Queens, New York, where JFKInternational Airport serves as a major entry port forinternational travel. The Correctional Association found astartling increase in the number of women arrested and chargedwith "A-I" felony narcotics offenses, many of whom werefirst time arrestees. This was primarily a result of the combinedeffect of the accessorial liability statute and the"Rockefeller Drug Laws," so that women suspected ofbeing used as couriers by drug smugglers frequently facedmandatory prison sentences of 15 and 25 years-to-life, even ontheir first arrest. (52) The report further found that despite the fact that many ofthese women claimed to be unwitting agents of drug distributors,or marginally involved in drug operations, they did not go totrial because of the excessively high stakes involved. Pleabargain agreements, which guaranteed relatively short sentencesof 3 years-to-life, was "too good" an offer to refuse,(although unconscionable under many individual circumstances),given the risk of a much more severe sentence if found guilty attrial. Many of these women were mothers, (53) unable or unwillingto risk being separated from their children for considerablylonger periods in the event of conviction after trial, andtherefore pleaded guilty even if they were innocent or able topresent valid defenses to the offense charged. In these cases, women are disproportionately affected by thelack of judicial discretion involved in the mandatory sentencesstatutes, regardless of any mitigating circumstances which mayexist. (54) Due to draconian drug laws such as these, which oftenfail to distinguish between major and minor participants in drugcases, fail to provide any relief for first time offenders, or toallow reasonable consideration of other mitigating factors and/orindividual characteristics of the defendant, the resulting rateof incarceration for women in Queens County, and for womenthroughout the U.S., has grown dramatically in recent years. Thisgrowth includes an increase of 275% from 1980 to 1992, in thetotal number of women incarcerated in the U.S.; and an increaseof 433% during the five year period from 1986 to 1991, in thenumber of women incarcerated in state prisons for drug offenses.(55) Even those women who are not defendants in drug cases areprofoundly affected by current drug policy, with its emphasis onenforcement rather than rehabilitation. When fathers areincarcerated for drug use or sale, it is the women who are leftto raise children in single parent households. When teenage boysbecome involved in the drug trade, it is their mothers who areevicted when civil forfeiture laws are enforced. When men who areinjection drug users share needles because of lack ofavailability of clean needles, the women they sleep with risk HIVinfection. For those women who have substance abuse problems, acombination of mandatory reporting requirements and the childabuse and neglect laws serve to deprive them of access to medicalservices, pre-natal care, and even substance abuse counseling.(56) A further disturbing trend has emerged in states throughoutthe nation, wherein pregnant women and new mothers, sufferingfrom substance abuse problems, face criminal prosecution onserious charges, including drug distribution, assault and murder,upon theories that such drug use, while pregnant, constitutes"delivery" of drugs to the unborn fetus. (57) In thesecases, it is asserted that injury to the unborn and newly borninfant justifies imposition of severe criminal sanctions upon thefemale drug user. These criminal prosecutions represent a new andnovel category of penal sanctions, (58) from which men areentirely excluded -- another unfortunate result of our nation'scurrent punitive approach to drug policy. VII. Effects Of Contemporary Drug Policy On The Integrity Of Government Return to Table of Contents As a general principle, where respect for the integrity ofgovernment is severely compromised, its ability to govern and therule of law itself breaks down. In this regard, we note that pastdecades of drug policy, characterized by use of draconian penalsanctions, has resulted in legislative and enforcement measuresof questionable wisdom and validity. Integrity of government and, specifically, respect for itsrepresentatives in the law enforcement community has been furthereroded by repeated incidents of individual and systemic policecorruption relating to the lucrative, black-market drug tradewith which many law enforcement officers come into contact.Meanwhile, extreme harshness of drug laws, often requiringdraconian mandatory minimum sentences in the event of convictionafter trial, causes widespread plea bargaining and entry ofguilty pleas, even where such pleas are inappropriate. Thisresults in insufficient checks on improper police activity,generally tested at hearings or trial of such cases. It furtherresults in the criminal conviction of innocent individuals, andincarceration of many such individuals, (albeit for shorterperiods than had they been convicted after trial). A furtherproduct of these circumstances, is the widespread deprivation toindividuals of the right to due process of law (through inabilityto risk trial), and overall loss of confidence in the ability toobtain fair treatment in our courts of justice. Furthermore, there is a growing lack of respect for a justicesystem where drug use or sale, although not generally viewed asbeing as dangerous or morally reprehensible as the perpetrationof violent crime (e.g., robbery, assault, murder), isnevertheless prosecuted more frequently, and more consistently.We must also be mindful of the "trivialization" ofviolent criminal conduct, fostered by undue emphasis upon druglaw enforcement and by a penal scheme which punishes drug crimesas severely or more severely than many violent crimes. In NewYork, for example, the sale of a $10 dollar quantity of cocaine(a Class B felony) is treated as severely as the serious feloniesof armed robbery and rape, and more severely than the highestcharge of assault, i.e., crimes resulting serious physical injury(a Class C felony). (59) The inordinate concentration on street-level drug users andsellers, (generally in inner city neighborhoods, often regardedto as "high crime" areas), has resulted in thedisproportionate and discriminatory impact of drug laws uponpeople of color throughout our nation. (60) Moreover, widespreadinjustice often results from the imposition of unduly harshprison sentences upon drug offenders, pursuant to mandatoryminimum sentencing statutes, even for first time offendersplaying peripheral roles in the drug offenses with which they arecharged. (61) Additionally, the substantial and relentless street-levelenforcement of drug laws, targeted mainly at youth populations inour inner city communities, (unmatched by efforts to reduceviolent crime), has resulted in an atmosphere of police at"war" with the community, and garnering a growingdisrespect for law enforcement and the perpetuation of an"us-against-them" mentality with respect to both thelaw enforcement community and the government which it represents. The erosion of civil liberties tolerated in the name of the"war on drugs," has become so extreme that somecommentators have gone so far as to claim that "[t]he Billof Rights is in danger of becoming meaningless in cases involvingdrugs." (62) The perceived imperative of waging the drug war has twistedconstitutional protections against unreasonable searches andseizures by state officials beyond all recognition, setting anominous precedent for the widespread violation of individualrights which inevitably extends to other governmental activities.What might be called the "drug exception" to theConstitution threatens the civil liberties of every citizen,since precedents set in the context of a drug case are latercited to justify limitations of civil rights in other contexts.As has been further noted: "The Supreme Court has permitted warrantless searches of automobiles, the use of anonymous tips and drug-courier profiles as the basis for police searches, and the seizure of lawyers' fees in drug cases. Property on which marijuana plants are found can be forfeited even if the owner is charged with no crime." (63) Also subject to continuing erosion are our citizens' rights toprivacy in the name of the "drug war," represented byunwarranted and unjustified drug testing of employees, propertysearches of children, and other intrusions into the lives ofindividuals not otherwise implicated in any criminal conduct soas to justify such intrusions. For example, all federal employeesare required to submit to urine testing. (64) Such testing hasalso become commonplace in private industry, not otherwiseconfined by constitutional limitations but, nevertheless,encouraged by governmental policies. Serious "due process" and moral implications arisethrough increased use of civil forfeiture laws, where innocentfamilies are deprived of substantial assets and, at times, theirhomes, due to acts of a single household member, in which theyhad no involvement and over which they had no control. Forexample, the elderly mother of a drug dealer, who personally hasnot participated in any illicit activities, may be evicted fromher home on the grounds that drug related activities were takingplace under her roof. Under these circumstances, the governmentneed only show that there existed reasonable grounds to believethe property was subject to forfeiture -- i.e. that the home wasbeing used for illicit drug dealing activities. The burden ofproof then shifts to the owner (or lessee) of the property toprove by a preponderance of the evidence that the property is"innocent". (65) Meanwhile, innocent family members ofsuspected drug dealers may be rendered homeless. Furthermore, there appears to have developed a trend towardspenalizing innocent property owners, where the government, unableto succeed in its objectives through its own failed policies, hasbegun to shift obligations and responsibilities for eradicatingdrug activity to private citizens. For instance, in somejurisdictions, owners of residential apartment buildings may bedeprived of their property through failure to evict suspecteddrug dealers or users, even where the government, with its lawenforcement and prosecutorial powers, has been unable to convictsuch individuals of any criminal activity. (66) In summary, punitive, draconian, and often irrationalapproaches to drug policy have, over time, caused unwarrantedencroachments upon the civil rights of those within our borders.(67) These are often represented by exceptions to rights embodiedin the U.S. Constitution, including rights guaranteed under theFourth Amendment and the right of individuals to "dueprocess of law," in diverse areas and at various levels ofgovernmental involvement. (68) Therefore, to preserve the integrity of government itself,particularly impacted by our nation's drug policy, we mustreassess our goals (which must be realistic), the purpose andvalues implicit in those goals, as well as the means and policiesby which we hope to achieve betterment of our society. Inreassessing the appropriate direction for future drug policy, wemust first acknowledge that a drastic change in thinking andapproach is clearly called for. Our government's continuedpursuit of a failed, punitive policy, which serves not to providehelp and aid to those in need of assistance, but rather, to"criminalize," "marginalize" and"alienate" growing numbers of its population,ultimately causes more harm than good, garners disrespect for itsinstitutions, and raises the question of its ability to fairlyand effectively govern. Accordingly, we must set out on a course to devise a policywhich inspires confidence for positive and meaningful progress incombating substance abuse, violence, and other related problemsin our society. In embarking on such path, we would do well joinwith the medical profession in adherence to the "Hippocraticoath," which in its most common form of expressioninstructs: "First, do no harm". Task ForceRecommendations Return to Table of Contents I. Pursue Alternative Models inEstablishing Future Drug Policy Replace emphasis on "penal" based approach to drug policy with "medical" or other alternative policy models, which view substance abuse and related problems as primarily a public health issue. Improve and expand drug treatment, vocational support and diversionary programs, utilizing extensive cost savings derived in transition from cost-intensive "penal" based approach to drug policy. Adopt a more rational and compassionate approach to drug policy, founded upon the humane treatment of substance abusers and their families, and placing emphasis on assisting those drug users who need treatment in obtaining such treatment, rather than emphasizing arrest, prosecution and incarceration as a solution. Integrate drug treatment centers with other community based health facilities, so as to bring substance abusers in need of treatment within the health care system. Expand methadone maintenance programs and apply resources saved in transition from a "penal" based policy, to support empirical research on effective treatments of substance abuse problems. Apply cost-benefit analysis for all drug control policies implemented, to ensure that any such policy is unlikely to cause more harm than use of the substance(s) prohibited. Consider alternative drug policy models which would allow for government regulation and quality control for currently designated "controlled substances," in an effort to further reduce health risks associated with purchase and consumption of unsafe adulterated drugs from illegal, unregulated drug markets. Seriously study and consider alternative drug policy models, which attempt to remove huge profits which drive the illegal drug trade, in an effort to decrease the harms associated with "drug prohibition." For those controlled substances which may be "decriminalized," (e.g., marijuana), replace penal sanctions with government regulation and appropriate taxation. Allow states to experiment with alternative approaches to drug policy, including non-penal based models. Study alternative drug policies, including experimental programs conducted in the U.S. and abroad, in an attempt to arrive at the best, most helpful and cost-effective system available. Develop and encourage pilot programs and alternative approaches to substance abuse issues with close monitoring. Create state and federal commissions, including representatives from each of the executive, legislative and judicial branches of national and local governments, to recommend substantial and cohesive changes in drug policy. II. Provide Immediate SentencingRelief and Additional Judicial Discretion in Criminal Prosecution of Drug Cases Repeal mandatory minimum sentencing statutes for non-violent drug offenders. Revise draconian drug laws, downgrading the category of "non-violent" narcotics offenses to levels more commensurate with the seriousness of these offenses in relation to other crimes. Expand judicial discretion in sentencing drug offenders on both the state and federal levels, permitting judges to sentence individual defendants in a manner suitable to the circumstances of the offense and the offender. Where appropriate, permit downward modification of sentences for "drug mules" and other low-level participants in drug transactions. Subject to constitutional protections, provide for statutory relief for presently incarcerated drug offenders, modifying sentences to reflect proposed amendments to drug laws. To the extent criminalization of use and sale of controlled substances remains in place, avoid the present system's over-reliance on weight-based criteria in drug prosecutions, reserving more serious penalties for sales where aggravating factors exist, such as sale to children or use of violence in trade. Establish and improve diversionary and treatment programs and other alternative-to-incarceration programs for non-violent drug offenders. Encourage increased utilization of probation department resources toward facilitating expanded use of such programs by courts in sentencing drug offenders. III. Reduce the Harms AssociatedWith Substance Abuse and Drug Prohibition Move from policy of "zero tolerance," to one incorporating "harm reduction" principles, accepting the reality that marijuana and common recreational drugs, and other potentially harmful substances (including alcohol and tobacco), have always, and will continue to be consumed by some members of society, and concentrate efforts on reducing the harms associated with such use. Adjust policing priorities to concentrate enforcement efforts on curtailing and preventing violent criminal conduct, rather than emphasis on the apprehension and imposition of penal sanctions for use and consumption of drugs. Reduce the risk of young people coming into contact with the "hard" drug market by separating it out from the "soft" drug market. Expand availability of accurate information and education about harms which may be associated with drug use and substance abuse and ways to minimize those harms. Promote needle exchange programs and repeal drug paraphernalia laws, in order to curtail the spread of AIDS and other similarly transmitted diseases. Initiate measures and revise laws to promote, rather than hinder access of substance abusers to medical and other care, as may be needed. Assure doctor-patient privilege/confidentiality for those seeking treatment for substance abuse, pre-natal care and other forms of health care, to prevent fear of prosecution, removal of children from homes and other potential repercussions which discourage individuals from utilizing health care facilities. IV. Concentrate Law EnforcementResources on Reducing Violent Crime and Prosecution of Violent Criminal Offenders Reallocate law enforcement resources currently dedicated to the prosecution of non-violent drug offenders, toward prosecution of violent crime. Concentrate and redirect efforts of police, FBI, and other state, local and federal law enforcement agencies on investigation and arrest of violent criminal offenders. Reserve harsh sentencing laws, together with law enforcement, prosecution, court and prison resources for dealing with violent criminal offenders. Reject the notion that law enforcement efforts can eliminate drug use in our society, and redirect such policing efforts toward concentration on violence and community disruption. Attempt to eliminate causes of violent crime related to the lucrative illicit drug trade, by adopting policies which seek to remove huge profits from drug dealing and underworld black market narcotics distribution. V. Reshape the Drug Policy Debate --Return to Objective Analysis and Realistic Goals Commence objective, rational, non-partisan, and interdisciplinary review of current drug policy, with emphasis on realistic and appropriate goals to be achieved in dealing with problems of harmful drug use and substance abuse. Devise reasonable and compassionate means of addressing such problems. Establish constructive dialogue on drug policy reform, taking care to adopt terminology which distinguishes between harms caused by substance abuse per se and those harms caused by drug control policies themselves. Avoid use of the "drug problem" as "catch-all" for other societal ailments, in an effort to engage in a rational and honest dialogue on the development of a responsible drug policy. Carefully analyze, for scientific validity, claims of causal nexus between use of controlled substances and specific criminal activities. In analyzing causes of "drug-related" crime, identify and distinguish between criminal activity caused by: (i) use or abuse of psychoactive substances; (ii) the lucrative black-market drug trade; and (iii) implementation of current drug policy. Devise realistic policies which reduce, rather than perpetuate violence and other criminal activity. Undertake an accurate, scientific analysis of the pharmacological makeup, uses and effects and dangers of any given drug (controlled or otherwise), in order to inform the determination of a rational and appropriate policy for regulation, use and treatment of such drug. Evaluate how policies presently employed, with emphasis on arrest, prosecution and incarceration, work either to provide assistance, or to cause further harm, to those individuals who use drugs, their families and communities. Commence constructive dialogue distinguishing between substance abuse and drug use generally, in order to develop appropriate and cost-effective goals and policies relating to government, medical or other intervention into lives of citizens, minimizing involuntary intervention absent clear and compelling necessity. VI. Implement Public EducationCampaign on Drug Use and Substance Abuse Increase access to and availability of accurate information about the harms associated with types of drug use and of substance abuse. Provide access to information about safe use of controlled substances, in the absence of abstinence, and ways to reduce harms associated with such use. Counteract inaccurate, misleading and divisive "drug war" propaganda, which has characterized many drug education campaigns initiated by advocates of "zero tolerance" drug policy. VII. Decriminalize Marijuana Decriminalize marijuana, accepting that the economic and social costs of enforcing penal sanctions for possession of this relatively harmless drug can no longer be justified. If not decriminalized, where medically recommended, permit the medical use of marijuana and other controlled substances which have been determined by the medical community to be therapeutically beneficial. VIII. Reverse Encroachments on CivilRights and Restore "Due Process of Law" Repeal draconian sentencing laws for non-violent drug offenses, which deprive individuals of an opportunity to contest charges at trial due to risk of extensive and unreasonable periods of incarceration. In recognition of inherent rights to privacy and personal autonomy, reevaluate whether, and to what degree, government intervention is appropriate and justifiable with respect to casual use of drugs by its citizens. Restore a broader application of the U.S. Constitution's Fourth Amendment prohibition of unjustifiable search and seizure by government, eliminating the "drug exception" to the Constitution which has created unacceptable invasions of privacy and personal freedom. Severely curtail civil forfeiture laws, to permit government restraint of property only upon "reasonable cause," and allow for forfeiture of only those assets directly traceable to criminal transactions, obtained as such with knowledge of the owner of the property to be forfeited, and which laws are enforceable only upon prior notice and with the meaningful right to contest, in accordance with "due process of law". IX. Provide Alternative Social andEconomic Opportunity for Inner City Youth Declare war on causes of substance abuse, including: poverty; lack of education; lack of economic opportunity; family crises and; financial, emotional and physical instability. Utilize substantial savings anticipated from moving from cost-intensive "penal based" model of drug policy, to provide greater educational, vocational and recreational opportunities for youth at risk of becoming involved in the illegal drug trade. Expand and implement affirmative action programs designed to increase educational, economic and career opportunities for minority youth. Encourage public and private investment in poor communities to provide greater economic opportunities in the legitimate job market. X. End War on Youth and Inner CityCommunities -- Restore Confidence and Integrity in Government End discriminatory enforcement of drug laws in inner city communities, which fall most heavily on young people of color. Take measures to reduce violence associated with drug prohibition and the lucrative, illicit drug trade it fosters. Take measures to avoid placing police at "war" with inner city youth, as results from current drug laws and enforcement policies, and work to build positive alliances between police, minority communities and their youth. Restore confidence in government by having it assist and work with those in need, by creation of positive vocational, educational, recreational and other programs, in place of current emphasis upon arrests, prosecution and incarceration which prevails as a result of present drug policy. Equalize penal sanctions applicable to crack-cocaine users and powder-cocaine users, while reducing draconian penalties presently applicable to each. Bibliography Return to Table of Contents Association of the Bar of the City of New York, A WiserCourse: Ending Drug Prohibition, 49 The Record, No. 5,at 523 (June, 1994). Barbara Bloom, Incarcerated Mothers and Their Children:Maintaining Family Ties. Barbara Bloom & David Steinhart, Why Punish Children? AReappraisal of the Children of Incarcerated Mothers of America(1993). P. Bourgois, Just Another Night on Crack Street, NewYork Times Magazine, November 12, 1989, at 65. Bureau of Justice Statistics, U.S. Department of Justice, Drugs,Crime and the Justice System, at 195 (December, 1992). Bureau of Justice Statistics, U.S. Department of Justice, Prisonersin 1993, (1994). Duncan Campbell, Debate that Fails the Dope Test, Guardian(U.K.), May 15, 1993, at 24. Todd R. Clear, Tougher is Dumber, New York Times,December 12, 1993, at 21. Correctional Association of New York, Injustice Will BeDone: Women Drug Couriers and the Rockefeller Laws,(February, 1992). Correctional Association of New York & The New YorkCoalition for Criminal Justice, Imprisoned Generation(September, 1990). Department of Health & Human Services, NationalHousehold Survey on Drug Abuse, SAMHSA, (1993). Department of Justice, Report: Two-Thirds of Non-ViolentOffenders Serving Mandatory Minimum Sentences, The DrugPolicy Letter, Drug Policy Foundation, (Spring, 1994) at 28. Charles B. DeWitt, Information Sharing: A Plus forCorrections Construction, National Institute of JusticeReports, (Jan/Feb, 1991). Drugs & Crime Data Center & Clearinghouse, FactSheet: Drug Data Summary 1 (April, 1994). Drugs & Crime Data Center & Clearinghouse, FactSheet: Drug Data Summary 2, (April, 1994). Federal Bureau of Investigation, Crime in the United States,(1991). Alan B. Fischler, The Incarceration of America, NewYork Law Journal (NYLJ) , 11/6/92, at 2. Sen. Joseph L. Galiber, A Bill to Repeal Criminal DrugLaws: Replacing Prohibition with Regulation, 18 Hofstra L.Rev. 831 (1990). Abraham G. Gerges, The Possible End to 'TASC Pleas', NYLJ11/18/93, at 2. Keri A. Gould, Turning Rat and Doing Time for Uncharged,Dismissed, Or Acquitted Crimes: Do the Federal SentencingGuidelines Promote Respect for the Law?, 10 NYLS Journalof Human Rights 1 (1993). L.A. Greenfield & S.M. Harper, Women in Prison, U.S.Bureau of Justice Statistics, Special Report (1991). L. Grinspoon & J.B. Bakalar, The War on Drugs -- APeace Proposal, 330 New England Journal of Medicine357. L. Grinspoon & J.B. Bakalar, Marihuana -- The ForbiddenMedicine, (1993). J. Jackson, A Real War on Drugs Can't Ignore Poverty, NewYork Newsday, September 18, 1989, at 58. Hon. Whitman Knapp, Dethrone the Drug Czar, New YorkTimes, May 9, 1993, Section 4, at 15 (Op-Ed). Michael Z. Letwin, Report from the Front Line: The BennettPlan, Street-Level Drug Enforcement in New York City and theLegalization Debate, 18 Hofstra L. Rev. 795 (1990). Michael Z. Letwin, Wrong Way to Fight Crime, NewYork Times, October 6, 1990, at 23 (Op-Ed article). Michael Z. Letwin, Sentencing Angela Thompson, NYLJ4/18/94, p.2, col.3. David C. Leven, Curing the Addiction to Punishing Addicts, NYLJ5/24/93, at 2. David C. Leven, Public Hearing Testimony Before the NYSAssembly Standing Committee on Codes on the Rockefeller Drug Laws- Twenty Years Later, Prisoners' Legal Services of New York,June 4, 1993. L.F. Lowenstein, Recent Investigations into Criminality, TheCriminologist, (1992) at 105. Clarence Lusane, Pipe Dream Blues: Racism & the War OnDrugs, (1991). Marc Mauer, Americans Behind Bars: One Year Later, TheSentencing Project, (February, 1992). M. Mauer & Tracy Huling, Young Black Americans and theCriminal Justice System: Five Years Later, The SentencingProject, (October, 1995). M. Mauer, Young Black Men And The Criminal Justice System:A Growing Problem, The Sentencing Project, (1990). Ethan A. Nadelmann, Cops Across Borders, (1994). Ethan A. Nadelmann, Should We Legalize Drugs? HistoryAnswers Yes, American Heritage, (February/March,1993), at 42. Ethan A. Nadelmann, Thinking Seriously About Alternativesto Drug Prohibition, 121 Daedalus 3, (Summer, 1992). E. Nadelmann, A Rational Approach to Drug Legalization, AmericanJournal of Ethics and Medicine, (Spring, 1991). E. Nadelmann, Drug Prohibition in the United States: Costs,Consequences and Alternatives, 245 Science 939(September, 1989). E. Nadelmann, U.S. Drug Policy: A Bad Export, 70 ForeignPolicy 92 (Spring, 1988). James Ostrowski, The Moral and Practical Case for DrugLegalization, 18 Hofstra L. Rev. 607 (1990). James Ostrowski, Thinking about Drug Legalization, CatoInstitute Policy Analysis, No. 121, (May, 1989). Pratt & Peterson, Civil Forfeiture in the SecondCircuit, 65 St. John's L. Rev. 653 (1991). Jill Leslie Rosenbaum, Family Disfunction and FemaleDelinquency, 35 Crime and Delinquency (1989). C.P. Rydell & S.S. Everingham, Controlling Cocaine:Supply Versus Demand Programs, RAND (1994). R. Sabbag, The Cartels Would Like a Second Chance, RollingStone Magazine, May 5, 1994, at 35. J. Schuler & A. McBride, Notes From the Front: ADissident Law-Enforcement Perspective on Drug Prohibition, 18 HofstraL. Rev. 893 (1990). N. Steinberg, The Law of Unintended Consequences, RollingStone Magazine, May 5, 1994, at 33. M. Sviridoff, et al., The Neighborhood Effects ofStreet-Level Drug Enforcement: An Evaluation of TNT by The VeraInstitute Of Justice, (August, 1992). Hon. Robert W. Sweet & Edward A. Harris, Just andUnjust Wars: The War on the War on Drugs - Some Moral andConstitutional Dimensions of the War on Drugs, 87 NorthwesternL. Rev. 1302 (1993). Hon. Robert W. Sweet, The Abolition of Prohibition -- onDrugs, That Is, Mouthpiece, Journal of the N.Y.S.Association of Criminal Defense Lawyers, Vol. 5, No. 5, (Nov/Dec,1992). C. Torres, Legalize It?, The Nation, June 20,1994, at 857. University of California at San Francisco, The PublicHealth Impact of Needle Exchange Programs in the U.S. and Abroad,U.C.S.F. Institute for Health Policy Studies, (September, 1993). Hon. Jack B. Weinstein & Fred A. Bernstein, TheUnwarranted Denigration of Mens Rea on Drug Sentencing, FederalSentencing Reporter, Vol. 7, No. 3, (Nov/Dec, 1994). Hon. Jack B. Weinstein, The War on Drugs is Self-Defeating, NewYork Times, July 8, 1993 (Op-Ed). P. Wilkinson, The Young and the Reckless, RollingStone Magazine, May 5, 1994, at 29. S. Wisotsky, A Society Of Suspects: The War On Drugs andCivil Liberties, (1992). L. Zimmer & J.P. Morgan, Exposing Marijuana Myths: AReview of the Scientific Evidence, The Lindesmith Center,(October, 1995). L. Zimmer, Operation Pressure Point: The Disruption ofStreet-Level Drug Trade on New York's Lower East Side, Centerfor Research in Crime and Justice, N.Y.U. School of Law, (1987),at 9. Footnotes Return to Table of Contents 1. See The Merck Manual, 16th Ed. (1992) at1550; also see 21 U.S.C. 802, (regarding federalcriminal classification of presently designated controlledsubstances). Many of the more commonly known controlled substances were notillegal or "criminalized," until passage of theHarrison Act of 1914. Marijuana was banned in 1937. Alcohol wasbanned in 1920, although "decriminalized," by repeal ofthe 18th Amendment in 1933. While present drug policy hasstatutory "roots" dating back 80 years, we regardcontemporary drug policy, as characterized by the emphasis on"stepped-up" law enforcement efforts and enhanced penalsanctions, a more recent development dating back three decades,to the early 1970's. 2. See National Household Survey on Drug Abuse(1993), U.S. Department of Health and Human Services, SubstanceAbuse and Mental Health Services Administration (SAMHSA), whichreports that 12% of the total U.S. population, or 24 millionpersons within the U.S., had used illicit drugs within the pastyear. 77 million persons had used illicit drugs sometime duringtheir life. In a similar survey, conducted in 1994, it was foundthat 10.8% of the total population, or 22.6 million persons hadused illicit drugs some time during the previous year. Further, a U.S. General Accounting Office report, released in1989, noted the following findings: that drug abuse in the UnitedStates persisted at very high levels throughout the 1980's; thatthe amount of cocaine consumed in the U.S. doubled, whilethe price declined about 30%; that the price of heroin declined20%, while the average purity of heroin sold had doubled; andthat marijuana, while its use declined, continued to be readilyavailable in most areas of the country. See JamesOstrowski, Thinking About Drug Legalization, CatoInstitute Policy Analysis (1989) at 28. Thus, notwithstandinghuge expenditures in waging the "war on drugs," (seeSection IIA, infra), drug use remains widespreadthroughout the nation, its costs have actually decreased andpotency increased. See also, Joseph B. Treaster, HospitalData Show a Rise in Drug Abuse, New York Times, July9, 1992, at B1, (citing lower costs and greater purity of drugs,together with more young sellers entering the drug market due tounemployment, as reasons for upsurge in drug abuse in New YorkCity. Further reporting on New York State Office of Alcoholismand Substance Abuse estimate of 200,000 heroin addicts in NewYork City alone.) See also Association of the Bar of theCity of New York, A Wiser Course: Ending Drug Prohibition,49 The Record, No. 5 (1994) at 544. Failures in ability ofU.S. to prevent production and importation of narcotics,notwithstanding costly efforts, are also well documented. SeeE. Nadelmann, Cops Across Borders, (1993). 3. In aid of more meaningful and objective analysis of whathas commonly been referred to as "the drug problem,"care must be taken and appropriate distinctions made in usingterms such as: "drug use," "substance abuse,""drug-related crime," and "drug-inducedcrime." Definitions of these terms having been blurred inthe drug policy debate thus far, has led to a failure to properlyanalyze and distinguish harms caused by drug use, substanceabuse, the drug-trade, and drug control policies themselves. 4. See "Public Health Consequences of Current DrugPolicy," Section III, infra. 5. We acknowledge the reality, that forms of drug use andother potentially harmful behavior have, and always will be,engaged in by members of our society. Accordingly, we note thatpolicies based on "zero tolerance" are unrealistic,unnecessarily harsh, and often counterproductive to reachingthose in need of assistance. 6. Alternative models of drug policy which merit considerationinclude those incorporating principles of "harmreduction," which have received widespread acceptance amongdrug policy experts and by various governments throughout theworld. "Harm reduction" strategies seek to analyze thephenomenon of substance abuse in society by identifying andisolating the actual societal harms caused by substance abuse, aswell as policies employed to defeat it, and attempting to reducethose harms deriving from each. In seeking to reduce harmsassociated with drug use, "harm reduction" strategiesinclude the expansion of needle exchange programs and methadoneclinics, and education on safe drug use for that segment of thepopulation who will continue to use harmful drugs. Meanwhile,such policy redirects law-enforcement efforts from attempts toeradicate all drug use, to concentration in areas where crime andpublic disorder continue to occur. We find this approach to beboth more realistic and humane than present"zero-tolerance" based policy, with all its attendantcosts, marginal results, and questionable use of availableresources. 7. From 1973 to 1993 the total number of inmates held inprison and jail facilities throughout the U.S. quadrupled.Having doubled from 1973 to 1983, the years from 1983 through1993 saw the total number of prisoners held in the U.S. doubleonce again, from 660,800 to 1,408,685. During this period, thenumber of incarcerated drug offenders rose 510%. It is estimatedthat in 1990, when the number of individuals incarcerated in U.S.jails and prison facilities reached 1.1 million, the cost ofincarcerating these individuals was approximately $20.3 billion,with an anticipated need to double prison facilities inthe federal system. In some states, such as New York, the figures are even morestartling, New York having seen its inmate population almost tripleduring the period from 1981 through 1991. In only six years, from1983 to 1989, the state saw the annual number of individualsimprisoned for drug offenses grow 500%. By 1990, felony drugconvictions in New York represented 50% of all felony convictionshanded down by its state courts, up from 11.6% in 1980. As of1992, New York State anticipated the need for eight new prisons,at an approximate cost of $220 million to build one prison, and$22.5 million per year each to operate -- totaling near termcosts of approximately $2.2 billion dollars. See Alan B.Fischler, The Incarceration of America, N.Y. LawJournal, November 6, 1992 at 2; Marc Mauer and Tracy Huling, YoungBlack Americans and the Criminal Justice System: Five Years Later,The Sentencing Project (1995); M. Mauer, Americans BehindBars: One Year Later, The Sentencing Project (1992); Stateof New York, Division of Criminal Justice Services Statistics,1980-1990; Correctional Association of New York and the New YorkCoalition for Criminal Justice, Imprisones Generation,(September, 1990); Charles B DeWitt, Information Sharing: APlus for Corrections Construction, National Institute ofJustice Reports, (Jan/Feb., 1991). 8. In 1991, the U.S. became the leading nation in the rate atwhich it incarcerates its people. For instance, by 1991, 445 ofevery 100,000 persons in the U.S. were imprisoned, a rate ofincarceration more than 2 to 3 times that of its closest"competitors", e.g. Canada and China each at 111 per100,000, and Japan at 42 per 100,000. See M. Mauer, AmericansBehind Bars: One Year Later, The Sentencing Project (1992). 9. While some economic benefit is admittedly derived in thosecommunities where new prisons are built and to the correctionspersonnel hired to staff these additional facilities, such"benefits," nevertheless, represent redirection ofincreasingly limited public resources, and involve the muchgreater costs associated with warehousing drug offenders. 10. One study noted that 62% of the children of incarceratedwomen live more than 100 miles from the correctional facility,and 47% lived 21-100 miles from the facility; Barbara Bloom, IncarceratedMothers and Their Children: Maintaining Family Ties, at60-64. Overall, 54% of children whose mothers were incarceratednever visited the prison facility; Barbara Bloom and DavidSteinhart, Why Punish Children? A Reappraisal of the Childrenof Incarcerated Mothers of American, (1993) at 20. 11. L.F. Lowenstein, Recent Investigations into Criminality, TheCriminologist, (1992) at 105. 12. Jill Leslie Rosenbaum, Family Dysfunction and FemaleDelinquency, 35 Crime and Delinquency, (1989) at 31,39. Rosenbaum found that 96% of women who had been committed tothe youth authority as children, were later arrested as adults.76% of those women had at least one other family member with acriminal record. 51% of the mothers of those women had felonyarrest records, most of which were drug related. 13. See "Effects of Contemporary Drug Policy on theIntegrity of Government," Section VII, infra. 14. See Clarence Lusane, Pipe Dream Blues: Racism& The War on Drugs, (1991); J. Schuler & A. McBride, NotesFrom the Front: A Dissident Law-Enforcement Perspective on DrugProhibition, 18 HOFSTRA L. REV. 893 (1990); M. Sviridoff, etal., The Neighborhood Effects of Street-Level DrugEnforcement: An Evaluation of TNT by the Vera Institute ofJustice, (August 1992); and Michael Z. Letwin, Report fromthe Front Line: The Bennett Plan, Street-Level Drug Enforcementin New York City and the Legalization Debate, 18 HofstraL. Rev. 795 (1990). 15. On the phenomenon of "drug mules" generally, seeCorrectional Association of New York, Injustice Will Be Done:Women Drug Couriers and the Rockefeller Drug Laws, (1992). 16. See J. Schuler & A. McBride, Notes From theFront: A Dissident Law-Enforcement Perspective on DrugProhibition, 18 Hofstra L. Rev. 893 (1990). 17. See Michael Z. Letwin, Wrong Way to Fight Crime, NewYork Times, October 6, 1990, at 23 (Op-Ed article); andLetwin, Report from the Front Line: The Bennett Plan,Street-Level Drug Enforcement in New York City and theLegalization Debate, 18 Hofstra L. Rev. 795, at notes68 and 127. 18. See also, "Effects of Contemporary Drug Policy onthe Integrity of Government," Section VII, infra. 19. Treatment: Effective (But Unpopular) Weapon AgainstDrugs, RAND Research Review, (Spring, 1995); seealso Joseph Treaster, Study Says Anti-Drug Dollars AreBest Spent on Treatment, New York Times, June 19,1994; Marc Mauer and Tracy Huling, Young Black Americans andthe Criminal Justice System: Five Years Later, The SentencingProject (1995). 20. In New York, for example, a parent's substance abuse andfailure to cooperate with treatment is prima facieevidence of "neglect" for the purposes of Family Courtabuse and neglect proceedings; Family Court Act 1046(a)(iii). 21. For example, New York State law imposes mandatoryreporting requirements on health care professionals, includingmedical practitioners, social workers and counselors, requiringthem to report suspected child abuse and neglect to the ChildWelfare Administration. Since substance abuse is deemed a type of"child neglect" (see note 20, above), this has awidespread deterrent effect on access to health care by drugusers. With respect to fear of arrest and prosecution of women, see"The Impact of Current Drug Policy on Women,"Section VI, infra. 22. See J. Ostrowski, Thinking About DrugLegalization,Cato Institute Policy Analysis, No. 121,May 25, 1989; Association of the Bar of the City of New York, AWiser Course: Ending Drug Prohibition, 49 The Record,No. 5, at 523 (1994); E. Nadelmann, The Case for Legalization, ThePublic Interest, No. 92 (1988). 23. A 1993 Center for Disease Control and Prevention (CDC)study found that needle exchange programs are likely to reduceHIV transmission and do not increase drug use. However, itsrecommendations have not been followed because of, what webelieve to be, an irrational adherence to a "zerotolerance" drug policy. See U.C.S.F. Institute forHealth Policy Studies, The Public Health Impact of NeedleExchange Programs in the U.S. Abroad, (September, 1993). 24. L. Zimmer & J.P. Morgan, Exposing Marijuana Myths:A Review of the Scientific Evidence, The Lindesmith Center,(October 1995). Although between 60 to 70 million Americans haveused marijuana, not one has died from an overdose, a contrast notjust with alcohol but with aspirin; E. Nadelmann, A RationalApproach to Drug Legalization, American Journal of Ethicsand Medicine, (Spring, 1991). Nadelmann also cites DrugEnforcement Administration's Administrative Law Judge, FrancisYoung, concluding, after extensive hearings on the medicinalvalue of marijuana, that "it is one of the safesttherapeutically active substances known to man"); id.at 6. Nadelmann further reports that, in the 11 states thatdecriminalized marijuana during the 1970's, rates of consumptionwere indistinguishable from rates in those states that had not;and that, in the Netherlands, where cannabis was decriminalizedin 1976, consumption among young people had actually decreasedsubstantially. See also Robert W. Sweet, The Abolitionof Prohibition -- on Drugs, that is, Mouthpiece, Journalof the New York State Association of Criminal Defense Lawyers,Vol. 5, No. 5, (Nov/Dec, 1992), reporting on recommendations byPresident Nixon's commission on the drug laws and the those ofthe National Academy of Sciences in 1982, both of which calledfor an end to the criminalization of marijuana. Sweet furthernotes that decriminalization of marijuana would take 850,000arrests out of the system. It is also noteworthy, as reported in J. Ostrowski, ThinkingAbout Drug Legalization, Cato Institute Policy Analysis,No. 121, (1989) at 5, that when marijuana was banned in 1937, nomedical evidence was presented to Congress in support of suchlegislation. 25. Speech by Kildare Clarke, M.D., Kings Co. Medical Center,NYCLA Evening Forum, "Bursting at the Seams: Toward aRational Allocation of Resources in the Criminal JusticeSystem," (November 1992). 26. J. Ostrowski, The Moral and Practical Case for DrugLegalization, 18 Hofstra L. Rev. 607 (1990). 27. L. Zimmer & J.P. Morgan, supra at Note 24. Alsosee Note 28, infra. 28. It is well established that alcohol causes liver diseaseand tobacco is a carcinogen. Additionally, alcohol use and abuse,when combined with other activities, i.e., operation of a motorvehicle, has more dangerous effects than most presently illegalsubstances. Furthermore, alcohol abuse has been implicated inincreased incidence of violent behavior, including domesticviolence. While not advocating a return to "alcoholprohibition," we note that in the case of alcohol,appropriate sanctions are imposed upon harmful activitiesconducted while under the influence of this intoxicant, ratherthan punishment for its consumption per se. Thecomparative statistics are also quite poignant. Alcohol andtobacco have been directly implicated in approximately 100,000and 300,000 deaths per year, respectively. See R. Sweet, TheAbolition of Prohibition -- on Drugs, that is, supra, at 7,and E. Nadelmann, U.S. Drug Policy: A Bad Export, ForeignPolicy, No. 70, at 92 (Spring, 1988). Meanwhile, according tothe National Council on Alcoholism, only 3,562 people were knownto have died in 1985 from use of all illegal drugs combined,notwithstanding 1985 having been was one of the highest for percapita drug consumption. Id. 29. Extensive research in to the potential therapeutic effectsof psychedelics has been conducted by the MultidisciplinaryAssociation for Psychedelic Studies (MAPS). 30. See L. Grinspoon and J. Bakalar, Marihuana --The Forbidden Medicine, (1993). 31. In studying the causes of crime, use of the term"drug related" is often unhelpful and even misleading,as it fails to distinguish between those crimes actually causedby drug use or substance abuse (i.e. "drug induced,"meaning caused by the actual psychotropic experience, or mindand/or physical alterations brought on by use of illicit drugs),and those resulting from participation in the violent butlucrative drug trade under circumstances of drug prohibition,(i.e., "drug trade" or "drug prohibition"related crime). 32. A comparable distinction might be made between"alcohol-induced" crime (e.g., public disorder andaccentuated violent behavior, domestic or otherwise), and"alcohol trade" or "alcohol prohibition"related crime brought on by the era of prohibition (1920 to1933), which included assaults and homicides -- resulting fromturf wars between rival bootleggers, shoot outs with lawenforcement officials, transactions gone bad, etc., extortion,bribery, and sale of adulterated and poisonous liquor. This isnot to state, however, that all occasions of casual drug usecauses behavior which is harmful or sufficiently serious as tojustify intervention by the state, either by penal orrehabilitative measures. See Robert W. Sweet and Edward A.Harris, Just and Unjust Wars: The War on the War on Drugs --Some Moral and Constitutional Dimensions of the War on Drugs,(Book Review), Northwestern University L. Rev., Vol 87,No. 4, (Summer, 1993). 33. See Testimony of John P. Morgan, Professor ofPharmacology, City University of New York Medical School, June1994, at jointly sponsored public hearings of the New York CountyLawyers' Association and the Association of the Bar of the Cityof New York. We note, parenthetically, that of the substanceswhich have been most directly related to violent and other formsof anti-social behavior, alcohol rates most highly. This is not,however, a "controlled substance," as that term isdefined by criminal statutes, nor would the Task Force recommenda return to "prohibition" of alcohol, based on thelessons learned from that failed experiment. 34. Certain nations have succeeded in decreasing such"drug prohibition-related" violence by easingrestrictions on use and, to some extent, on sale of certainsubstances which are designated as "controlled" in theUnited States. This has decreased, to a degree, the black marketactivity and thereby, the cost and violence associated withillegal drug trade. Examples include: the Netherlands, Australiaand the United Kingdom. 35. We cannot fail to note here that many involved in the drugtrade, particularly in our nation's cities, are not"hardened criminals," but rather, minority youth whoare understandably attracted to the possibilities of immediateeconomic advancement through participation in the drug trade. Fordespite its risks, engagement in the sale of drugs represents oneof the few avenues available to such individuals in a world whichappears to present limited economic opportunity. 36. Marc Mauer and Tracy Huling, Young Black Americans andthe Criminal Justice System: Five Years Later, The SentencingProject (1995). 37. See Marc Mauer, Young Black Men and the CriminalJustice System: A Growing National Problem, The SentencingProject (1990). 38. Testimony of Jonathan Soroko, former Special NarcoticsAssistant District Attorney, at jointly sponsored public hearingsof the New York County Lawyers' Association and the Associationof the Bar of the City of New York (June, 1994). 39. As reported in the U.S. Dept. Bureau of Justice, Bureau ofJustice Statistics, Bulletin, Prisoners in 1993: "In 1992 . . . the number of new court commitments for drug offenses totaled an estimated 102,000 [up from 8,900 in 1980, ed.]. The number of persons admitted for drug offenses was nearly as large as the number admitted for property offenses (104,300) and larger than the number for violent offenses (95,300 and public-disorder offenses (29,400). An estimated 30.5% of all new court commitments in 1992 were drug offenders, up from 6.8% in 1980. . . .The increase in drug offenders admitted to prison accounted for nearly 46% of the total growth in new court commitments since 1980. . . . The growth in the number of persons arrested for drug law violations and the increase in the rate of incarceration for drug offenses account for the change in the prison offense distribution. Between 1980 and 1992, the estimated number of adult arrests for drug law violations increased by 108% from 471,200 to 980,700." The resulting shift in the percentage of drug offenders heldin U.S. prisons and jail, as compared to inmates incarcerated forother criminal offenses, is as follows: In 1983, the total drugoffenders held in federal prisons represented 27.6% of the totalinmate population. By 1993, this figure rose to 60.8%. Duringthat same period, the percentage of drug offenders rose in stateprisons from 7.0% to 22.5%, and in local jails from 9.3% to23.0%. Together with the shift in the makeup of jail and prisonpopulations, increased drug arrests and commitment of drugoffenders during this period has resulted in a doubling ofthe total number of individuals incarcerated in the U.S., from660,800 in 1983 to 1,408,685 in 1993. This figure quadruplesthe number of those incarcerated in the U.S. in 1973, just 20years ago; M. Mauer and Tracy Huling, Young Black Americansand the Criminal Justice System: Five Years Later, TheSentencing Project (1995). 40. M. Mauer, Americans Behind Bars: One Year Later,The Sentencing Project (Feb, 1992). Also see Keri A.Gould, Turning Rat and Doing Time for Uncharged, Dismissed, OrAcquitted Crimes: Do the Federal Sentencing Guidelines PromoteRespect for the Law?, 10 N.Y.L.S. Journal of Human Rightsat 1 (1993). 41. See, e.g., experiences of Colombia, Panama andPeru; see also E. Nadelmann, Cops Across Borders,(1993). 42. The 18th Amendment, instituting alcohol prohibition, wasenacted in 1920 and repealed in 1933. 43. E. Nadelmann, Drug Prohibition in the United States:Costs, Consequences, and Alternatives, 245 Science 939(September, 1989); J. Ostrowski, Thinking About DrugLegalization, Cato Institute Policy Analysis, No. 121,(1989). 44. Testimony of Loren Siegel, New York Civil Liberties Union,at jointly sponsored public hearings of the New York CountyLawyers' Association and the Association of the Bar of the Cityof New York (June, 1994). 45. Actually, discussions of "decriminalization" or"legalization" have always found wide currency,particularly in present times, due to the overwhelming failure,at huge cost, of a harsh law enforcement based strategy of drugcontrol. See Anthony Lewis, End the War, NewYork Times, November 3, 1995, at A29; Jefferson Morely, Crackin Black and White, The Washington Post, November 19,1995, at C1. Further, we must be mindful that drug prohibition,in its inception, began just 6 years prior to alcoholprohibition, by passage of the Harrison Narcotics Act of 1914, abill with little popular support but urged by then Secretary ofState William Jennings Bryan, a man of "deep prohibitionistand missionary convictions...'" J. Ostrowski, "ThinkingAbout Drug Legalization," Cato Institute PolicyAnalysis, No. 121, at 3 (1989). While drug control has takenon its present character as a serious law enforcement priorityduring the past three decades, ironically, this same period hasbeen one of unprecedented growth for the underworld, illegal drugindustry, in drug usage, and in the expenditure of economicresources fighting a futile "war on drugs." 46. M. Mauer and Tracy Huling, Young Black Americans andthe Criminal Justice System: Five Years Later, The SentencingProject (October, 1995). This recent report found that althoughAfrican Americans represent about 13% of the total population and13% of those who are monthly drug users, they are 35% of thosearrested for drug possession, 55% of those convicted for drugpossession, and 74% of the total serving sentences ofincarceration for drug possession. See also, 1 in 3 YoungBlack Men in Justice System, Washington Post, October5, 1995, at 1. 47. Such operations are rarely conducted in predominantlywhite, middle and upper-class neighborhoods. 48. According to the U.S. Sentencing Commission, 90% of thoseconvicted in 1994 for federal crack offenses were black and 3.5%were white. For powder cocaine, 29.7% were black and 25.9% werewhite (the rest were Hispanic). Under current federal law, thereis a mandatory minimum sentence of 5 years imprisonment forpossession of 5 grams of crack or 500 grams of powder cocaine.The Sentencing Commission's recent proposal to remove the100-to-1 sentencing disparity was rejected by Congress, theJustice Department and the Clinton Administration. See L.Greenhouse article, New York Times, 10/31/95, at A18. 49. See "Effects of Contemporary Drug Policy on theIntegrity of Government," Section VII, infra. 50. In the five years from 1989 to 1994, black, non-hispanicwomen from the ages of 20 to 29, faced the highest growth incriminal justice "control rates," (i.e., incarcerated,on parole or on probation) which increased 78% during thisperiod. In the five year period from 1986 to 1991, black,non-hispanic women overall faced the highest growth in numbers ofthose incarcerated in state prisons for drug offenses, with anincrease of 828% during this period. See also note 56, infra. 51. Correctional Association of New York, Injustice Will BeDone: Women Drug Couriers and the Rockefeller Drug Laws,(February 1992). 52. For federal arrestees, the potential sentence afterconviction for similar crimes, under the Federal SentencingGuidelines, is 50 years-to-life. 53. 80% of women prisoners are the sole caretakers of childrenunder age 18. L. A. Greenfield and S. M. Harper, Women inPrison, U.S. Bureau of Justice Statistics, Special Report(1991). 54. See, for example, M. Letwin, Sentencing AngelaThompson, NYLJ 4/18/94, p.2, col.3. 55. See Barbara Bloom and David Steinhart, WhyPunish Children?, supra, at 3; also see M.Mauer and Tracy Huling, Young Black Americans and the CriminalJustice System: Five Years Later, The Sentencing Project(1995). Regarding the general increase in the conviction andincarceration of women for drug offenses, in 1991, 1 in 3 womanin state prisons was incarcerated for a drug offense, up from 1in 8 in 1986. From 1986 to 1991, the number of female stateprisoners incarcerated for drug offenses grew from 2,370 to12,633, for an increase of 433%. Id. 56. See "Public Health Consequences of Current DrugPolicy," Section III, supra. 57. As regularly reported in Reproductive Freedom News,the newsletter published by The Center for Reproductive Law andPolicy, New York City. In criminal statutes, "delivery" of narcotics, withor without pecuniary compensation, is generally treated under themore serious category of sale or distribution of such narcotics, (see,for example, New York State Penal Law 220.00(1), whichdefines sale of narcotics as: to "sell, exchange, give ordispose of to another or offer or agree to do the same." (Emphasisadded.) Although such criminal prosecutions against women arenot presently known to have been brought in New York State, theyhave been, and continue to be brought in various statesthroughout the nation, (see Reproductive Freedom News, supra). 58. As regularly reported in Reproductive Freedom News, supra. 59. See New York State Penal Law (P.L.) 220.39(Criminal Sale of a Controlled Substance in the Third Degree), ascompared with P.L. 160.15 (Robbery in the First Degree), P.L.130.35 (Rape in the First Degree), and P.L. 120.10 (Assaultin the First Degree). 60. See "Drug Policy, Drug Law Enforcement and Peopleof Color," Section V, supra. 61. See "The Impact of Current Drug Policy onWomen," Section VI, supra. 62. L. Grinspoon & J. Bakalar, The War on Drugs -- APeace Proposal, 330 New England Journal of Medicine357, at 357. 63. L. Grinspoon & J. Bakalar, ibid., at 357. Seealso Florida v. Bostick, 111 S. Ct. 2382 (1991); U.S. v.Sokolow, 490 U.S. 1, at pp.13-14 (1989) (in his dissent,Justice Brennan enumerates cases in which the court failed toquestion the "chameleon-like way [in which the drug courierprofile] adapt[s] to any particular set of observations." 64. See S. Wisotsky, A Society of Suspects: The Waron Drugs and Civil Liberties, at 180 (1992). 65. The difficulty of establishing this negative propositionis borne out by the government's own statistics, which revealthat the Drug Enforcement Agency (DEA) made 14,430 domesticseizures of nondrug property in 1993, resulting in a fiscalwindfall of approximately $670 million; see Drugs &Crime Data Center & Clearinghouse, Fact Sheet: Drug DataSummary 2, (April, 1994). 66. For example, in New York, pursuant to Real PropertyActions and Proceedings Law 715, the District Attorney can seekfines and other sanctions against owners of such properties whofail to commence eviction proceedings against tenants suspectedof illegal conduct, irrespective of the ability of the DistrictAttorney to bring or sustain criminal charges with respect tosuch tenants. 67. We also note, with great concern, the conduct of variousgovernments outside our borders, both with and without directionand encouragement provided by the United States, whose ownpolicies clearly take on world-wide significance. See, e.g.,E. Nadelmann, Cops Across Borders, (1993). 68. As to the effect of federal drug sentencing laws incompromising the threshold requirement that mens rea beevident in the conduct of an individual defendant as an essentialelement in imposing criminal responsibility, see Jack B.Weinstein & Fred A. Bernstein, The Unwarranted Denigrationof Mens Rea on Drug Sentencing, Federal SentencingReporter, Vol. 7, No.3, (Nov/Dec 1994). 14 Vesey Street New York, NY 10007 (212) 267-6646 Additional Funding for Publication and Distribution ofthis Report Provided by: The DrugPolicy Foundation 4455 Connecticut Avenue, N.W. Suite B-500 Washington, D.C. 20008 (202) 537-5005 Join DRCNet DRCNet Home Page WT02-B03-12IA086-000615-B001-366http://206.61.184.43:80/schaffer/Library/studies/dac/dacmenu.htm 206.61.184.43 19970122024357 text/html 3905HTTP/1.0 200 OKDate: Wednesday, 22-Jan-97 02:43:52 GMTServer: WebSitePro/1.1f (S/N wpo-0deb)Allow-ranges: bytesContent-type: text/htmlLast-modified: Saturday, 28-Dec-96 06:46:19 GMTContent-length: 3688 Drugs and Our Community - Report of the Premiers' DrugAdvisory Council -March, 1996 Contents | Feedback | Search DRCNet Library | Schaffer Library | Major Studies Drugs and our Community REPORT OF THE PREMIER'S DRUG ADVISORY COUNCIL MARCH 1996 Joint Departmental Information CentreCataloguing-in-Publication entry: Victoria Premier's Drug Advisory Council Drugs and ourCommunity: Report of the Premier's Drug Advisory Council/Premier's Drug Advisory Council, March 1996. Melbourne: Victorian Government, 1996. 164 p.; 30 cmBibliography. ISBN: 0 7306 9227 2 Cover title. 1. Drugutilization - Social aspects - Victoria. 2. Substance abuse -Victoria. I. Title. 362.2909945 Report designed and produced by O'SHEA SAUNDERS PTY. LTD. Tel:(03) 9583 8827 Cover designed and produced by ROYCE COMMUNICATIONS PTY. LTD.Tel: (03) 9820 3733 M A RC H 19 9 6 This report is available only in Adobe Acrobat PDF format DAC Report Part 1 DAC Report Part 2 CONTENTS ACKNOWLEDGMENTS i OVERVIEW iii 1 BACKGROUND 1 1.1 COUNCIL ACTIVITIES 1 1.2 COMMISSIONED WORK 2 2 ILLICIT DRUGS: CONTEXT AND FACTS 3 2.1 NATURE AND EXTENT OF TRAFFICKING AND USE 4 2.2 DETERRING MANUFACTURE, SUPPLY AND DISTRIBUTION 29 2.3 PREVENTING USE AND REDUCING HARM 40 2.4 AUSTRALIAN AND INTERNATIONAL EXPERIENCES 59 3 CHALLENGES AND CHOICES FOR VICTORIA 65 3.1 INTRODUCTION 65 3.2 CURRENT KNOWLEDGE 66 3.3 DEMAND AND SUPPLY TRENDS 68 3.4 DIFFERENT RESPONSES TO DIFFERENT DRUGS 72 3.5 INFORMATION AND HEALTH EDUCATION 77 3.6 SUPPORT AND TREATMENT SERVICES 87 3.7 LAW ENFORCEMENT AND POLICING IN A HARM MINIMISATIONSTRATEGY 100 3.8 THE LAW 105 3.9 INFRASTRUCTURE 115 4 RECOMMENDATIONS 119 APPENDICES 135 Contents | Feedback | Search DRCNet Library | Schaffer Library | Major StudiesWT02-B03-13IA087-000632-B015-226http://206.61.184.43:80/schaffer/Library/studies/inhemp/6app1.htm 206.61.184.43 19970122091300 text/html 38653HTTP/1.0 200 OKDate: Wednesday, 22-Jan-97 09:12:49 GMTServer: WebSitePro/1.1f (S/N wpo-0deb)Allow-ranges: bytesContent-type: text/htmlLast-modified: Saturday, 28-Dec-96 07:04:13 GMTContent-length: 38435 Indian Hemp Drugs Commission Report - Note by Mr. G. A.Grierson Contents | Feedback | Search DRCNet Library | Schaffer Library | Major Studies | IndianHemp Drugs Commission Indian Hemp Drugs Commission Report NOTE BY MR. G. A. GRIERSON, C.I.E., MAGISTRATE ANDCOLLECTOR, HOWRAH, ON REFERENCES TO THE HEMP PLANT OCCURRING INSANSKRIT AND HINDI LITERATURE I have the honour to state that I have searched through allthe Sanskrit and Hindi books accessible to me, and to forward theaccompanying note on the references to the hemp plant occurringin the literatures of those languages. I have met the hemp plant in Sanskrit and Hindi literatureunder various names. The principal are: (1) Bhanga. (2) Indracana. (3) Vijaya or Jaya The earliest mention of the word ganja which I have noted isdated about the year 1300 A.D. Whenever the word vijaya is used, it is doubtful whether thehemp plant is meant, or the yellow myrobolan, as the words meansboth. The name Bhanga occurs in the Atharvaveda (say, B.C. 1400).The hemp plant is there mentioned simply as a sacred grass.Panini (say, B.C. 300) mentions the pollen of the hemp flower(bhanga). In the commencement of the sixth century we find thefirst mention of vijaya which I have noted. It is a sacred grass,and probably means here the hemp plant. The first mention of bhanga as a medicine which I have notedis in the work of Sucruta (before the eighth century A.D.), whereit is called an antiphlegmatic. During the next four centuriesbhanga (feminine) frequently occurs in native Sanskritdictionaries in the sense of hemp-plant. In the tenth century the intoxicating nature of bhang seems tohave been known: and the name Indracana, Indra's food,first appears, so far as I know, in literature. Its intoxicatingpower was certainly known in the beginning of the fourteenthcentury. In a play written in the beginning of the sixteenthcentury, it is mentioned as being consumed by jogis (Caivamendicants). It is there named "Indra's food." In later medical works it is frequently mentioned undervarious names. I append a more detailed account of the passages in which Ihave noted the uses of the Indian hemp. I may add that I have not traced in literature any differencebetween the uses of the word ganja and the word bhanga, thoughmodern kavirajas tells me that they are distinct plants. Cir. B.C. 1400. In the Atharvaveda (cir. 1400 B.C.) thebhang plant is mentioned (11, 6, 15) once: "We tell of the five kingdoms of herbs headed by Soma;may it and kuca grass, and bhanga and barley, andthe herb saha release us from anxiety." Here reference is evidently made to the offering of theseherbs in oblations. The grammarian Panini (5, 2, 29) mentions bhangukata,the pollen of the hemp flower, as one of his examples. Cir. B. C. 300. The fact that the pollen of this special flower was quoted isworth noting. Varahamihira in his Brihatsamhita (XLVIII, 39),mentions vijaya as used with other grasses in the rotes ofthe Pusya, bathing festival. A.D. 504. Vijaya is this passage certainly means some plant orother. The word may mean either the Indian hemp-plant or be asynonym of haritaki (the yellow myrobolan). Dr. Hoernleinforms me that in the oldest medical words the word is explainedby commentators in the latter sense. It is doubtful what meaningwe are to adopt here. The word may mean the hemp-plant bhanga.In the passage from the Atharvaveda, already quoted, amongst thefive plants special honoured as oblations, bhanga isclosely connected with the herb saha. So also in theBrihatsamhita, vijaya is mentioned as one of a long listof plants to be used in the offering, and the very next plantmentioned is saha, which is apparently the same as saha.This would encourage the theory that the vijaya of theBrihatsamhita was more probably the same as the bhanga ofthe Atbarvaveda. In Sucruta (Ut. XI, 3) Bhanga is recommended togetherwith a number of other drugs as an antiphlegmatic. Before the eighth century. Vijaya is mentioned in the same work as a remedy forcatarrh accompanied by diarrhea (Ut. XXIV, 20, and Ut. 39, page415, 20), as an ingredient in a prescription for fever arisingfrom an excess of bile and phlegm. In these two passages,however, vijaya is probably an equivalent of haritaki,the yellow myrobolan, and does not mean hemp. In the various kosas, or dictionaries, bhanga isfrequently mentioned as meaning the hemp-plant. Thus, (1) Amarakosa, 2, 9, 20. Cir. A. D. 500. (2) Trikandacesa, 3, 364. Tenth or eleventh century(3) Hemacandra's Anekarthakosa,2, 37. Twelfth century. (4) Hemakandra's Abhidhanacinlamani,1179. The Sarasundari (date not known to me), a commentary onthe Amarakosa mentioned above, Twelfth century by Mathureca, and quoted in theCabdakalpadruma, mentions that the seed of the bhangaplant is the size of that of millet (kalaya). Cakrapanidatta is said to have flourished under Nayapala, aprince who reigned Cir. 1050 A.D. in the eleventh century A.D. In his Cabdacandrika,a medical vocabulary, he gives the following Sanskrit names forbhang: (1) Vijaya (victorious), (2) Trailokyavijaya(victorious in the three worlds), (3) bhanga, (4) Indracana(Indra's food), (5) Jaya (victorious). These names seem to show that its use as an intoxicant wasthen known. The Rajanighantu of Narahari Pandita adds the followingnames to those given by A.D. 1300. Cakrapanidatta in the Cabdacandrika abovementioned: (6) Virapattra (hero-leaved or the leaf of heroes), (7) Ganja, (8) Capala (the light-hearted), (9) Ajaya (the unconquered), (10) Ananda (the joyful), (11) Harsini (the rejoicer) and adds that the plant possesses the following qualities: (1) Katulva (acridity); (2) kasayatra(astringency); (3) Usnatva (heat); (4) tiktatva(pungency); (5) vatakaphapahatva (removing wind andphlegm); (6) samgrahitva (astringency); (7) vakpradatva(speech-giving); (8)balyatva (strength-giving); (9) medhakaritva(inspiring of mental power); (10) cresthadipanatva (theproperty of a most excellent excitant). The Carngadhrasamhita, a medical work by Carngadhara,the date of which is unknown, Say A.D. 1500. but which must have been compiled during theMuhammadan period of Indian History, specially mentions (1, 4, 19) bhangaas an excitant (vyavayin). In the same passage it mentionsopium. The Dhurtasamagama, or "Rogues' Congress," isthe name of an amusing if coarsely A.D. 1550. written farce of about the year 1500 A.D., theauthor of which was one Jyotirica. In the second act two Caivamendicants came before an unjust judge, and demand a decision ona quarrel which they have about a nymph of the bazar. The judgedemands payment of a deposit before he will give any opinion. Oneof the litigants says: "Here is my ganja bag; let it be accepted as adeposit." The Judge (taking it pompously, and then smelling itgreedily): "Let me try what it is like (takes a pinch).Ah! I have just now got by the merest chance some ganja which issoporific and corrects derangements of the humours, whichproduces a healthy appetite, sharpens the wits, and acts as anaphrodisiac." The word used for ganja in the above is Indracana(Indra's food). The Bhavaprakaca, another medical work written byBhavadevamicra (cir. A.D. 1600), has as follows: Cir. A. D. 1600. Bhanga ganja matulani madini vijaya jaya Bhanga kaphahari tikta grahini pacani laghuh Tiksosna pittala moha -mada vag vahni vardhini "Bhanga is also called ganja, matulani, madini(the intoxicating), vijaya (the victorious), and jaya(the victorious). It is antiphlegmatic, pungent, astringent,digestive, easy of digestion, acid, bile-affecting; and increasesinfatuation, intoxication, the power of the voice, and thedigestive faculty." "The Rajavallabha, a materia medica, byNarayanadasa kaviraja, the date of which I 17th century. do not know, but which is quoted in the Cabdakalpadruma,and is believed to be ancient, has the following: Cakra-canam tu tiksno-snam moha-krit kustha-nacanam Bala-medha-gni-krit-clesma -dosa-hari rasayanam Jata mandara-manthanaj jala-nidhau piyusa-rupa pura Trailokye vijaya-prade 'ti vijaya cri-devaraja-priya Lokanam hita-kamyaya ksiti-tale prapta naraih kamada Sarva-" tanka-vinaca-harsa-janani yaih sevita sarvada. "Indra's food (i.e. ganja) is acid, produces infatuation,and destroys leprosy. It creates vital energy, the mental powers,and internal heat, corrects irregularities of the phlegmatichumour, and is an elixir vitae. It was originally produced, likenectar, from the ocean by the churning with Mount Mandara, andinasmuch as it gives victory in the three worlds, it, the delightof the king of the gods, is called vijaya, the victorious.This desire-fulfilling drug was obtained by men on the earth,through desire for the welfare of all people. To those whoregularly use it it begets joy and destroys every anxiety." The Rasapradhipa, a work, the date of which is unknownto me, and which is quoted in ? Date. the Cabdakalpadruma mentions jaya as aremedy for indigestion: Ksaratrayam sutagandhou pancakolam idam cubham Sarvais tulya jaya bhrista tad-ardha cigruja jata Natron, saltpetre and borax, mercury and sulphur, and theprosperous five spices (long pepper, its root, piper chaba,another pepper, and dry ginger). To these add an equal amount ofparched jaya and half of that amount of horse-radish (moringa)and jata. It is not certain whether jaya here means bhang or Haritaki(yellow myrobolan). The word has both significations. The latter,perhaps, suits the formula best. In the Rasaratna-samuccaya, a work written in the southof India, jaya is classified as a semi-poison, Langoli visamustic ca karaviro jaya tatha ? Date Tilakah kanako rkac ca vargo hy upavisatmakah. Langali (Vanguiera spinosa), the root of the Neriumodorum, jaya (Symplocos racemosa) kanaka and ak(a kind of Euphorbia), are semi-poisonous. Bhang is frequently mentioned by vernacular poets. The oldestinstance with which I 1400 A.D. am acquainted is the well-known hymn by Vidyapati Tbakur (1400 A.D.), in which he calls Civa "Digambarabhanga," in reference to his habit of consuming thatdrug. According to an old Hindu poem, on which I cannot now laymy hands, Civa himself brought down the bhang plant from theHimalayas and gave it to mankind. Jogis are well-known consumersof bhang and ganja, and they are worshippers of Civa. In folk-songs, ganja or bhang (with or without opium) is theinvariable drink of heroes before performing any great feat. Atthe village of Bauri in Gaya there is a huge hollow stone, whichis said to be the bowl in which the famous hero Lorik mixed hisganja. Lorik was a very valiant general, and is the hero ofnumerous folk-songs. The epic poem of Alha and Rudal, oruncertain date, but undoubtedly based on very old materials (theheroes lived in the twelfth century A.D.), contains numerousreferences to ganja as a drink of warriors. For instance, thecommencement of the canto dealing with Alha's marriage, describesthe pestle and mortar with which the ganja was prepared, theamount of the intoxicating drink prepared from it (it is called sabzi)and the amount of opium (an absurdly exaggerated quantity) givento each warrior in his court. That the consumption of bhang is not considered disreputableamong Rajputs may be gathered from the fact that Ajabes, who wascourt poet to the well-known Maharaja Bishwanath Singh of Riwa,wrote a poem praising bhang and comparing siddhi to the"success" which attends the worshipper of"Hari." Here there is an elaborate series of puns. Theword siddhi means literally 'success,' and harimeans not only the god Hari, but also bhang. NOTE BY BABU ABHILAS CHANDRA MUKERJI, SECOND INSPECTOR OFEXCISE, BENGAL, ON THE ORIGIN AND HISTORY OF TRINATH WORSHIP INEASTERN BENGAL. Date of origin._In 1867 Babu Ananda Chandra Kali orKailai, of Dhamrai, a village in thana Sabhar of the Daccadistrict, first started the worship at the house of hisfather-in-law at Fattehpur in the Atia pargana of the Mymensinghdistrict (sub-division Tangail). Antecedents of the originator._Dhamrai is an importantvillage in the Dacca district noted for its car festival, whichis annually held in honor of a local idol named Madhab Thakur,and which is witnessed by a large gathering of people. Ananda Chandra received education at the Dacca Normal School.After leaving school he served for some time as a pundit(schoolmaster), and then entered the Police Department, but wasthere only a short time. He is a Barendra Brahman and belongs toa respectable family. He learnt to smoke ganja when he was only aboy. His present age is 60 years. He has the reputation of beinga versifier. He smokes two pice worth of ganja every day. He married at Fattehpur in the Mymensingh district. There heintroduced Trinath worship 27 years ago. A panchali (poem)reciting the praises and exploits of Trinath was first publishedat Dacca in 1871 and the first edition (1,000 copies) was sold ina few months. The circumstances under which the worship was first started._AnandaChandra Kali was at the time living in the house of hisfather-in-law. He was thinking of introducing the worship of acommon god, who might be worshipped by all classes, rich andpoor, Brahman and Chandal, and by all creeds, Saktas, Baishnavas,and Shaivas, and the idea occurred to him of having the presentworship at which ordinary and inexpensive things, such as ganja,oil, and betel-leaf, were alone to be used. Trinath (from Sanskrit Tri, three, and Nath,lord) is represented to be Brahma, Bishnu and Shiva, the HinduTrinity in one. Being a ganja-smoker himself, Ananda Kali may have alsothought that by introducing the worship he would be able to savethe ganja-smokers from disrepute, as then ganja could be consumedin the name of a god and under colour of doing a religious orpious act. Religious aspect of the worship._The followingtranslation of the Introduction to the Trinath MelaPanchali gives some idea of the subject: "The universe consists of the earth, the heaven, and thenether world, and Trinath is the lord of these three worlds. "There was an incarnation of God in the form of Gour(Chaitanya), who delivered the sinners by preaching the name ofHari, but the Lord was not satisfied with this, and becameconcerned for the created, and soon he became incarnate again.Brahma, Bishnu and Shiva, gods in three forms, manifestedthemselves in one form. The one God, the Lord of the universe,seeing the miseries of mankind, came to their deliverance. Ananda(Ananda Chandra Kali, the originator) declares that the true andsincere worshippers of Trinath are sure to obtain salvation.Brahma, Bishnu, and Shiva met together and expressed their desireto come to this world in one form to receive worship. "He is a truly pious man who worships Trinath, andblessings are showered on the worshipper. "The worship should be made in a form in which the richand the poor may equally join and may perform it easily. "Only three things, each worth one pice, are required forthis puja (form of worship). The things which please allmust be selected. The offering should consist of siddhi(ganja), pan (betel-leaf), and oil, each worth one pice. "The votaries should assemble at night and worship withflowers. The ganja should be washed in the manner in which peoplewash ganja for smoking. The worshipper must fill three chillumswith equal quantities of ganja, observing due awe and reverence.When all the worshipers are assembled the lamp should be lit withthree wicks, and the praises of Trinath should be sung. As longas the wicks burn, the god should be worshipped and his praiseschanted. The god should be reverentially bowed to at the close ofthe puja. When the reading of the Panchali is finished,those that will not show respect to the Prasad (theoffering which has been accepted by the god), i.e. chillumof ganja, shall be consigned to eternal hell, and the sincereworshippers shall go to heaven." How the worship spread._Ananda Kali commenced the pujawith the aid of some ganja-smokers in the village of Fattehpur. Alarge number of people consume ganja in the Dacca. NOTE BY MR. J.M. CAMPBELL, C.I.E., COLLECTOR OF LAND REVENUEAND CUSTOMS AND OPIUM, BOMBAY, ON THE RELIGION OF HEMP To the Hindu the hemp plant is holy. A guardian lives in thebhang leaf. As the wife of Vishnu, the preserver, lives in thehysteria-curing tulsi, or Holy Basil, and as Shiva dwellsin the hysteria-curing bel, gle marmelos, so theproperties of the bhang plant, its power to suppress theappetites, its virtue as a febrifuge, and its thought-bracingqualities show that the bhang leaf is the home of the great Yogior brooding aascetics Mahadev. So holy a plant should have special rearing. Shiva explains tohis wife, Parvati, how, in sowing hemp seed, you should keeprepeating the spell 'Bhangri,' 'Bhangi,' apparently that thesound of that guardian name may scare the evil tare-sowinginfluences. Again, when the seedlings are planted the same holyname must be repeated, and also at the watering which, for thespace of a year, the young plants must daily receive. When theflowers appear the flowers and leaves should be stripped from theplant and kept for a day in warm water. Next day, with onehundred repetitions of the holy name Bhangri, the leaves andflowers should be washed in a river and dried in an open shed.When they are dry some of the leaves should be burnt with duerepeating of the holy name as a jap or muttered charm.Then, bearing in mind Vagdevata, or the goddess of speech, andoffering a prayer, the dried leaves should be laid in a pure andsanctified place. Bhang so prepared, especially if prayers aresaid over it, will gratify the wishes and desires of its owner.Taken in the early morning such bhang cleanses the user from sin,frees him from the punishment of crores of sins, and entitles himto reap the fruits of a thousand horse-sacrifices. Suchsanctified bhang taken at daybreak or noon destroys disease.Before the religious user of bhang stand the Ashtadevata or EightGuardians with clasped hands ready to obey him and perform hisorders. The wish of him who with pure mind pours bhang with duereverence over the Ling of Mahadev will be fulfilled. Such holiness and such evil-scaring powers must give bhang ahigh place among lucky objects. That a day may be fortunate thecareful man should on waking look into liquid bhang. So anynightmares or evil spirits that may have entered into him duringthe ghost-haunted hours of night will flee from him at the sightof the bhang and free him from their blinding influences duringthe day. So too when a journey has to be begun or a fresh duty orbusiness undertaken it is well to look at bhang. To meet some onecarrying bhang is a sure omen of success. To see in a dream theleaves, plant, or water of bhang is lucky; it brings the goodnessof wealth into the dreamer's power. To see his parents worshipthe bhang-plant and pour bhang over Shiva's Ling will cure thedreamer of fever. A longing for bhang foretells happiness: to seebhang drunk increases riches. No good thing can come to the manwho treads under foot the holy bhang leaf. So evil-scaring and therefore luck-bringing a plant must playan important part in the rites required to clear away evilinfluences. During the great spirit time of marriage in Bombayamong almost all the higher classes of Gujarat Hindus, of theJain as well as of the Brahmanic sects, the supplies sent by thefamily of the bride to the bridegroom's party during their sevendays' sojourn includes a supply of bhang. The name of the fatherwho neglects to send bhang is held in contempt. Again, after thewedding, when the bridegroom and his friends are entertained atthe house of the bride, richly-spiced bhang is drunk by theguests. The Gujarat Musalman bride before and after marriagedrinks a preparation of bhang. Among the Pardeshi or North IndianHindus of Bombay bhang is given not only at weddings, but thePardeshi who fails to give his visitor bhang is despised by hiscaste as mean and miserly. Another great spirit time during whichbhang plays an important part is the time of war. Before theoutbreak of a war and during its progress the Ling of Mahadevshould be bathed with bhang. Its power of driving panicinfluences from near the god has gained for bhang the name ofVijaya, the unbeaten. So a drink of bhang drives from thefighting Hindu the haunting spirits of fear and wariness. So thebeleagured Rajput, when nothing is left but to die, after loosinghis hair that the bhang spirit may have free entrance, drinks thesacramental bhang and rushing on the enemy completes his juharor self-sacrifice. It is this quality of panic-scaring that makesbhang, the Vijaya or Victorious, specially dear to Mahadev in hischaracter of Tripur, the slayer of the demon Tripurasur. As Shivais fond of bel leaves, as Vishnu is fond of tulsileaves, so is Tripuresvar fond of bhang leaves. He who wishes toobtain his desires must constantly offer bhang to Tripuresvar. Bhang the cooler is a febrifuge. Bhang acts on the fever notdirectly or physically as an ordinary medicine, but indirectly orspiritually by soothing the angry influences to whom the heats offever are due. According to one account in the Ayurveda, fever ispossession by the hot angry breath of the great gods Brahma,Vishnu, and shiva. According to another passage in the Ayurveda,Shankar or Shiva, enraged by a slight from his father-in-lawDaksha, breathed from his nostrils the eight fevers that withermankind. If the fever-stricken performs the Viraya abhishek, orbhang-pouring on the Ling of Shankar, the god is pleased, hisbreath cools, and the portion of his breath in the body of thefever-stricken ceases to inflame. The Kashikhanda Purana tellshow at Benares, a Brahman, sore-smitten with fever, dreamed thatbe had poured bhang over the self-sprung Ling and was well. Onwaking he went to the Ling, worshipped, poured bhang andrecovered. The fame of this cure brings to Benares sufferers fromfever which no ordinary medicine can cure. The sufferers are laidin the temple and pour bhang over the Ling whose virtue hasgained it the name Jvareshwar, the Fever-Lord. In Bombay manypeople sick of fever vow on recovery to pour bhang over a Ling.Besides as a cure for fever bhang has many medicinal virtues. Itcools the heated blood, soothes the over-wakeful to sleep, givesbeauty, and secures length of days. It cures dysentery andsunstroke, clears phlegm, quickens digestion, sharpens appetite,makes the tongue of the lisper plain, freshens the intellect, andgives alertness to the body and gaiety to the mind. Such are theuseful and needful ends for which in his goodness the Almightymade bhang. In this praise of the hemp the Makhzan or greatGreek-Arab work on drugs joins. Ganja in excess causes abscess,even madness. In moderation bhang is the best of gifts. Bhang isa cordial, a bile absorber, an appetiser, a prolonger of life.Bhang quickens fancy, deepens thought, and braces judgment. As on other guardian-possessed objects, the cow, the Vedas, orthe leaf of the bel tree, oaths are taken on the bhangleaf. Even to a truthful witness an oath on the bhang leaf isdreaded. To one who foreswears himself the bhang oath is death. So holy a plant must play a leading part in temple rites.Shiva on fire with the poison churned from the ocean was cooledby bhang. At another time enraged with family worries the godwithdrew to the fields. The cool share of a plant soothed him. Hecrushed and ate of the leaves, the bhang refreshed him. For thesetwo benefits bhang is Shankarpriya, the beloved of Mahadev. Sothe right user of bhang or of ganja, before beginning to drink orto smoke, offers the drug to Mahadev saying, lena Shankar, lenaBabulnath: be pleased to take it Shankar, take it Babulnath.According to the Shiva Purana, from the dark fourteenth of Magh(January-February) to the light fourteenth of Asbadh (July-July),that is, during the three months of the hot weather, bhang shouldbe daily poured over the Ling of Shiva. If not every day, bhangshould be poured at least during the first and last days of thisperiod. According to the Meru Tantra on any Monday, especially onShravan (July-August) Mondays, on all twelfths or pradoshs,and on all dark fourteenths of shivratris, still more onthe Mahashivratri or Shiva's Great Night on the dark fourteenthof Magh (January-February), and at all eclipses of the sun ormoon, persons wistful either for this world or for the world tocome should offer bhang to Shiva and pour it over the Ling. Notevery devotee of Shiva makes offerings of bhang. Such rites inBombay are seldom performed except in the Bhuleswar and Babulnathtemples and there only on special occasions. The bhang offered toMahadev is without pepper or other spice. It is mixed with water,water and milk, or milk and sugar. It is poured over the Ling.According to some authorities the offerer should not touch theoffered bhang. Temple ministrants Atits, Tapodhans, Bhojaks,Bhopis, Bharadis, Guravas alone should drink it. If there are noministrants the remains of the offering should be poured into awell or given to cows to drink. Other authorities encourage theofferer to sip the bhang, since by sipping the bhang reaches andsoothes the Shiva-Shakti or Shiva-spirit in the sipper. Oncertain special occasions during failures of rain, duringeclipses, and also in times of war libations of bhang are pouredover the Ling. Vaishnavas as well as Shaivas make offerings of bhang. Theform of Vishnu or the Guardian to whom bhang is a welcomeoffering is Baladev, Balaram, or Dauji, the elder brother ofKrishna. Baladev was fond of spirits, not of bhang. But Banias,Bhatias, and other high class Hindus, not being able to offerspirits, instead of spirits present bhang. In Bombay the offeringof bhang to Baladev, unlike the special offerings to Shiva, is acommon and every-day rite. Without an offering of bhang noworship of Baladev is complete. Unlike the plain or milk andsugared bhang spilt over the Ling, Baladev's bhang is arichly-spiced liquid which all present, including the offerer,join in drinking. Such social and religious drinking of bhang iscommon in Bombay in the temple of dauji in Kalyan Kirparam lanenear Bhuleshwar. As in the higher class worship of Baladev theliquor offering has been refined into an offering of bhang so itis in the worship of Devi, Shiva's early and terrible consort. Onany Tuesday or Friday, the two weeks days sacred to Devi, stillmore during the Navratra or Nine Nights in Ashwin orSeptember-October, those whose caste rules forbid liquor make apleasing spiced bhang. And as in the worship of Baladev allpresent, worshipper and ministrant alike, join in drinking.Shitaladevi, the Cooler, the dread goddess of small-pox, whosenature, like the nature of bhang, is cooling, takes pleasure inofferings of bhang. During epidemics of small-pox the burning andfever of the disease are soothed by pouring bhang over the imageof Shitaladevi. So for the feverishness caused by the heatsespecially to the old no cure equals the drinking of bhang.Unlike spirits the tempter to flesh bhang the craver for milk ispleasing to the Hindu religion. Even according to the straitestschool of the objectors to stimulants, while to a high casteHindu the penalty for liquor-drinking is death, no penaltyattached to the use of bhang, and a single day's fast is enoughto cleanse from the coarser spirit of ganja. Even amongthose who hold stimulants to be devil-possessed penalty anddisfavour attach to the use of hemp drugs only when they aretaken with no religious object and without observing the duereligious rites. At the other extreme of Hindu thought from the foes tostimulants, to the worshippers of the influences that, raisingman out of himself and above mean individual worries, make himone with the divine force of nature, it is inevitable thattemperaments should be found to whom the quickening spirit ofbhang is the spirit of freedom and knowledge. In the ecstasy ofbhang the spark of the Eternal in man turns into light themurkiness of matter or illusion and elf is lost in the centralsoul-fire. The Hindu poet of Shiva, the Great Spirit that livingin bhang passes into the drinker, sings of bhang as the clearerof ignorance, the giver of knowledge. No gem or jewel can touchin value bhang taken truly and reverently. He who drinks bhangdrinks Shiva. The soul in whom the spirit of bhang finds a homeglides into the ocean of Being freed from the weary round ofmatter-blinded self. To the meaner man, still under the glamourof matter or maya, bhang taken religiously is kindlythwarting the wiles of his foes and giving the drinker wealth andpromptness of mind. In this devotion to bhang, with reverence, not with theworship, which is due to Allah alone, the North Indian Mussalmanjoins hymning the praises of bhang. To the follower of the laterreligion of Islam the holy spirit in bhang is not the spirit ofthe Almighty. It is the spirit of the great prophet Khizr orElijah. That bhang should be sacred to Khizr is natural. Khizr isthe patron saint of water. Still more Khizr means green, therevered colour of the cooling water of bhang. So the Urdu poetsings 'When I quaff fresh bhang I liken its colour to the freshlight down of thy youthful beard.' The prophet Khizr or the Greenprophet cries 'May the drink be pleasing to thee.' Nasir, thegreat North Indian Urdu poet of the beginning of the presentcentury, is loud in the praises of his beloved Sabzi, the Greenone. 'Compared with bhang spirit are naught. Leave all thingsthou fool, drink bhang.' From its quickening the imaginationMusalman poets honour bhang with the title Warak al Khiyall,Fancy's Leaf. And the Makhzan or great Arab-Greek drug bookrecords many other fond names for the drug. Bhang is theJoy-giver, the Sky-flier, the Heavenly-guide, the Poor Man'sHeaven, the Soother of Grief. Much of the holiness of bhang is due to its virtue of clearingthe head and stimulating the brain to thought. Among ascetics thesect known as Atits are specially devoted to hemp. No social orreligious gathering of Atits is complete without the use of thehemp plant smoked in ganja or drink in bhang. To its devoteebhang is no ordinary plant that became holy from its guardian andhealing qualities. According to one account, when nectar wasproduced from the churning of the ocean, something was wanted topurify the nectar. The deity supplied the want of anectar-cleanser by creating bhang. This bhang Mahadev made fromhis own body, and so it is called angaj or body-born.According to another account some nectar dropped to the groundand from the ground the bhang plant sprang. It was because theyused this child of nectar or of Mahadev in agreement withreligious forms that the seers or Rishis became Siddha or onewith the deity. He who, despite the example of the Rishis, usesno bhang shall lose his happiness in this life and in the life tocome. In the end he shall be cast into hell. The mere sight ofbhang cleanses from as much sin as a thousand horse-sacrifices ora thousand pilgrimages. He who scandalises the user of bhangshall suffer the torments of hell so long as the sun endures. Hewho drinks bhang foolishly or for pleasure without religiousrites is as guilty as the sinner of lakhs of sins. He whodrinks wisely and according to rule, be he ever so low, eventhough his body is smeared with human ordure and urine, is Shiva.No god or man is as good as the religious drinker of bhang. Thestudents of the scriptures at Benares are given bhang before theysit to study. At Benares, Ujjain, the other holy places yogis,bairagis and sanyasis take deep draughts of bhang that they maycentre their thoughts on the Eternal. To bring back to reason anunhinged mind the best and cleanest bhang leaves should be boiledin milk and turned to clarified butter. Salamisri, saffron, andsugar should be added and the whole eaten. Besides over the demonof Madness bhang is Vijaya or victorious over the demons ofhunger and thirst. By the help of bhang ascetics pass dayswithout food or drink. The supporting power of bhang has broughtmany a Hindu family safe through the miseries of famine. Toforbid or even seriously to restrict the use of so holy andgracious a herb as the hemp would cause widespread suffering andannoyance and to the large bands of worshipped asceticsdeep-seated anger. It would rob the people of a solace indiscomfort, of a cure in sickness, of a guardian whose graciousprotection saves them from the attacks of evil influences, andwhose mighty power makes the devotee of the Victorious,overcoming the demons of hunger and thirst, of panic fear, of theglamour of Maya or matter, and of madness, able to rest to brookon the Eternal, till the Eternal, possessing him body and soul,frees him from the haunting of self and receives him into theocean of Being. These beliefs the Musalman devotee shares to thefull. Like his Hindu brother the Mussalman fakir reveres bhang asthe lengthener of life, the freer from the bonds of self. Bhangbrings union with the Divine Spirit. 'We drank bhang and themystery I am He grew plain. So grand a result, so tiny a sin.' Contents | Feedback | Search DRCNet Library | Schaffer Library | Major Studies | IndianHemp Drugs CommissionWT02-B03-14IA086-000614-B048-214http://206.61.184.43:80/schaffer/Library/studies/fada/fadafin.htm 206.61.184.43 19970122023250 text/html 58660HTTP/1.0 200 OKDate: Wednesday, 22-Jan-97 02:32:34 GMTServer: WebSitePro/1.1f (S/N wpo-0deb)Allow-ranges: bytesContent-type: text/htmlLast-modified: Saturday, 28-Dec-96 07:06:25 GMTContent-length: 58442 The Facts About Drug Abuse Final Report Of The Drug AbuseCounci The Facts About Drug Abuse The Drug Abuse Council, 1980 Final Report Of The Drug Abuse Council IN 1972 Dealing with Drug Abuse: A Report to the FordFoundation concluded that the national drug policies at thattime were not effective and were not likely to eliminate or evengreatly affect "drug abuse." That report, describingthe complex nature of psychoactive drug use and misuse,identified flaws in programs and laws which had been designed toreduce the harm to individuals and society of the indiscriminate,nonmedical use of psychoactive drugs. Public policy was found tobe unrealistic and unresponsive to cultural, social,psychological, and economic factors underlying the widespread useof drugs. The report to the Ford Foundation was issued at the end of adecade of increasing drug use and increasing concern about suchuse. Drugs seemed to be everywhere; a generation of youngAmericans had been urged to "turn on, tune in, and dropout" with a wide variety of mood-altering drugs. The UnitedStates was described as a nation of "pill poppers. "Deeply held public fears were heightened as city after cityreported heroin addiction of epidemic proportions. From suburbanneighborhoods, long considered secure and stable, came reports ofheroin experimentation by high school students from middle- andupper-income families. Thousands of American soldiers in Vietnamwere said to be addicted to heroin. New words andphrases-"pot," "downers," "uppers,"drug "trips"-became part of the popular vocabulary. In 1972 it was estimated that between three- and six-hundredthousand Americans-the vast majority of whom were said to beinner-city blacks and Hispanics-were addicted to heroin. Nearly25 million Americans were reported to have tried marijuana and 10million were said to use it regularly. Millions of othersregularly used stimulants, depressants, hallucinogens, andtranquilizers for non-medical purposes. However, alcohol andnicotine continued to be the most widely used and misused drugsillicit drugs-marijuana, heroin, and cocaine in particular-weresingled out for attention, yet the misuse of legally availabledrugs was often ignored. While various methods or approaches for"solving the drug problem" were presented, confusionprevailed. Drug issues, particularly that of the relationshipbetween drug use and crime, were constantly publicized andpoliticized. Many Americans thought the increase in street crimeduring the late 1960s resulted largely from illicit drug use andtherefore responded enthusiastically to calls for a war on drugsto keep illicit drugs and their users apart. Heroin was labelled"Public Enemy Number One." New "get tough"laws were proposed, and many were enacted. Hundreds of millionsof dollars were appropriated for programs to stiffen lawenforcement, improve public education, and expand treatmentefforts. At the height of public concern in 1972, Dealing with DrugAbuse urged caution and restraint. It called for a climate ofreason which would permit identification of the real risks ofdrug misuse and rejection of policies and programs based onmisinformation and sensationalism. It pointed out that drug useand drug problems were not new but have persisted throughouthistory, not only in the United States but in many othercountries, cultures, and societies as well. It noted thatknowledge about the causes of drug misuse was inadequate, as wasknowledge about its -grevention and treatment. Moreover, thereport revealed much of what was then accepted as fact to beerroneous, out of date, or misleading. The authors of Dealing with Drug Abuse, the sponsoringprivate organizations which funded the Drug Abuse Council, and,subsequently, the council's board of directors perceived apressing need for independent analyses of public drug policiesand programs. They felt that lawmakers and public officials,particularly in the federal government, were reacting todrug-related problems from a limited, crisis-oriented perspectivewhen a longer-range view was necessary, and that theeffectiveness of law enforcement and treatment strategies wasoften overstated by public officials, which led to unrealisticexpectations of rapid and sweeping solutions. Thus theseindividuals and groups agreed to sponsor an independentorganization capable of providing the public with a lessemotional, more apolitical perspective. As a result the DrugAbuse Council was established in early 1972. As of this writing, the Drug Abuse Council has been inexistence for nearly seven years. During this time the councilhas, through staff-directed projects, research grants, andcontracts, assessed many aspects of the use and misuse ofpsychoactive drugs.2 This work has been undertaken with theunhampered view and resources of a national, independent,nonprofit, nongovernmental organization. The council has had resources sufficient to examinedrug-related issues in depth and over time. It began by analyzingthe assumptions underlying public perceptions and policies. Itexamined the accepted knowledge of the interaction of chemicalsubstances with the human body and mind. It studied variousaspects of contemporary society to identify socioeconomic andcultural factors relating to drug use and misuse. The council hasreviewed and assessed laws, programs, and projects-federal,state, and local; governmental and private-which have beenadopted in response to psychoactive drug use and misuse. In pursuit of its efforts to learn more about drug use andmisuse, the council gathered information from public officials,scientists, historians, and law enforcement and treatment programpersonnel. It canvassed widely and deeply the experiences andviews of current and former drug users, of minority groups andindividuals, and of other informed or concerned persons. The council has periodically published its findings on manyaspects of drugs and has sought to bring about changes inpolicies and programs it considers unsound. Through theseactivities, it has sought to provide leadership in the privatesector. When operations began in 1972, a five-year period of activitywas planned. In the fifth year, the board of directors decided tocontinue some of the council's functions for an additional twoyears. Now, as this seven year period comes to an end, we feel aresponsibility to share our major observations, findings, andsuggestions for the future in the form of a final report. This final report consists of two major sections: first, thereport of the directors of the Drug Abuse Council; and second,six chapters on various drug policy topics prepared by thecouncil's staff and consultants. While not every judgment orsuggestion advanced in these staff report chapters isspecifically endorsed by the council's board of directors, theydo form the analytic base from which the board drew itsobservations, conclusions, and recommendations. The Report of the Directors As this report developed, it became increasingly clear thatthe most valuable document we could provide would be oneaddressed to the concerned citizen, not just to the professionalin the drug field. We stepped back from the day-to-day concernsof those who work in research, treatment, prevention, and lawenforcement to begin to address the broader philosophical,social, moral, legal, and pragmatic issues influencing nationaldrug policies and the expenditure of public funds. Thus readersof this report will find few recommendations about theparticulars of program efforts in treatment, prevention, orenforcement. We do not mean by this to suggest that there are noimprovements that can be made in program operations; there are infact many. We have, however, chosen to focus our discussioninstead on the public policies and attitudes from which theseprogram efforts stem. We believe that substantial benefits cancome only as a result of a significant rethinking of our approachto drugs, not from tinkering with the mechanisms of our publicprogram response. This report is a conscious effort to stimulate publicinterest in drug policy issues and to promote greater publicunderstanding of them. By indicating the costs and benefits ofpast and present efforts, we can begin to formulate and acceptprinciples with which more reasonable and effective alternativeapproaches to drug misuse can be constructed. We have noblueprint for a step-by-step solution to the nation's -problemswith drugs; in our opinion it would be a mistake for anyone tothink such a plan could be devised, given present knowledge. Itwould, however, be equally erroneous to think that nothing can bedone to improve the current situation. Since the creation of the Drug Abuse Council in 1972, what isoften termed "the American drug scene" has changed inseveral ways. As a general observation, more Americans appear tobe using more psychoactive substances. Drug use and misuse havebecome among the most compelling realities of contemporaryexistence. Among legally available drugs, alcohol has increasedin the number of its users, particularly among younger people.Among illicit drugs, marijuana has steadily increased in use, ashas cocaine more recently. Although recent research has providedevidence of substantial numbers of occasional, nonaddicted heroinusers, federal officials report that heroin addiction hasdeclined over the past two to three years. Greater changes can be observed in the nation's response todrug use and misuse in terms of changes in laws and publiclysupported programs. In some respects, the situation has improved.Given the magnitude of federal expenditures on drug treatmentprograms and law enforcement efforts-estimated to be nearly $6billion since 1971-some improvements should be demonstrable. Forexample, the passage of the Drug Abuse Office and Treatment Actof 1972 has led to the creation of a nationwide network of drugtreatment programs, chiefly for heroin dependence. As a result,treatment for those dependent on heroin is now more readilyavailable. The federal National Institute on Drug Abuse reportsthat between 1971 and 1978 hundreds of thousands of individualshave received treatment in about two thousand federally fundedclinics throughout the country. However, many more have notvoluntarily sought treatment. Another area of improvement over the past few years is inbasic research, work which has broadened understanding of theaddictive process and the biochemistry of the brain and centralnervous system. More questions remain unanswered than have beenanswered, but recent progress is encouraging. Perhaps the most significant change may be the decline in theemotional fervor that once dominated public discussion of drugs.Public concern is still intense; nonetheless, there is widerpublic acknowledgment that simple, quick solutions to our drugproblems will not be forthcoming. As a result, publicexpectations are more moderated development that may encouragemore realistic law enforcement and control objectives. While we consider these to be changes for the better, thebasic situation remains: Despite progress in a number of areas,more Americans use and misuse more psychoactive drugs than ever.Since in our considered judgment this situation will prevail atleast through the next few years, it is necessary for us as anation to plan carefully and thoughtfully how to handle it mostresponsibly. This planning requires a basic rethinking ofnational goals, policies, and strategies regarding the use andmisuse of psychoactive drugs. The underlying social dynamics andproblems that lead to drug misuse are so exceedingly complex asto as yet elude totally satisfactory solutions; the rationalcourse, then, is to begin with what has been learned fromhistory, particularly from the experience of the past severalyears. The council has several general observations that we regardas of central importance to this process of rethinking, butbefore submitting them, we emphasize again that we have nostep-by-step blueprint for solving the nation's drug problems. Wecan, however, indicate where past experience and current analysisshould direct us, and we can begin to strive toward moreconsistent, coherent, and responsible approaches to drug use andmisuse in the future. The following observations are, in ourview, central to this process. 1. Psychoactive substances have been available for use sincethe beginning of recorded time and will predictably remain so.Man will undoubtedly continue to use such substances for avariety of reasons: to relax, to escape, to enjoy, to worship, todelude, to destroy. At given times in history certain drugs havehad greater appeal or easier availability and have consequentlybeen used more widely, but the essential point is that somepsychoactive drugs are almost always readily available toenable people to achieve what they wish or need for alteration ofmood or mind. As we search for more effective policies andprograms, this certainty of drug availability should be at theforefront of our thinking. 2. While the use of psychoactive drugs is pervasive,misuse is much less frequent. A failure to distinguishbetween the misuse and the use of drugs creates the impressionthat all use is misuse or "drug abuse." This isparticularly true in the case of illicit drugs. For example,while millions of Americans of high-school and college age haveexperimented with various drugs and many use some of themregularly, clearly the majority exercises personal restraint orobeys social controls in drug-taking behavior. To state this inanother way, the number of young Americans who are in seriouspersonal difficulty because of the misuse of drugs is relativelysmall. However, the frequent depiction of the minority who domisuse drugs, especially illicit ones, as typical conveys themistaken impression that misuse is pervasive if not inevitable. 3. While not enough is known about why certain individualsmisuse drugs, it is known that there is a definite correlationbetween pervasive societal ills-such as poverty,unemployment, and racial discrimination-and drug misuse.When such conditions predominate-as they do in the inner-cityareas of many large American cities-the manifestations ofwidespread drug misuse and trafficking in illicit drugs can beseen in their most pernicious forms. So long as these adversesocial conditions persist, -widespread -drug misuse care be,expected. Drug misuse resulting from such societal conditionsaggravates other urban problems, and makes restoring the vitalityof our inner cities more difficult to achieve. 4. Attempts to control the availability of drugsoften present a conflict between the desires of individualsand the aspirations of society. When harm to both theindividual and society is clearly demonstrable, the conflict maybe resolved. When harm to either is less clearly demonstrable, itis less easily resolved. This may lead to dissension ofconsiderable magnitude, involving sensitive questions ofindividual rights and the limits of governmental powers. To stateit plainly, the price of an effective strategy for eliminatingdrug misuse would be perceived by many Americans as too high interms of the invasion of privacy and the abrogation of individualfreedoms. National drug policies must reflect careful balancingof these concerns in order to enjoy substantial public support. 5. Drug-related laws and policies center too often on thedrugs themselves and not often enough on the problems of thepeople misusing them. This leads to preoccupation with andelaboration of the adverse aspects of certain drugs, as ifthey themselves were somehow culpable. Such thinking canreinforce a focus on eliminating or legalizing the availabilityof certain drugs as "solutions" to related problems.Drug policies should instead be primarily focused on people andtheir problems. 6. Too many Americans have unrealistic expectations aboutwhat drug laws and programs can accomplish. All toooften, these laws and programs are expected to eliminate drugproblems. More disturbing, drug laws and programs have beenexpected to contribute substantially to other social objectivesas well, such as reducing crime, increasing employment, orrestoring family cohesion. Such expectations place overwhelmingand unfair burdens on laws, programs, and those administeringthem, and make failure and public frustration commonplace. Ourdrug policies and laws need to be more realistically stated tocommand public support. 7. Finally, we Americans should resist the temptation toblame our drug problems on others. We have done this too often inthe past. Our drug problems are peculiar to our own nationalexperience. They derive from our history and culturaltraditions, our mistakes and prejudices, our societal ills andflaws-not those of Turks, Mexicans, Burmese, or Colombians.Certainly, many aspects of drug problems are internationalin scope, and much can be gained by multinational research andeducation efforts. At times we must seek the cooperation of otherpeoples and other countries in order to try to curtail the flowof illicit drugs into this country. However, the chances forsuccess in these cooperative efforts would be enhanced, in ourview, if they were undertaken with an acceptance that the mostfundamental aspect of American drug problems is the magnitude ofdemand for drugs and that the problems leading people to misusedrugs will not vanish even if the supply of one or two drugsis eliminated. It is against the backdrop of these general observations thatthe council submits its conclusions and recommendations. Werepeat, they will not dispose of our drug problems. However, ifapplied they would, in our view, mitigate much of the harm thatcomes from present policies and approaches-harm that in the mindsof many is damaging in a free society. As we observed above, Americans tend to overlook the capacityfor misuse of licit drugs and overestimate the misuse of illicitdrugs. As a consequence, we pursue widely divergent courses,depending upon the legal status of a particular psychoactivesubstance. For example, some drugs, such as caffeine, are freelyavailable in a wide variety of forms. Use is frequently promotedand misuse largely unacknowledged. Other drugs, such as nicotineand alcohol, are considered potentially more harmful, but theiruse is largely controlled by social attitudes and their misuse,though discouraged, is not prohibited. Actions taken under theinfluence of such drugs that have a potential for injury toothers-drunken driving, for instance-are subject to criminalsanctions, although misuse itself is not. Still other drugs, such as barbiturates, amphetamines, andtranquilizers, have generally recognized legitimate medical uses,yet they also have significant potential for harm if misused.There is growing public awareness of this potential harm, and theavailability of these drugs is more carefully controlled, as, forexample, by prescription of licensed physicians. Criminalsanctions are employed to discourage diversion from legitimatechannels. Then there are some drugs, such as heroin and marijuana,which are considered to be harmful to individuals and society andwithout legitimate medical uses. National policy toward thesedrugs over the past seven years has been a two-pronged effort tocontrol the supply or availability and reduce the demand. Thus,laws are designed to eliminate the availability of these drugs byprohibiting their use, production, or distribution, and criminalsanctions are employed to enforce them. On the demand side,assistance-primarily treatment for heroin addiction throughpublicly funded clinics-is offered and sometimes mandated forthose using these drugs. Public drug policies are in essence a reflection ofprevailing attitudes about psychoactive drugs, and currentattitudes are, conversely, strongly influenced by past andpresent policy. In this manner current policies reflectassumptions and events more than a half century old, despite thefact that many of those assumptions were erroneous or founded indemogoguery. Unfortunately, in the view of the council, drugpolicies and prevailing public attitudes continue to representmisunderstanding and wishful thinking more than sober analysis.For example, it is still widely believed that by prohibiting theuse of a particular drug through the criminal law, that drug canbe eliminated from society. Despite sobering experiences to thecontrary, it is still hoped that more resources for lawenforcement and treatment or more stringent laws will endproblems with drugs. Individuals use and misuse all kinds of licit and illicitdrugs for a wide variety of reasons, some with greater potentialfor harm to themselves and society than others. For example, somedrug use is clearly experimental or inquisitive; individuals wantto know what a drug will do to them, how it will make them feeland act. Other drug use is recreational; individuals use drugs torelax, to enhance enjoyment of a social situation. Still otherdrug use is demonstrably harmful and antisocial; individuals usedrugs in ways harmful to themselves or society. As it is now constituted, however, national drug policy doesnot reflect an adequate appreciation of these very realdifferences in drug-using behavior-yet at the same time mostAmericans in their day-to-day experience are at least generallyaware of such differences. For example, most are aware of thedifference between social drinking and alcoholism. They perceivethe difference between taking an occasional tranquilizer andtaking tranquilizers compulsively, between taking prescribednarcotics to relieve pain and being addicted to them. ManyAmericans have begun to recognize the difference between smokingan occasional marijuana cigarette and being constantly"high" on marijuana. To command informed publicsupport, public policies must recognize these differences in thepatterns and circumstances of drug use. Public policy regarding heroin can probably never be the sameas policy respecting marijuana or alcohol. These drugs differpharmacologically, and people generally use them for differentreasons and in different situations. However, the principles uponwhich the control mechanisms of public drug policies are basedcan and should be consistent. As the public begins to appreciatethe differences in drug use patterns and behavior, some changesin attitudes and policy approaches are occurring. For example, many states have lessened the severity of theirlaws regarding marijuana possession. The use and misuse ofsedatives and tranquilizers are under scrutiny. Responsiblenational organizations such as the National League of Cities andthe U.S. Conference of Mayors have publicly called for newapproaches to heroin addition. Others have urged caution in ourresponse to the observed increase in cocaine use, lest anilladvised response make matters worse. The federal government's attitude about drugs also has beenaffected. The Ford administration's 1975 White Paper on DrugAbuse, which expressed the federal strategy, differeddramatically in tone from the "war on drugs" approachof the early 1970s. Although the White Paper had littleimmediate impact, it opened the door for substantial futurechanges. The Carter administration's appeal for the"decriminalization" of marijuana has providedadditional evidence that change is possible. Because the country does appear to be in a relatively calmmood regarding drugs and a process of rethinking is evident, itis a good time to look to the future. Given the council's beliefthat in the future there will in all probability be more, notless, use and misuse of psychoactive drugs, it is essential toconsider ways in which society may face this situation. Suggestions for the Future. To state it plainly, thechallenge facing America regarding drugs is to determine how bestto live with the inevitable availability of psychoactive drugswhile mitigating the harmful aspects of their misuse. A case canbe made that we are, in fact, learning to do just that. For example, the latest national survey indicates thattwo-thirds of American adults regularly use alcohol and some 13million adult and youthful drinkers are said to be problemdrinkers. Currently, federal efforts are increasingly focused ondetermining the underlying causes of alcohol misuse in the hopeof developing more effective preventive and treatment measures.However, despite very deep concerns, there are no seriousproposals for a return to Prohibition. The lessons of thatexperience were well learned-the criminal justice system couldnot and should not be society's chief agent for controllingalcohol abuse. Instead, attention is now directed at moreeffective public education and health measures. The public seemsto wish to reduce the dangers and risks associated with themisuse of alcohol and yet continue to enjoy the perceivedbenefits derived from responsible use. While no one argues thatwe have been successful in eliminating the enormous social costsof alcoholism and alcohol related problems, current policies arelargely regarded as both reasonable and responsible. Similarly, a case can be made that, with nearly 50 millionAmericans having tried marijuana and 16 million of thesereporting current use, the public (on the basis of opinion polls)believes that marijuana use will not decrease markedly over thenext few years and that society must adapt to this use in a morereasonable, responsible manner. While this usage, too, is seen bymany as a disturbing development, appreciable numbers think thatresponsible adaptation is possible. To date, eleven statelegislatures have removed the threat of criminal arrest andimprisonment for the possession or use of small amounts ofmarijuana. This development reflects an understanding that severecriminal sanctions against the use of small amounts of marijuanaare neither appropriate nor effective. The harm to societyassociated with the use of small amounts of marijuana is not seenas sufficient to justify the use of criminal sanctions inattempts to control it. Another case in point is the great increase in publicawareness during the past ten to fifteen years of the potentialharm of excessive cigarette smoking. Increased awareness has ledto new approaches in education and to ordinances and lawsimposing civil fines for smoking in designated "nosmoking" areas. Yet there have been no serious proposals tojail those who smoke. Since smoking is perceived as at worst apublic health problem, not a criminal activity, more effectivepublic education and health measures are seen as the mostappropriate policy response. These changes are encouraging. Perhaps they offer directionsfor changes in public policy regarding the use of otherpsychoactive drugs. In developing such new approaches to the useand misuse of these drugs, the nation must first set realistic,consistent goals. In this regard, the primary goal thecouncil urges is that society seek to minimize the harmand dysfunction that can accompany the misuse of any psychoactivesubstance, whether that drug is currently classified as licit orillicit, To accept this goal entails accepting factors which up to nowhave not enjoyed wide acceptance-e.g., the continued use ofillicit drugs by many Americans. It also entails accepting thatnot all illicit drug use is necessarily harmful. Further, itindicates that seeking to minimize harm from drug misuse is notsynonymous with seeking to eliminate drug use. If our goal is to minimize harm and dysfunction, then thetarget of national efforts should logically be the harm anddysfunction which come from indiscriminate drug use. Such atarget calls primarily for education, public health, treatment,and rehabilitation measures. Such measures could be moreeffective in reducing the misuse of drugs if other drug policiesthemselves were more reasonable, consistent, and realistic. Theexperience of decades makes it clear that only in reducing themisuse of drugs is there real hope for effectively reducing drugproblems. This is not to say that society should sanction theunbridled use of psychoactive drugs. To the contrary, publicpolicy should make clear society's strong disapproval of themisuse of such drugs. This disapproval will be more persuasive ifit is expressed in terms of concern for individual health andwell-being. This is also not to say that the nation should immediatelyabandon all domestic and international law enforcement effortsaimed at reducing the availability of illicit drugs. Though by nomeans are all drug law enforcement and control efforts effective,it would be highly inaccurate to say that they have produced nobenefits. While many of these benefits (e.g., reduction in theavailability of particular drugs) have proved temporary in thepast, even such temporary gains are welcome developments. To theextent that law enforcement efforts curtail the supply of illicitdrugs in a responsible manner, they should be continued. The problems with drug law enforcement are complicated.Americans have historically overemphasized drug law enforcementand control measures and, at least until recently,underemphasized policies aimed at reducing the misuse of drugs.In so doing we have paid enormous costs in both dollars andother, less quantifiable ways, such as increased burdens on thecriminal justice system, corruption, and decreased respect forlaw and those enforcing it. All too often these law enforcementefforts have continued blindly and repetitiously without acareful assessment and balancing of their costs and benefits. Perhaps the greatest costs have been those attendant tocriminalizing users of illicit drugs. For example, to brand ascriminals hundreds of thousands of American youths otherwiseleading normal lives, by virtue of their experimental orrecreational marijuana use, presents a fundamental problem in asociety founded on principles of justice and respect for law. Itleads directly to suspicion of and disrespect for the law.Similarly, to -persist in depicting addiction to opiatedrugs as leading inexorably to violent criminal behavior fostersfurther disrespect for law. As is well documented, many opiateaddicts do engage in certain kinds of criminal behavior,particularly "crimes against property" in order toraise funds to support their drug habits; but addiction itself,whether to narcotics, alcohol, or nicotine, is essentially apsychological and physiological phenomenon. There are social,cultural, and economic factors which demonstrably influence thisphenomenon or are intimately related to it, but addiction is a"crime" only because we have traditionally labeled itas such. At this stage in our history, there is a clear need toredress the longstanding imbalance between publicly fundedefforts to reduce misuse and efforts to reduce supply. Theprimary focus of public policy should be on the former. We submitthat such a redressing would encourage more realisticexpectations-even public acceptance-of what law enforcementstrategies and agencies can accomplish in reducing drugavailability. The most important aspect of such a change in emphasis wouldbe that public policy would reflect contemporary and foreseeablerealities in a straightforward manner. By placing the major emphasis on reducing the misuse ofdrugs, society will be confronted with the necessity of improvingprogram effectiveness in that regard; the record of the past isnot exemplary. There is an urgent need to expand the base ofknowledge concerning educational, preventive, and treatmentmethodologies and techniques. This means a far greater investmentin basic and applied research and evaluation. In addition toincreasing the research investment, it will be necessary todevelop a national research strategy which can provide directionand coordination to these efforts. Since it is unlikely thatanswers will be instantly forthcoming, this strategy should beapplied for the next several years and assure continuity of theresearch effort. Public officials must also be more willing tochange policies if necessary in response to expanded knowledge.Only by taking these steps can there be a realistic expectationof attracting the calibre of research scientists that could makea difference. While we think such an expanded research effort will producemore understanding and better guidance for educational,preventive, and treatment approaches, certain steps can be takennow, based on available knowledge and experience, to make thepublicly funded response to drugs more reasonable and moreeffective. At the federal administrative level, for instance, thereshould be much closer coordination between domestic andinternational drug law enforcement efforts and agencies on theone hand and prevention and treatment strategies and agencies onthe other. Effective coordination can occur only at the highestlevels of the executive branch of government, whether by aspecial-purpose, cabinet-level committee or by a special staff inthe executive office, because the important drug programfunctions are lodged in several departments and agenciesthroughout the executive branch. Such a high-level coordinating body or staff could meet twoessential criteria for greater effectiveness in national drugpolicy development and implementation: First, it could develop acohesive policy, and, second, it could advise the President andprovide accountability to Congress, and thereby to the public. This concept is, of course, not new. The 1972 Drug AbuseOffice and Treatment Act created the White House Special ActionOffice on Drug Abuse Prevention which was succeeded in 1976 bythe Office for Drug Abuse Prevention. This latter office ceasedto function in 1978, to be succeeded-at least in some of itsfunctions-by a Special Assistant to the President for drugissues, a small staff within the White House's Domestic PolicyStaff, and a Federal Strategy Council composed of publicofficials and private citizens. However, while it thus appearsthat a coordinating mechanism does now exist at the highest levelof the executive branch, it is our impression that this mechanismis not currently achieving its major objectives, namely, thedevelopment and implementation of a cohesive national drug policyand closer coordination of law enforcement and treatmentagencies. In addition to the more effective coordination mechanism thatwe recommend, other improvements in the performances of drugagencies are possible. This is as true for treatment andprevention programs as it is for law enforcement agencies,particularly as they relate to heroin addiction. Again, however,we stress that for such improvements to make a lasting impactthey must be preceded by substantial changes in public policy. In drug treatment activities at present, improvements areboth possible and needed. Some improvements can come by applyingthe new knowledge gained in recent years; others can come byseeking more aggressively to increase that knowledge. At the sametime there is a need to acknowledge the limitations of drug,treatment, imposed by social and economic conditions well beyondthe influence of drug treatment programs. One development that has begun to affect drug treatmentduring recent years is change in the concept of heroin addiction.There is convincing evidence that more individuals use herointhan are addicted to it. Since most heroin treatment has beenfounded on the principle that to use heroin is to be addicted toit, the existence of large numbers of nonaddicted heroin usershas substantial implications. It is also known that the typicalheroin addict, once thought to use heroin to the exclusion of allother drugs, is more likely to use many drugs, some in concertwith heroin, others when heroin is unavailable. One implicationof this is that when heroin is unavailable today's heroin addictsare as likely to turn to other drugs as they are to treatment. The past eight to ten years have seen substantial progress inthe treatment of heroin addiction. Various treatment approacheshave evolved, the most widely publicized of which has been theuse of the synthetic opiate methadone as a"maintenance" drug for individuals addicted to heroin.There are currently seventy-eight thousand individuals enrolledin methadone maintenance programs throughout the country, themajority of which are publicly funded. During this same period there has been a correspondingincrease in the number of individuals enrolled in what are mostoften termed "drug free" treatment programs, i.e.,those based on the principle of abstinence from drug use andusing psychological and behavior modification techniques toachieve this goal. There are currently an estimated 132,000individuals receiving treatment in this type of program. There now exists a nationwide network of treatment programsand facilities none of which existed prior to 1972. This networkwas initiated primarily by federal grants and contracts throughstate drug abuse coordinating agencies to local governmental ornonprofit programs. As a result, federal officials are frequentlyquoted as saying that any heroin addict who wants treatment canreceive it. While this statement may be theoretically accurate,there are two major caveats. First, the accomplishments oftreatment efforts are limited by lack of funding, societalconditions (e.g., the general employment picture), and thedifficulties of providing "successful" treatment underany circumstances. Second, for every heroin addict who is intreatment on any given day, there are an estimated three who arenot. They have neither volunteered nor been referred by thecriminal justice system. While there has been dramatic progress in making treatmentmore available, serious problems remain. Perhaps the mostfrustrating of these problems is the fact that no one-includingthe council-appears able at this time to provide definitive,persuasive answers about the comparative effectiveness of thevarious treatment approaches. The basic problem with ascertainingtreatment effectiveness is that there is no public orprofessional consensus about what treatment should accomplish orwhat constitutes "successful" treatment. Differentapproaches-e.g. abstinence, methadone maintenance, anddetoxification-are needed to respond to the broad diversity ofpeople in trouble from the misuse of drugs. Treatment successshould be gauged by the improved function of the individual insociety as measured by personal stability, employment, andrelated criteria. Treatment for drug dependence need not have asits primary goal abstinence from all drug use for its own sake.To the extent that abstinence is attainable for certainindividuals, it should be a goal; for others, such a goal may beunrealistic, premature, or even self-defeating. Treatment goalsshould reflect the complex nature of drug dependence, whichvaries from person to person. Successful treatment for drug dependence may-foster-such a degreeof stability in an individual that he or she is able to begainfully employed; employment may in turn become a majorreinforcing factor in the success of treatment. It is, however,unrealistic to expect too much regarding employment fromtreatment and rehabilitation efforts since the individuals intreatment often have little or no work experience and few skillsto offer in a job market characterized by fluctuating economicconditions. Successful treatment may also result in suchstability that the individual no longer engages in criminalactivities to support a costly drug habit. In each case, the goalof drug treatment should be the degree of stability necessary tolead to later developments, not those developments themselves.While some may brand such differences as only matters ofsemantics, we believe they are of crucial importance to thesearch for realistic goals in the treatment of drug dependence. Further problems with treatment become evident when attentionis focused on the quality of different programs. There are notenough programs which offer the wide range of assistance neededby those dependent on drugs who seek rehabilitation. Numerousfactors have contributed to this situation, not the least ofwhich is the rapid proliferation of programs which occurred inthe early 1970s. Many weak programs were funded then and arestill in existence. The nature and quality of the clinicalprocess in many programs have also been adversely affected by theincreased number of treatment clients coming to them by referralfrom the criminal justice system. This development has led somedrug treatment programs away from a properly therapeutic functioninto an increasingly custodial role with their patients. Health and drug treatment providers should not have to becomesociety's agents for the control of social deviance or criminalactivity. The primary responsibility of treatment systems shouldbe treatment. If modification of drug-taking behavior, even oflife styles, is a component of treatment then it should bepresented as such. Treatment for drug dependence should beavailable chiefly because people need help, not as a behavior orcrime control measure. Conversely, efforts to curtaildrug-related crime should be presented as such and not mislabeledas therapeutic approaches to drug dependency. For now, pending the outcome of further study and evaluationas well as research developments, there is a clear need tointegrate the treatment of heroin addiction more closely with thegeneral health care system. Drug treatment is now too isolated;the cross-fertilization of new ideas and trends from otherdisciplines which should be occurring is not observable. For drugtreatment to retain its vitality in the immediate future, itcannot remain entirely apart from the mainstream of traditionalphysical and mental health care, nor on the other hand can it betotally absorbed by that system. Our final suggestion on treatment is that we should immediatelyenter into a more active phase of research and experimentationwith heroin, particularly regarding the potential of using thedrug itself in the treatment of heroin addiction. Wedo not know enough about the treatment of heroin addiction orabout what types of treatment are effective to be able to closeour minds to alternative approaches. Through experience we havelearned much about the use of methadone in treatment; we need tolearn more about the potential of similar use of heroin. Severalhighly qualified research scientists have designed a variety ofresearch protocols which call for the use of heroin at some stagein the addiction treatment process. Under present law, theseprojects could be funded; we are convinced that the mostpromising of them should be. This research should emphasize local and state options andflexibility. What may prove efficacious in one setting may not inothers, and what may prove effective for one individual may beinappropriate for another. While we have much to learn from theexperience of other countries, particularly England, heroinaddiction in America presents unique problems requiring creativeapproaches. Thus, our call for research and experimentation intothe use of heroin in treatment should not be misconstrued as anendorsement of the concept of heroin maintenance (i.e., theprovision of heroin to registered addicts). We have seriousreservations as to whether such an approach would provebeneficial in this country. On the other hand, we submit that wedo need direct experience with the use of heroin in treatmentsettings; otherwise, we will not be able to learn what we shouldknow before making decisions regarding fundamental policychanges. just as we think treatment program efforts and policies canbe improved, we feel that drug law enforcement can also beimproved. The basic problem with law enforcement efforts lieswith the drug laws themselves. As long as these laws separatedrugs into licit and illicit categories, there will be anecessity for such agencies as the Drug EnforcementAdministration, with its primary mission of controlling theavailability of illicit drugs. The elimination of theavailability of these drugs is in our view unachievable; still,as long as the laws remain in effect, they should be responsiblyenforced. Earlier we indicated our belief that national drug policyought to be based on the way in which a drug is used rather thanon the properties of specific drugs. This enlightened approach isgenerally characteristic of our public policies with respect toalcohol, tranquilizers, and a host of other potentially abusabledrugs. Society accepts responsible use of these drugs, whileseeking to prevent their misuse and, if necessary, punishing boththose who jeopardize the safety of others by irresponsible usagebehavior and those who illegally manufacture or sell such drugs.However, our laws regarding illicit drugs such as marijuana,cocaine, and heroin do not distinguish responsible fromirresponsible use; thus, under the law, any use of these drugsconstitutes misuse or "drug abuse." Drug lawenforcement is consequently directed, at least theoretically,against all users and suppliers of illicit drugs. This is whereproblems with drug law enforcement begin. It is not, however,where they end. Many proponents of a national policy of total prohibition ofillicit drug use are beginning to acknowledge the impossibilityof achieving such a goal. Revised goals, such as containmentrather than elimination of availability, are now being advanced.Infrequently acknowledged, however, even with the more cautiousgoals, are the attendant costs of attempted prohibition, such ascriminalizing and stigmatizing hundreds of thousands of users andusing questionable practices in developing cases against them. Nor are we convinced of the supposed benefits of many currentdrug law enforcement efforts. It is commonplace to assume thatlaws and law enforcement efforts decrease the number of peoplewho would otherwise use these contraband substances. However,there are reasons to doubt this assumption. Exhaustive study hasrevealed little deterrent impact from the so-called "gettough" drug laws of New York State. This study showed littlechange in the incidence and prevalence of heroin or other illicitdrug use as a result of the new law. Similarly, in Oregon, whereannual surveys have been conducted to assess the impact of thatstate's enactment of marijuana"decriminalization," no appreciable increase in use hasbeen observed over time or in comparison to other jurisdictionswhere marijuana penalties have remained stringent. In fact, othersurveys indicate that the primary reason people have choseneither not to begin use or to discontinue it is simple lack ofinterest; -the existence of criminal sanctions against use ranksquite low as a reason given for not using marijuana. While suchexamples do not offer sufficient evidence from which to draw firmconclusions, they do raise important questions requiring carefulexamination. The most important recommendation the DrugAbuse Council can make in the area of drug law enforcement haslittle to do with specific law enforcement approaches. Wepropose a major research effort to analyze the actualeffects of drug laws and drug law enforcement on personaldecisions to use or not use illicit drugs. A well-designednational study, similar to that of New York drug laws undertakenin 1974 by the Bar Association of the City of New York, couldfurnish much useful guidance in this sensitive area. In addition to encouraging us to recommendsuch general policy research, our years of examination of theissues involved in the widespread use of marijuana incontemporary society have convinced us, beyond a doubt, that theuse of criminal law and criminal procedures to deter marijuanause results in more harm to society than is warranted by presentknowledge regarding its potential harm with moderate use. Thisconviction should not be misconstrued as giving marijuana a cleanbill of health. Much about this drug remains unknown. Researchshould continue, particularly multi-year studies which seek toexamine the consequences of marijuana use by humans over longperiods of time. Enough is now known to warrant considerablecaution with its use, particularly heavy use; use by pregnantwomen and by adolescents should be avoided. However, we alsobelieve that legislative efforts to decriminalize atfederal andstate levels the possession of small amounts of marijuana forpersonal use should continue. States should be encouraged to trydifferent legislative models, the effects of which could beassessed over time, in an effort to learn which works mosteffectively to minimize potential harm from theindiscriminate use of marijuana. The above observations and suggestions aboutdrug treatment and law enforcement lead us to the conclusionthat, by adhering to an unrealistic goal of total abstinence fromthe use of illicit drugs, opportunities to encourage responsibledrug-using behavior are missed. Individual decisions about druguse invoke value judgments seldom made in isolation; peerpressure and social, economic, and cultural variables must all betaken into consideration as we seek to minimize harm and preventmisuse. Public education efforts should attempt toplace the use and misuse of psychoactive drugs in accurateperspective for all members of society, notjust younger members. In order to be helpful in minimizing theharm of drug misuse, information must be credible, coherent, andverifiable. It must be believable when placed in the context oflife experiences. For example, it strikes us as inconsistent toissue calls for total abstinence from some drugs while"happy hours" with two drinks for the price of one arepromoted for another. Such inconsistencies are readily apparentto the youth of our country and engender skepticism on their partas to the wisdom of official drug policies-and of the oldergeneration in general. Many of our suggestions and observations have been directedtoward policyrnakers in the public sector, those elected andappointed public officials who make national drug policy throughtheir actions and decisions at federal, state, and local levels.It is no less true today than it was seven years ago when theDrug Abuse Council was created that the views of these officialstend to be crisis-oriented and short-range. While publicofficials have a duty to lead as well as to administer, there arelimitations to their ability to go much beyond prevailing publicattitudes in matters as volatile as drug issues. The privatesector, on the other hand, can and should play a critical,responsible role in developing longer-range views and policiesand improved public attitudes. The Drug Abuse Council has been one such effort in theprivate sector. Other alternatives either already exist or couldbe created. Any such entity will require the exertion ofprivate-sector leadership and the investment of resourcessufficient to undertake independent research and legislative,budgetary, and policy analyses. Much basic examination andreexamination has occurred and does not require repeating. Withmodest annual expenditures, an organization within the privatesector could help keep the American public informed and provideleadership for the development of broad public support forsensible drug policies and programs. It is our conviction thatthe private sector needs to continue to take an active role inboth developing and assessing public drug policies and programs. A Final Thought and Suggestion. The goal of the council wasstated in its 1972 Annual Report. The chairman said, The Directors of the Drug Abuse Council, widelyrepresentative in personal and professional exposure andinvolvement, are determined not to look to exhortations or crashprograms for illusory solutions or cures. Instead, because theCouncil was initiated and is supported as a private independentagency, unencumbered by shibboleths or taboos or political orbureaucratic pressures, the Directors have been free-and haveexercised their freedom-to begin to learn, and to publish whatthey have learned, about drug abuse and treatment in. a drugusing society. Since 1972 the many publications of the council-and ofpersons and agencies supported by the council-have reported whatwe have learned about drugs, about their use, misuse, and ourresponse to them. In the concluding paragraphs of one of the lastand most significant studies initiated and supported by thecouncil, The Nation's Toughest Drug Law: Evaluating-the NewYork Experience ' it is stated that, First, the use of heroin and other opiates is but one elementof a larger problem. The misuse of all dangerous drugs-alcohol,cocaine, opiates, and other mood-changing drugs, some prescribedand some sold over the counter-all together constitutes "thedrug problem." Problems with so many components do not yieldto one-dimensional solutions. As no single drug treatment methodis suitable for all users, so there is not likely to be a singlelegal approach that is suitable for all offenders. Second, whether or not illicit drug use is for the most parta medical concern as some contend, it is incontrovertibly deeplyrooted in broader social "maladies." Narcotics use inparticular is intimately associated with, and part of, a widercomplex of problems that includes family break-up, unemployment,poor income and education, feeble institutional structures. andloss of hope. The final observation is a corollary of the second: it isimplausible that social problems as basic as these can beeffectively solved by the criminal law. If this statement is accurate-and we are convinced that itis-it reinforces our considered judgment that drug misuse isprimarily a social, medical, and public health problem, a problemthat will not yield to single or simplistic solutions orapproaches. And it reinforces our judgment that solutions orapproaches that might be useful in one place or with someindividuals would not necessarily be so in another setting orwith other people. Recognizing that deeply felt attitudes and establishedpolicies reflect fears and judgments that will yield slowly, ifever, to facts and conditions described in the council'spublications, we recommend that serious consideration be given tothe use of individual state or local option as a means ofattempting solutions appropriate in one place but not in others.Local option could encourage greater flexibility and ingenuityrather than reliance upon an unrealistic, rigid homogeneity innational drug policy. We need to respond to the diversity ofpeople who use and misuse drugs, base all our policies on aconsistent set of principles seeking to discourage misuse, andkeep our seemingly innate drug-using behavior within reasonablelimits through means which do not themselves cause more harm thanthey prevent. CliffSchaffer's Home Page WT02-B03-15IA086-000614-B041-370http://206.61.184.43:80/schaffer/Library/studies/lag/children.htm 206.61.184.43 19970122020118 text/html 22493HTTP/1.0 200 OKDate: Wednesday, 22-Jan-97 02:01:03 GMTServer: WebSitePro/1.1f (S/N wpo-0deb)Allow-ranges: bytesContent-type: text/htmlLast-modified: Saturday, 28-Dec-96 07:02:48 GMTContent-length: 22275 La Guardia Committee Report -- Marijuana and SchoolChildren Contents | Feedback | Search DRCNet Library | Schaffer Library | Major Studies | LaGuardiaCommittee Report The LaGuardia Committee Report on Marijuana Marihuana and School Children One of the most serious accusations leveled against marihuanaby special feature writers has been that it is widely used by theschool children of this nation. These authors have claimed thatit has so detrimental an effect on development that it is a majorfactor in juvenile delinquency. This phase of the marihuanaproblem was deemed serious enough to merit primary considerationin our study of the marihuana problem in New York City --specifically in the Borough of Manhattan. We decided to attackthis aspect of the problem along the following lines: To observe schools in order to see if pupils bought marihuana cigarettes from any peddlers operating in the neighborhood. To investigate thoroughly complaints made by parents to school and police authorities relative to marihuana and its use by school children. To interview principals, assistant principals, and teachers of many of the schools in New York City with reference to our project. To gather relevant statistics from various city bureaus and private agencies. Unknown to the school authorities, our investigators had undersurveillance many of the schools in the Borough of Manhattan.They would observe a particular school for a number ofconsecutive days, watch loiterers and suspicious characters inthe locality, and, under certain circumstances, follow some ofthe children. This procedure was repeated at varying intervals indifferent localities. From time to time the investigators wouldreturn to some of the schools which they previously had keptunder surveillance. Attention was naturally concentrated uponthose schools from which emanated the most numerous complaintsand which were located in suspected neighborhoods. We must admitthat it would have been possible for such sales to have takenplace during the time that our investigators were not on duty,but we came to the conclusion that there was no organized trafficon the part of peddlers in selling marihuana cigarettes to thechildren of the schools we observed. Certain of the school authorities deserve special commendationfor their alertness in singling out suspicious charactersloitering in the vicinity of their schools. While investigatingone of the suspected schools, our investigators who wereloitering in the neighborhood were suspected and treated as"suspicious characters" by the school authorities. During the period of this survey the Police Department whileengaged in an entirely separate criminal investigation received alead indicating the sale of marihuana to children in a certainhigh school. As a result, one pupil was arrested and convictedfor selling cigarettes to his classmates. In the Harlem district we discovered a few places where schoolchildren gathered during and after school hours for the purposeof indulging in smoking ordinary cigarettes, drinking alcoholicbeverages, and engaging in homosexual and heterosexualactivities. One of our investigators, having gained entrance to such aplace, ostentatiously displayed marihuana cigarettes which he hadwith him. The madam of the place promptly cautioned him againstusing the "weed" and insisted that at no time did shepermit any person to smoke it on her premises. A surprising number of school children smoking ordinarycigarettes were noted. A checkup revealed that these cigaretteswere being illicitly sold by men on the street and in candystores in the "loose" form. It is possible that thistrade in ordinary cigarettes is occasionally misinterpreted astrade in "reefers." Interviews with school authorities were very significant, andit is of value to summarize briefly some of the statementsactually made by them. The locations of the schools and the namesof the persons quoted are in our official files. High School. Predominantly white. The principal stated, "The school has never had any connection with marihuana, not even a rumor." High School. Predominantly white. The principal at first appeared to be evasive and did not readily volunteer information, but after repeatedly being pressed with the question stated that the school "had not had any difficulty with the subject of marihuana." High School. Predominantly white. The principal emphatically stated, "I have had no trouble with marihuana in my school." A vocational school in the Borough of Queens. Mixed. "I have never heard the slightest thing about marihuana in connection with this school." High School. Queens. Mixed. "We never had the slightest connection with marihuana in any way." Junior High School. Harlem. Predominantly Negro and Latin-American. The principal stated that there had been a few marihuana cases among the boys about eighteen months ago. His assistant volunteered the information that there had been some boys in the school who had "reefers" in their possession. On other occasions some of the boys appeared to be intoxicated and when examined confessed to having smoked "reefers." He further stated, "It was difficult to be sure if sleepy, perspiring, pallid-looking boys were feeling the effects of marihuana or were just recovering from too much 'partying' or drinking." He volunteered the opinion that since marihuana was an acute problem among the adult population in that particular district, it could be assumed that marihuana could occasionally become a problem in the school. Junior High School. White and Latin-American. On the fringe of Harlem. Principal and assistant principal stated that they have never had the slightest difficulty arising from marihuana. Junior High School. White and Negro. Bordering on Harlem. The principal, because of his short tenure of office, was unable to express his opinion on the subject. The chief clerk stated that marihuana had never been a problem in the school. She was certain, however, that it was sold in the neighborhood. Junior High School. White, with a high percentage of Negro and Latin-American. The principal stated, "As yet we have had no contact with marihuana although, considering the neighborhood, it would not be unlikely." Junior High School. Latin-American, Negro, and some white. The principal stated, "We have had no trouble with marihuana." He was of the opinion that because of the locality it would be possible for some older boys to smoke it without anybody being cognizant of it. He added that he would let us know if any boys were detected smoking. During the period of the survey no such report was made. Junior High School. Latin-American predominating. The principal stated that she had not had any trouble with marihuana. Junior High School. White predominating. The principal stated, "I have had no contact with it." However, due to the location of the school, which was near Harlem, she stated she would notify the Juvenile Aid Bureau if such a problem arose. During the period of the survey no such report was received. Junior High School. White. The principal stated that no information concerning the use of any narcotics had ever come to his attention and was equally insistent that teachers would have reported any such information to him. Junior High School. White. The principal stated that she had never found anything to indicate the use of any drug in the school. Junior High School. White and mixed. The principal stated that last year he had suspected that a group of chronic truants were using marihuana but he was unable to obtain any direct evidence. Junior High School. White. The principal and his assistant stated that they had no real evidence of any marihuana problem in the school, and they do not believe that the drug is used to any extent. Junior High School. White. The principal stated that although she had no tangible evidence of marihuana smoking among the students, she has problem groups that gather in premises where she is inclined to think that marihuana could be obtained if they wished to get it. She is certain no marihuana is used in the school itself. We investigated thoroughly the suggestions made by the principal as to premises where marihuana might be sold but we were unable to gather any evidence of its sale. Junior High School. White. The acting principal and a teacher in the school who had been there for a number of years stated that there had never been any evidence of the use of marihuana or any other drugs in the school. Junior High School. White. The health director of this school stated that any evidence concerning the use of narcotics by pupils would have been called to his attention, but none had been. Junior High School. White. The authorities stated that there had been no traces of marihuana smoking. Junior High School. White. The authorities stated that there had never been the slightest suggestion of marihuana smoking in the school. Junior High School. White. The assistant principal stated that he knew of no marihuana problem in the school. Junior High School. White. The principal stated that because of the publicity given to marihuana smoking she had been on the alert to discover indications of its use in her school but had found no evidence of marihuana in the school or of anything that would lead her to believe that any one of her students used marihuana outside of the school. Junior High School. White. The principal stated that nothing pertaining to the use of narcotics had been reported to him in all the years he had been there. High School. Predominantly white. Authorities, including the medical department, stated that no student had ever been reported for being under the influence of marihuana. High School. Predominantly white. The principal stated, "There is no indication of a marihuana problem in the school." Grammar School. The principal stated that anonymous letters had been received from time to time from pupils in the school in reference to marihuana. One letter was actually signed by a pupil of the school, who reported the sale of marihuana in a candy store in the vicinity. The principal with held the name of the pupil but requested us to investigate the report. We kept this school, the immediate neighborhood, and all candy stores in the vicinity under strict surveillance, but were unable to gather any evidence which would indicate that the pupils of this school were obtaining marihuana. Junior High School. Negro. Queens. The assistant principal stated that he had never heard anything about marihuana being a problem in his school. We had received a complaint about this school and one of our investigators had an informal chat with one of the teachers of this school who, because of her interest in the school children, appeared to be more conversant than anyone else with general problems at the school. She stated that she was certain marihuana was used by some of the students. She elaborated on the subject and recalled that a few months prior to the interview she had sent home five students (three Negroes and two Italians) whom she had noticed acting "dopey" in the classroom after the noon recess. She was not positive they were under the influence of marihuana but was fairly certain that they were under the influence of some drug. A student had told her that these boys used "reefers" and, noticing their stupor, she had concluded that they were under the influence of marihuana. Superficial examination showed her that their condition was not due to drinking whisky or any alcoholic beverage. In this school it was not necessary to notify the principal if a student was sent home. The teacher did so on her own account, arriving at a diagnosis without informing the principal of the condition. There was no doctor or nurse to examine the students. Grammar School. Negro. The principal and the social worker attached to this school stated that some time prior to the interview they had heard that cigarettes were being sold to children in Harlem. We were told of a certain man who was suspected of selling them to the children. The social worker was certain that a year before the interview marihuana cigarettes were sold on a certain street in Harlem to school children, but she had no knowledge as to whether the condition existed at the time of our investigation. While working on another part of the survey, we interviewed a young Negress, approximately 20 years of age, who was a marihuana smoker. She stated that she and another girl started to smoke marihuana cigarettes while attending this particular school. High School. Mixed, predominantly white. The principal stated that he was positive that there was no marihuana problem in his school. High School. Predominantly white. A student was arrested for selling marihuana cigarettes to other pupils. We kept this school under surveillance after the arrest. Although we heard rumors that the sale of marihuana would start again, we were unable to gather any evidence of this. Our investigators attended the dance of the graduating class of this school at one of the hotels in the city. The dance was well conducted and had a large attendance. There was no evidence of smoking at this affair. The principal was cooperating with the Juvenile Aid Bureau of the Police Department in conducting the investigation of the marihuana problem in his school. High School. White and Negro. Although rumor is widespread that "reefer" smoking is common at this school, thorough investigation did not produce evidence of it at the time of our investigation. We did obtain information, which we consider authoritative, that in 1935 a man was offered the concession to sell marihuana cigarettes to the students of this school. He refused the offer. The principal of this school stated that there had never been any trouble as a result of marihuana smoking and he knew of no actual cases. High School. White, Negro, and Latin-American. The director of health education, who was conversant with the subject, stated that the school had no problem with regard to marihuana smoking on the premises but that a Puerto Rican student who lived in Harlem had informed him that he could obtain marihuana cigarettes in his locality. College. White, some Negroes and Latin-Americans. We did not interview the authorities. Observation of the be havior of and conversation with students did not reveal any marihuana problem. College. White, some Negroes and Latin-Americans. This college is located near one of the famous "tea-pads" of Harlem. Many of the students pass the house regularly. Continued observation did not reveal any student attendance. Junior High School. Negro. Most of the boys of this school were familiar with the subject of marihuana. The pupils of the school are incessant smokers of ordinary cigarettes. We were unable to obtain any information which would indicate that they used "reefers." Some students were observed entering a house in which there was a "tea-pad," but we never found any of the occupants of this "tea-pad" to be pupils of the school. The counselor at the school stated that during the previous term there were suspicions regarding the use of marihuana. Junior High School. Negro. The principal, who is considered qualified to discuss this subject, stated that for the three months prior to the interview there had been no marihuana problem. She ventured the opinion that a few cases do arise in the spring and summer. Observation of this school reveals that practically every day young boys between the ages of 18 and 20 loitered near the gates of the schoolyard at the close of the session. Some of these boys were known to our investigators as "reefer" smokers, and they associated with the girls of the school. Two young girls known by our investigators to be "reefer" smokers stated that they started to smoke marihuana while at that school. High School. White, many Negroes and Latin-Americans. Many students smoked ordinary tobacco cigarettes. Numerous complaints and rumors were associated with this school. The principal stated that in 1934 they had an acute marihuana problem but that at the present time they did not think it existed. They are constantly on guard, especially at the beginning of a term, because they get many new students from the Harlem district. We are of the opinion that there are definite signs indicating that there is some marihuana smoking in the school. High School. Negro and white. The principal of this school stated that they did not have a marihuana problem. We are certain, however, that this school does to some extent present an acute problem for we have observed a few students smoking "reefers" away from the school. We have reason to believe that some of them smoke it while at school. The girls attending this high school have a very low moral standard. On the basis of the above statements and findings, we feeljustified in concluding that although marihuana smoking may beindulged in by small numbers of students in certain schools ofNew York City, it is apparently not a widespread or largescalepractice. In the belief that actual facts concerning the roleplayed by marihuana in the production of juvenile delinquencycould best be revealed in the records of the Children's Court ofNew York City, we interviewed the proper authorities on thissubject. On the basis of the Children's Court records for 1939,marihuana is not an important factor in the development ofdelinquency. Contents | Feedback | Search DRCNet Library | Schaffer Library | Major Studies | LaGuardiaCommittee ReportWT02-B03-16IA086-000614-B041-339http://206.61.184.43:80/schaffer/Library/studies/lag/attitude.htm 206.61.184.43 19970122020046 text/html 16531HTTP/1.0 200 OKDate: Wednesday, 22-Jan-97 02:00:41 GMTServer: WebSitePro/1.1f (S/N wpo-0deb)Allow-ranges: bytesContent-type: text/htmlLast-modified: Saturday, 28-Dec-96 07:03:22 GMTContent-length: 16313 The Mental Attitude of the Marijuana Smoker Toward Societyand M Contents | Feedback | Search DRCNet Library | Schaffer Library | Major Studies | LaGuardiaCommittee Report The LaGuardia Committee Report on Marihuana The Mental Attitude of the Marihuana Smoker Toward Societyand Marihuana Most of the smokers of marihuana coming within the scope ofour survey were unemployed, and of the others most had part-timeemployment. Occasional, as well as confirmed, users were all aware of thelaws pertaining to the illegal use of the drug. They did notindulge in its use with a spirit of braggadocio or as a challengeto law as has been reported by some investigators in otherdistricts. They did not express remorse concerning their use ofmarihuana, nor did they blame this habit as a causative factor inthe production of special difficulties in their personal lives.Except for musicians there appeared to be no attempt atsecretiveness on the part of the habitual smoker. This attitudeis in marked contrast to that usually taken by those addicted tomorphine, cocaine, or heroin. The consensus of marihuana users is that the drug is notharmful and that infrequent or constant use of marihuana does notresult in physical or mental deterioration. In describing the most common reaction to the drug they alwaysstated that it made them feel "high." Elaboration ofjust what the smoker meant by "high" varied with theindividual. However, there was common agreement that a feeling ofadequacy and efficiency was induced by the use of marihuana andthat current mental conflicts were allayed. Organic illness wasnot given as a cause for smoking "reefers." A person may be a confirmed smoker for a prolonged period, andgive up the drug voluntarily without experiencing any craving forit or exhibiting withdrawal symptoms. He may, at some time lateron, go back to its use. Others may remain infrequent users of thecigarette, taking one or two a week, or only when the"social setting" calls for participation. From time totime we had one of our investigators associate with a marihuanauser. The investigator would bring up the subject of smoking.This would invariably lead to the suggestion that they obtainsome marihuana cigarettes. They would seek a "tea-pad,"and if it was closed the smoker and our investigator would calmlyresume their previous activity, such as the discussion of life ingeneral or the playing of pool. There were apparently no signsindicative of frustration in the smoker at not being able togratify the desire for the drug. We consider this point highlysignificant since it is so contrary to the experience of users ofother narcotics. A similar situation occurring in one addicted tothe use of morphine, cocaine, or heroin would result in acompulsive attitude on the part of the addict to obtain the drug.If unable to secure it, there would be obvious physical andmental manifestations of frustration. This may be consideredpresumptive evidence that there is no true addiction in themedical sense associated with the use of marihuana. The confirmed marihuana smoker consumes perhaps from six toten cigarettes per day. He appears to be quite conscious of thequantity he requires to reach the effect called "high."Once the desired effect is obtained he cannot be persuaded toconsume more. He knows when he has had enough. The smoker determines forhimself the point of being "high," and is everconscious of preventing himself from becoming "toohigh." This fear of being "too high" must beassociated with some form of anxiety which causes the smoker,should he accidentally reach that point, immediately to institutemeasures so that he can "come down." It has been foundthat the use of such beverages as beer, or a sweet soda pop, isan effective measure. Smokers insist that "it does somethingto the stomach" and that it is always associated with"belching." A cold shower will also have the effect ofbringing the person "down." Smokers have repeatedly stated that the consumption of whiskywhile smoking negates the potency of the drug. They find it isvery difficult to get "high" while drinking whisky, andbecause of that smokers will not drink whisky while using the"weed." They do, however, consume large quantities ofsweet wines. It is their contention that this mild alcoholicbeverage aids the drug in producing the desired effect. Mostmarihuana smokers insist that the appetite is increased as theresult of smoking. We have been unable to confirm the opinion expressed by someinvestigators that marihuana smoking is the first step in the useof such drugs as cocaine, morphine, and heroin. The instances areextremely rare where the habit of marihuana smoking is associatedwith addiction to these other narcotics. Marihuana and Eroticism In the popular agitation against the use of marihuana, itserotic effects have been stressed repeatedly. As previouslystated in this report, our investigators visited many"tea-pads" in the Borough of Manhattan. It is true thatlewd pictures decorated the walls but they did not find that theywere attracting attention or comment among the clientele. In factone of the investigators who was concentrating his attention onthe relation between marihuana and eroticism stated in his reportthat he found himself embarrassed in that he was the only one whoexamined the pictures on the wall. Numerous conversations with smokers of marihuana revealed onlyoccasional instances in which there was any relation between thedrug and eroticism. At one time one of our investigators attendeda very intimate social gathering in an apartment in Harlem,having succeeded in securing the position of doorman for theoccasion. There was a great deal of drinking, and the dancing was of themost modern, abandoned, "jitter-bug" type. This form ofdancing is highly suggestive and appears to be associated witherotic activity. The investigator made careful observation ofthose who were dancing, and found that there was no differencebetween the ones who were and the ones who were not smoking"reefers." Similar impressions were received aftercareful observations in public dance halls, places where theyknew that some persons were under the influence of marihuana. Visits to brothels which occasionally also served as"teapads" revealed that the use of marihuana was notlinked to sexuality. These observations allow us to come to theconclusion that in the main marihuana was not used for directsexual stimulation. Crime One of the most important causes of the widespread publicitywhich marihuana smoking has received is the belief that thispractice is directly responsible for the commission of crimes. During our investigation many law enforcement officers,representing various federal, state and local police bureaus,were interviewed and asked for a confidential expression ofopinion on the general question of crime and marihuana. In mostinstances they unhesitatingly stated that there is no proof thatmajor crimes are associated with the practice of smokingmarihuana. They did state that many marihuana smokers are guiltyof petty crimes, but that the criminal career usually existedprior to the time the individual smoked his first marihuanacigarette. These officers further stated that a criminalgenerally termed as a "real" or"professional" criminal will not associate withmarihuana smokers. He considers such a person inferior andunreliable and will not allow him to participate in thecommission of a major crime. In the period beginning October 1939 and ending November 1940,the Police Department made 167 arrests for the possession and useof marihuana. Classified according to race they were: white, 33men, 4 women; Latin-American, 26 men, 2 women; Negro, 83 men, 6women; Latin-American (colored) 9 men, 1 woman- British EastIndies 1, Filipino 1, Chinese 1. Classified according to age, 12per cent were between the ages of 16 and 20, 58 per cent betweenthe ages of 21 and 30, 24 per cent between the ages of 31 and 40,and 6 per cent between the ages of 41 and 50. During the period under discussion, the Police Departmentconfiscated approximately 3,000 pounds of marihuana. The sale and use of marihuana is a problem engaging thevigilance of the New York Police Department. However, the numberof officers available for such duty is limited. Officersspecifically assigned to the Narcotics Division of the PoliceDepartment are acquainted with the problem, but the majority ofthe officers are fundamentally without authoritative knowledgeregarding this subject. The relation between marihuana smoking and the commission ofcrimes of violence in the city of New York is described by Dr.Walter Bromberg, psychiatrist-in-charge of the Psychiatric Clinicof the Court of General Sessions, in an article published in theJournal of the American Medical Association: (start quotation) In the south of this country (New Orleans) the incidence ofmarihuana addicts among major criminals is admittedly high.Sporadic reports from elsewhere in the country of murders andassaults due to marihuana appear in the press frequently. It isdifficult to evaluate these statements, because of theiruncritical nature. The bulletin prepared by the Foreign PolicyAssociation lists ten cases "culled at random from the filesof the U.S. Bureau of Narcotics" of murder and atrociousassault in which marihuana was directly responsible for thecrime. Among the ten patients, the second, J. O., was described ashaving confessed how he murdered a friend and put his body in atrunk while under the influence of marihuana. J. O. was examined in this clinic; although he was apsychopathic liar and possibly homosexual, there was noindication in the examination or history of the use of any drug.The investigation by the probation department failed to indicateuse of the drug marihuana. The deceased, however, was addicted toheroin. Our observations with respect to marihuana and crime were madein the Court of General Sessions over a period of five and a halfyears. The material in that court is limited as to residence toNew York County, although it must be remembered that theoffenders come from many sections of the country and are of manyracial types. This is important, because the Britishinvestigators have noted in India that cannabis does not bringout the motor excitement or hysterical symptoms in Anglo-Saxonusers that occur in natives. There are several other difficultiesin collecting reliable material, one being the completedependence on the history and statements of the prisoners withoutan opportunity for objective tests or other corroborative check,as in the case of other drugs, e.g., heroin or morphine. During routine interviews of some 17,000 offenders in six anda half years, several hundred have been found who had directexperience with marihuana. Their testimony checks withexperimental results and clinical experiences with regard to thesymptoms of intoxication, the absence of true addiction, and thenegative connection with major crime. Especially is thisnoteworthy among sexual offenders and in cases of assault ormurder. The extravagant claims of defense attorneys and the pressthat crime is caused by addiction to marihuana demands carefulscrutiny, at least in this jurisdiction.... Most of the narcotic cases in New York County are heard in theCourt of Special Sessions, where misdemeanants are handled andwhere indictments on charges of the possession of drugs for useare returned. In the Court of Special Sessions in the samesix-year period, of approximately 75,000 indictments for allcrimes, 6,000 resulted in convictions for the possession and useof drugs. Since neither the law, the district attorney nor the policedepartment makes any distinction between the several kinds ofnarcotics in arraignments or indictments, there were no figuresfrom which to estimate the number of users of marihuana asdistinguished from the number of users of other drugs. A systemof sampling the 6,000 cases was therefore adopted in order tofurnish an approximate estimate of the total number of marihuanausers who came into conflict with the law. In this sampling the records of 1,500 offenders, or 25 percent of the 6,000, were examined. Of these, 135 were charged inconnection with marihuana. From this fact it was estimated thatabout 540 offenders, or 9 per cent of all drug offenders comingto the Court of Special Sessions in six years, were users ofmarihuana. In analyzing this sample of 135 cases, it was foundthat 93 offenders had no previous record, the previous charges orcharges of 8 concerned only drugs, 5 had records including drugcharges and 29 had records not including drug charges. Amongthose with longer records, that is, from four to seven previousarrests, none showed progression from the use of drugs to othercrimes. As measured by the succession of arrests and convictions inthe Court of General Sessions (the only method of estimation) itcan be said that drugs generally do not initiate criminalcareers. Similarly, in the Court of Special Sessions, only 8 percent of the offenders had previous charges of using drugs and 3.7per cent had previous charges of drugs and other petty crimes. Inthe vast majority of cases in this group of 135, then, theearlier use of marihuana apparently did not predispose to crime,even that of using other drugs. Whether the first offenderscharged with the use of marihuana go on to major crime is amatter of speculation. The expectancy of major crimes followingthe use of cannabis in New York County is small, according tothese experiences.(4) (end quotation) Bromberg, W., "Marihuana: a psychiatric study." J.A.M.A. 113: 4, 1939. Contents | Feedback | Search DRCNet Library | Schaffer Library | Major Studies | LaGuardiaCommittee ReportWT02-B03-17IA086-000614-B048-153http://206.61.184.43:80/schaffer/Library/studies/fada/fadafwd.htm 206.61.184.43 19970122023141 text/html 5466HTTP/1.0 200 OKDate: Wednesday, 22-Jan-97 02:31:34 GMTServer: WebSitePro/1.1f (S/N wpo-0deb)Allow-ranges: bytesContent-type: text/htmlLast-modified: Saturday, 28-Dec-96 07:06:12 GMTContent-length: 5249 The Facts About Drug Abuse Foreword The Facts About Drug Abuse The Drug Abuse Council, 1980 Foreword IN 1970, at the peak of the drug scare, the trustees of theFord Foundation decided that piecemeal measures were not enough.As a first step in a major program the Foundation asked PatriciaM. Wald, now a United States Circuit judge in the District ofColumbia, and Peter B. Hutt, a Washington lawyer, to undertake asurvey in depth of drug abuse and to suggest what privatefoundations might contribute to understanding, if not solution,of the problem. In their report to the Foundation published in1972 -Dealing with Drug Abuse-judge Wald and Mr. Hutt said: It is of fundamental importance that man has and willinevitably continue to have potentially dangerous drugs at hisdisposal, which he may either use properly or abuse, and thatneither the availability of these drugs nor the temptation toabuse them can be eliminated. Therefore, the fundamentalobjective of a modern drug-abuse program must be to help thepublic learn to understand these drugs and how to cope with theiruse in the context of everyday life. An approach emphasizingsuppression of all drugs or repression of all drug users willonly contribute to national problems. There is an urgent need for effective nongovernmentalleadership toward a more reasoned approach to drug abuse in thiscountry. A void exists that we believe can be filled by thecreation of a new Drug Abuse Council. In our best judgment, theCouncil could successfully exert this leadership and could have asubstantial and beneficial impact on drug abuse in this country. According to McGeorge Bundy, then President of the FordFoundation, The second important step was to join with three otherfoundations that have shared our concern with drug abuse-theCarnegie Corporation, the Commonwealth Fund, and the Henry J.Kaiser Family Foundation-in financing one of the principalrecommendations of the report, namely, the establishment of anindependent national Drug Abuse Council. (The Equitable Life Assurance Society joined the foundationsin contributing to the expenses of the Council.) The Council was organized in January 1972, but only after ithad been determined that a widely representative board ofdirectors and a highly competent staff could be assembled forabout five years of active service. The last formal meeting ofthe board was held in June 1978, and since then the President ofthe Council, Dr. Thomas E. Bryant, and the staff have beenengaged in the preparation of this Final Report. The Report demonstrates that widespread misuse or abuse ofdangerous drugs-not just heroin, marijuana, and cocaine, butalcohol and caffeine, and a great variety of stimulants andtranquilizers, some prescribed, some sold over the counter-is notan evil that can be extirpated by legislation or other means. Yetit is believed that an informed society, aware of thecomplexities of the issues and evidence, will be better able tocope constructively with the use of drugs. This belief underliesthis Final Report. It is not the function of a foreword to anticipate thefindings and conclusions of a massive study. It would, however,be gross neglect not to acknowledge in this foreword theexceptional contributions of the directors, the officers andstaff and consultants of the Council, and the foundations andmany others who have enabled the Council to apply knowledge andreason to the understanding and treatment of a major nationalproblem. These include: Judge Wald and Mr. Hutt, the Co-chairmen, and James V.DeLong, the extraordinarily able Executive Director of the FordFoundation survey staff, who produced Dealing with Drug Abuse-theseminal study that led to the creation of the Council. The directors of the Council for regular attendance atmeetings, for the information and wisdom and wit that enrichedthe deliberations of the board, and especially Dr. Bryant for thepersonal and professional qualities that underpinned hisindispensable leadership. And, of course, the Ford Foundation, the CarnegieCorporation, the Commonwealth Fund, the Henry J. Kaiser FamilyFoundation, and the Equitable Life Assurance Society, for thefinancial support essential to a major private enterprise. And the Council here records special gratitude to the seniorofficers and responsible staff of the Ford Foundation for sixyears of unfailing interest and support. BETHUEL M. WEBSTER Chairman CliffSchaffer's Home Page WT02-B03-18IA086-000614-B048-178http://206.61.184.43:80/schaffer/Library/studies/fada/fadadir.htm 206.61.184.43 19970122023154 text/html 9021HTTP/1.0 200 OKDate: Wednesday, 22-Jan-97 02:31:48 GMTServer: WebSitePro/1.1f (S/N wpo-0deb)Allow-ranges: bytesContent-type: text/htmlLast-modified: Saturday, 28-Dec-96 07:06:30 GMTContent-length: 8804 Board of Directors of the Drug Abuse Council The Facts About Drug Abuse The Drug Abuse Council, 1980 Board of Directors of the Drug Abuse Council Bethuel M. Webster, Chairman Webster & Sheffield New York, N.Y. Daniel X. Freedman, M.D., Vice-Chairman Professor and Chairman Department of Psychiatry University of Chicago Chicago, Illinois Thomas E. Bryant, M.D., J.D., President Washington, D.C. Arnalia V. Betanzos President, Wildcat Service Corporation New York, N.Y. formerly Member New York City Housing Authority Albert H. Bowker, Ph.D. Chancellor, University of California at Berkeley Berkeley, California William A. Darity, Ph.D. Dean, School of Health Sciences University of Massachusetts Amherst, Mass. William W. Grant Attorney Denver, Colorado Boisfeuillet Jones President, Emily & Ernest Woodruff Foundation Atlanta, Georgia J. Henry Smith Retired Chairman Equitable Life Assurance Society of the United States NewYork, N.Y. Dale Tooley District Attorney Denver, Colorado Eddie N. Williams President, joint Center for Political Studies Washington, D.C. Former Directors William R. Hewlett (1972-1977) President, Hewlett-Packard Company Palo Alto, California Arabella Martinez (1972-1977) Assistant Secretary for Human Development/HEW Washington, D.C. formerly Director, Spanish-Speaking Unity Council Oakland, California Eleanor Holmes Norton (1972-1977) Chairman, Equal Employment Opportunity Commission Washington, D.C. formerly Chairman, New York City Commission on Human Rights Herbert Sturz (1972-1978) Criminal justice Coordinator New York, N.Y. formerly Director, Vera Institute of justice New York, N.Y. Acknowledgments The individuals cited on the title page ofeach of the staff report chapters were a major source ofassistance to the authors in the preparation of those chapters.In addition, the authors collectively wish to acknowledge theirspecial gratitude to Jean R. Johnson for her unstinting effortsin the preparation of this book, to Margo C. Backas and PaulDanaceau for their assistance in editing, and to Norman E.Zinberg, Rayburn Hesse, Sibyl Cline Halper, Carl Akins, David E.Smith, Robert Newman, James M. Duke, and Mary Ann Orlando whoreviewed the manuscripts in their several drafts. Also deservingof grateful mention are the efforts of Marie P. Thompson, JaneSilver, William P. Vasquez, and William J. Haney. The Contributors Thomas E. Bryant holds both a medical and a law degreefrom Emory University in Atlanta. Since 1971, he has served asPresident of the Drug Abuse Council. During 1977 and 1978 heshared those responsibilities with his service as Chairman of thePresident's Commission on Mental Health. Prior to the Drug AbuseCouncil, Dr. Bryant headed the Health Affairs Office of theOffice of Economic Opportunity. He is a member of the Instituteof Medicine of the National Academy of Sciences and has served asa member of the President's Committee on -Mental -Retardation,the American Medical Association's Committee on Health Care forthe Poor, the Health Task Force of HEW, and the American BarAssociation's Commission on Mental Disabilities and as Chairmanof the Interagency Committee on Emergency Food and MedicalService. Dr. Bryant is currently Chairman of the Public Committeefor Mental Health. Erik J. Meyers is a graduate of the Fordham School ofLaw and Georgetown University's School of Foreign Service. Since1974 he has been legal counsel and a policy analyst for the DrugAbuse Council. He is a member of the New York and District ofColumbia Bar Associations and has served as legal advisor to thePublic Committee for Mental Health and the National Associationfor City Drug Coordination. Peter B. Goldberg, a graduate of the State Universityof New York at Albany, has been a senior policy analyst for theDrug Abuse Council since 1971. One of the original staff authorsof Dealing with Drug Abuse, Mr. Goldberg has pursuedpostgraduate work in urban planning at George WashingtonUniversity. He helped to organize the National Association forCity Drug Coordination and is Chairman of its National AdvisoryCommittee and a member of the Editorial Board of UrbanConcerns magazine. He is currently Special Assistant to theDirector of the National Institute on Alcohol Abuse andAlcoholism. John R. Pekkanen, a Nieman Fellow at HarvardUniversity in 1970-71 and a Drug Abuse Council Fellow in 1974-75,has written several nonfiction works on drug, health, andcriminal justice topics. Among his recent works are The BestDoctors in the U.S. (Seaview Books), Victims (Dial Press),and The American Connection (Follet Publishing Co.). Mr.Pekkanen has written numerous articles for Life magazine, Human Behavior,The New Republic, Atlantic Monthly, Town and Country, and isa former bureau chief for Life magazine. He is presently afreelance writer in Washington, D.C. David C. Lewis is a graduate of Brown University andthe Harvard Medical School. He has been a Senior Fellow at theHarvard Laboratory of Community Psychiatry and a Sloan FoundationFellow at Harvard Medical School. He has served as Chairman ofthe Mayor's Coordinating Council on Drug Abuse of the City ofBoston since 1972 as well as serving on the National League ofCities Task Force on Drug Abuse, National Institute on DrugAbuse's Research Review Committee and the National Associationfor City Drug Coordination (founding chairperson). Dr. Lewis iscurrently Associate Professor of Medicine and Donald G. MillerDistinguished Scholar in Alcoholism Studies at Brown University,Director of Alcoholism and Drug Abuse in the Brown UniversityProgram in Medicine, Director of the Alcoholism and SubstanceAbuse Division at Roger Williams General Hospital in Providence,Rhode Island, and former Medical Director of the WashingtonianCenter for Addictions in Boston. He has authored numerousarticles on alcohol and drug abuse issues in professionaljournals. John C. Sessler is a graduate of Rutgers Universityand the University of Southern California and holds a doctoratein physics from Georgetown University. He has been a seniorprogram analyst for evaluation and survey projects for the DrugAbuse Council from 1972 to 1978. Prior to his work at theCouncil, Dr. Sessler worked for the Center for Naval Analysis. Hehas authored several technical articles on a variety ofscientific topics, co-authored several Drug Abuse Councilpublications, and contributed a chapter to The Evaluation ofSocial Programs (Sage Publications). He is currentlyEvaluation Coordinator for the Public Health Service of theDepartment of Health and Human Services. Robert R. Carr is presently Executive Director of TheFund for Constitutional Government. He has thirteen yearsexperience in Washington as Congressional aide, public policyanalyst, political organizer, and writer. Employed since 1973 asthe Senior Program Officer at the Drug Abuse Council, he wasinvolved in drug law reform through testimony before statelegislatures, television and radio appearances, and thepublication of several articles in popular journals. In 1978, hewas appointed to the drug use/misuse task panel of thePresident's Commission on Mental Health. CliffSchaffer's Home Page WT02-B03-19IA086-000614-B049-43http://206.61.184.43:80/schaffer/Library/studies/aus/cannabis.htm 206.61.184.43 19970122023510 text/html 3356HTTP/1.0 200 OKDate: Wednesday, 22-Jan-97 02:34:42 GMTServer: WebSitePro/1.1f (S/N wpo-0deb)Allow-ranges: bytesContent-type: text/htmlLast-modified: Saturday, 28-Dec-96 07:16:01 GMTContent-length: 3139 Legislative options for cannabis use in Australia Contents | Feedback | Search DRCNet Library | Schaffer Library | Major Studies | LegislativeOptions for Cannabis Legislative options for cannabis use in Australia Commonwealth of Australia 1994 Monograph No. 26 CONTENTS Executive Summary Chapter 1: Introduction Chapter 2: Policy goals Chapter 3: Cannabis in context: history, laws and international treaties Chapter 4: Five legislative options for cannabis in Australia Chapter 5: Diversion and compulsory treatment Chapter 6: Evaluating new legislative approaches to cannabis Chapter 7: Conclusion Appendix 1. The medicinal use of cannabis Appendix 2. Industrial and horticultural uses of cannabis Appendix 3. The authors Contents | Feedback | Search DRCNet Library | Schaffer Library | Major Studies | LegislativeOptions for Cannabis WT02-B03-20IA086-000614-B041-436http://206.61.184.43:80/schaffer/Library/studies/lag/subjects.htm 206.61.184.43 19970122020158 text/html 12296HTTP/1.0 200 OKDate: Wednesday, 22-Jan-97 02:01:54 GMTServer: WebSitePro/1.1f (S/N wpo-0deb)Allow-ranges: bytesContent-type: text/htmlLast-modified: Saturday, 28-Dec-96 07:01:52 GMTContent-length: 12078 LaGuardia Committee Report - Subjects Selected for theStudy Contents | Feedback | Search DRCNet Library | Schaffer Library | Major Studies | LaGuardiaCommittee Report Subjects Selected for the Study For the purpose of establishing a uniform plan of procedure tobe followed throughout the study, a test group of 5 individualswho had had no previous experience with marihuana was selected.These were volunteers who were paid for their services. They wereof a low socio-economic level, but classified as of better thanaverage intelligence. Only one of the group came within the rangeof what is considered normal personality. They represented thetype of person who would readily take to marihuana were theopportunity offered. The main group, 72 subjects, was drawn from the inmates of thepenitentiaries at Riker's and Hart Islands and the House ofDetention for Women, all of which are under the supervision ofthe Department of Correction of New York City. There were twoadvantages in selecting subjects from this particular group;first, they could be kept under continuous observation throughoutthe period desired, and second, they constituted an excellentsample of the class in New York City from which the marihuanauser comes. The subjects all volunteered for the study afterhaving its purpose and the part they were to take in it fullyexplained to them. Race, Sex and Age. Of the group, 65 were males and 7 were females; 35 were white,26 were Negroes, and 11 were Puerto Ricans. The ages ranged from21 to 37 years except for one who was 45 and another who was 43.Of the women, 6 had been opium addicts for a number of years. Previous Experience with Marihuana. Forty-eight of the group, including 6 of the women, gave ahistory of marihuana smoking. The extent of the usage wasvariable- for some it was occasional, while others had indulgedin the habit fairly steadily over a period of years. Of the 48users, those who were sellers of marihuana were probably the mostconsistent smokers, as in carrying on the traffic they wouldendeavor to keep a stock on hand. But in any instance, the numberof cigarettes smoked during any stated period would varyaccording to circumstance. Thus one user stated that he smokedfrom 2 to 6 marihuana cigarettes a day, another from 10 to 15 aday, another 3 or 4 a week, and another 5 or 6 a month. Those whosmoked daily are here classified as steady users, those whosmoked when opportunity was offered but not daily, as occasionalusers. (TABLE 1) The users had all been deprived of marihuana from the time oftheir arrest, the shortest period being two weeks, the longest,one year and ten months. They all stated that the habit had oftenbeen interrupted voluntarily and the enforced discontinuation ofit had caused no discomfort. Health Record. The subjects were individually selected by Dr. Allentuck assuitable for the study. A physical and neurological examinationat the hospital showed no evidence of disease. However, theWassermann and Kline tests gave positive results for 6 subjectsand the Kline test alone was positive for 2 and doubtful for 2.These figures are consistent with those of the population fromwhich the group was selected. Of the 12,000 inmates of theRiker's Island Penitentiary in 1940 and the 8,000 in 1941, 10 percent reacted positively to serological tests. Intelligence Record. Sixty subjects (40 users and 20 nonusers ) to whom theBellevue Adult Intelligence Test was given had an average I.Q. of99.3, range 70 to 124. The average I.Q. of the user group was96.7, range 70 to 124, while that for the non-user group was104.5, range 93 to 114. When analyzed according to racial distribution, the two groupswere even better equated intellectually than the total resultsindicate. Of the 28 white subjects examined, the average I.Q. ofthe 13 users was 106.1, range 77 to 124, and that of the 15non-users was 106.3, range 96 to 114. The 19 Negro users had anaverage I.Q. of 92.6, range 70 to 112, and the 5 Negro non-usersaveraged 98.8, range 93 to 101. Although in the colored group thenon-users averaged 6.2 points higher than the users, it must betaken into account that the number of Negro non-users tested wassmall. The average I.Q. of the 8 Puerto Rican users was 91.0,range 72 to 100; that is, they were very similar in mentalability to the Negro users. From the results obtained from theBellevue Adult Intelligence Test, one may conclude that neitherthe users nor the nonusers were inferior in intelligence to thegeneral population. Marihuana Used The marihuana that was used for oral administration wassupplied by Dr. H. J. Wollner, Consulting Chemist of the UnitedStates Treasury Department. It was in the form of an alcoholfluid concentrate, the alcohol content ranging from 55 to 67.3per cent and the content of solids from 22.9 to 33.6 Sm. per 100cc. According to the bio-assay made by Dr. S. Loewe of theDepartment of Pharmacology of the Cornell University MedicalSchool, the strength of the fluid concentrate was found to befrom 71 to 90 per cent of that of the U.S.P. fluid extract forcannabis marketed by Parke, Davis and Company. The fluid extractwas not miscible with water and had a characteristic,disagreeable taste which made it easily recognized. For thesereasons the concentrate was evaporated to a viscid consistencyand made into pill form, with glycyrrhiza as the excipient. Eachpill was equivalent to 1 cc. of the concentrate. For controls, glycyrrhiza pills without marihuana were used.Several products prepared by Dr. Roger Adams in his investigationof the chemistry of marihuana were used. A comparison of theiraction with that of the concentrate will be found below. Inaddition to the concentrate, marihuana cigarettes were used.These were obtained from supplies confiscated by the New YorkCity Police. Each contained approximately from .4 to .8 gm. ofmarihuana. As the quality of the marihuana varied and the amountof active principles taken in with the smoke was unknown, therewas no exactness in dosage. In general, however, it appeared thatsmoking 2 cigarettes was equivalent to taking 1 pill. The minimal dose of the concentrate which produced clearcuteffects was 2 cc. During the repeated observations on each memberof the group larger doses were given, commonly up to around 8 cc.and in one instance up to 22 cc. For smoking, from one to as manyas eleven cigarettes were used. The Active Principles. Determination of relative potencies of drugs having similaraction can be made on human beings to a limited extent only. Thecomparison is based on easily measurable effects on some organ orsystem on which the drug has a highly selective action, but theexisting state of the system influences greatly the ensuingresult. Marihuana effects come mainly from action on the centralnervous system. The type and degree of response of this system tostimuli of various origins vary in different individuals and inthe same individual at different times. When marihuana is giventhe pre-existing state cannot be classified but it has influencein determining the response, and the same dose of marihuana doesnot produce identical effects in different subjects or in onesubject at different times. In general, however, when the dosegiven is definitely effective the responses are of a fairlyuniform character. For this reason the relative potency of the active principlessupplied by Dr. Roger Adams could be determined onlyapproximately. The principles used were the naturaltetrahydrocannabinol, the synthetic isomer, and the synthetichexylhydrocannabinol. These all brought on effects similar tothose of the marihuana concentrate. The estimate of theirrelative potency is as follows: 1 cc. of the concentrate,representing the extraction from 1 Gm, of marihuana, had as itsequivalent 15 mg. of the natural tetrahydrocannabinol, 60 mg. ofthe synthetic hexylhydrocannabinol, and 120 mg. of the synthetictetra compound. In explaining the differences in the estimatedpotencies, the rates of absorption must be taken into accountsince the action of marihuana depends on the amount of activeprinciple absorbed and its concentration in the brain at acertain time. The main conclusion is that the action of the marihuanaconcentrate is dependent on its tetrahydrocannabinol content andthat the synthetic compounds retain the action of the naturalprinciple. Procedure The procedure for examining the main group of subjects wasadopted in the light of the experience gained from thepreliminary study. The subjects were brought to the hospital in groups of fromsix to ten, and they stayed there from four to six weeks. Eachsubject had his history taken and was given a physicalneurological, and psychiatric examination on the day ofadmission. Since it has been shown that pulse variation is the mostconstant index of marihuana action, the pulse rate was recordedevery half hour during the day with the subjects at rest for fiveminutes before each reading. During the following days, through careful observation by theDirector, the general make-up of the subject, his personality,the character of his responsiveness, and his behavior in newsurroundings were determined both before and while he was underthe influence of marihuana. Additional information came throughthe nurses' reports. In addition, each subject was given a series of tests beforeand after the administration of marihuana in order that thechanges brought about by the drug might be measured. Includedamong these tests were psychological tests for mental functioningand emotional reactions, psychomotor tests for both simple andcomplex psychophysical functions, tests to determine suchabilities as musical aptitude and the perception of time andspace, and laboratory examinations to test the functioning of thevarious organs and systems of the body. Contents | Feedback | Search DRCNet Library | Schaffer Library | Major Studies | LaGuardiaCommittee Report WT02-B03-21IA086-000614-B042-117http://206.61.184.43:80/schaffer/Library/studies/lag/findings.htm 206.61.184.43 19970122020358 text/html 39701HTTP/1.0 200 OKDate: Wednesday, 22-Jan-97 02:03:28 GMTServer: WebSitePro/1.1f (S/N wpo-0deb)Allow-ranges: bytesContent-type: text/htmlLast-modified: Saturday, 28-Dec-96 07:02:32 GMTContent-length: 39483 LaGuardia Committee Report on Marijuana - Findings Contents | Feedback | Search DRCNet Library | Schaffer Library | Major Studies | LaGuardiaCommittee Report The LaGuardia Committee Report on Marijuana FINDINGS Rorschach Test Table 14 gives the Rorschach findings for 45 subjects both inthe undrugged and drugged states. The measurable changes on thetest which occurred during the period of drug intoxication werefew and not far-reaching. They may be considered indications oftendencies rather than of significant alterations of thepersonality. (TABLE 14) When the subjects were under the influence of marihuana(either 3- 6 cc. or cigarettes, the number of cigarettes being atthe discretion of the smoker) there was a slightly freer flow ofassociations than there was when they were in the undruggedstate, an increased productivity which coincided with theimpressions obtained from general observation of the subjectswhen they were "high." Without drug the average numberof interpretations made was 20.0, with drug 23.3. This increasednumber of responses was due primarily to the subject's greaterawareness of small, extraneous details which in his undruggedstate he overlooked. Thus, while 17 per cent of the subjects'answers were small or rare detail responses when no marihuana hadbeen administered, with marihuana this increased to 21 per cent.Coincidental with his increased absorption in the irrelevantthere was a slight decrease in the subject's drive to organizeand synthesize. Whereas without drug 40 per cent of the responsesinvolved the entire blot, with drug this was true of only 36 percent of the interpretations. Under the influence of marihuanathere was a mild tendency for the subject to become preoccupiedwith minutiae rather than to concern himself with the larger,more important aspects of a situation, and this implies somefalling off in meaningful constructive behavior. When the subject had taken marihuana there was some decreasein the objectivity with which he sized up situations. This wasindicated by the fact that without drug 92 per cent of hisinterpretations were good form, that is, they corresponded to theform of the blot, while with drug this percentage fell to 86 percent. The drug had an adverse effect on the individual's criticalfaculty and he was more prone to jump to erroneous conclusionsthan he was when he was in the undrugged state. The only other change that occurred on the Rorschach testafter the ingestion of marihuana was the decrease in thesubject's ability to think in line with the group. This showeditself in the decreased number of popular interpretations made,the drop being from 27 per cent without drug to 20 per cent withdrug. In other words, during the period of drug intoxication anindividual is somewhat less likely to see the obvious and thecommonplace than he is in his normal state. As important, or possibly even more important, than thechanges which occurred on the Rorschach after ingestion orsmoking of marihuana, is the fact that some of the most basicpersonality attributes remained unchanged. Thus it appeared that33 per cent of the subjects in the undrugged state were what isdescribed as introversive, that is, they were individuals whotend to withdraw somewhat from the world about them and dependprimarily on their own inner resources for emotional stimulation;20 per cent were extraversive, depending mainly on theirenvironment for affective satisfaction; 20 per cent wereambivert, showing equal potentialities in both directions; and 27per cent were emotionally constricted to the point where theygave little or no evidence of emotional response of any type.With drug 36 per cent were introversive, 22 per cent wereextraversive, 20 per cent were ambivert, and 22 per cent wereconstricted. Marihuana ingestion or smoking served to dilate theemotional life of only 2 of the subjects and shifted the type of1. In all 3 cases the change was actually a very slight one. Thefact that the emotional trends remain essentially unchanged underthe influence of marihuana was further revealed by the fact thatthe ratio for evaluating the individual's emo tional type, thatis, the ratio of movement to color, remained roughly the samebefore and after he had taken the drug, being 2.3:1.6 when he wasin the undrugged state and 2.9:2.1 when he was in the druggedphase. Although the quantitative changes occurring with marihuanaingestion or smoking were not large, there was a qualitativedifference in the protocols obtained from the subjects in theundrugged and drugged stages. Not only was there a slightincrease in the actual number of interpretations made, but theamount of talking and extraneous comment increased. The subjectplayed around with answers and often repeated them. He seemedanxious to get his every thought clearly across to his audience.More than this, he was much freer in the type of interpretationhe allowed himself. For example, one interpretation on Card II read: "Twodogs. Now wait a minute. I don't want to jump to conclusions butit looks as if the dogs were having intercourse and there was arupture." This response was not repeated when the subjectwas retested in the undrugged state. Nor was this individualunique in showing this qualitative difference. The disinhibitionand lessening of restraint which was a definitely observableeffect of the drug was also reflected in the assured explanationsand lengthy tirades which the subject offered on topics which inhis undrugged state he would undoubtedly feel were beyond him.Thus one subject interpreted Card X as "old bark of trees,roots dried up. It's thousands of years old; it takes thousandsof years to do that. I got to tell you that. I got to cover foryou. You wouldn't know about a thousand years ago. I'm smartnow." In some instances the "cockiness" induced byhis drugged condition produced an entirely new attitude in thesubject. Instead of the customary deferential, almostingratiating approach there was now a confident"know-it-all" manner. The effects of marihuana ingestion on user and non-user wereessentially the same, as indicated by the findings in Table 14,except that on the whole the alterations which did occur weremore marked for the non-user than for the user. Thus, forexample, while the average number of responses given by the userincreased only 11 per cent, those of the non-user rose 26 percent. Again, the user when drugged gave only 6 per cent fewerwhole answers as against a decrease of 15 per cent in the wholeresponses of the non-user in the drugged state. The user showed a29 per cent increase in small detail interpretations, thenon-user 31 per cent. There was only a 2 per cent drop in goodform interpretation by the user as against a 12 per cent drop forthe non-user. Only in the loss of popular interpretations did theuser exceed the non-user, his falling off being as great as 31per cent as compared with 24 per cent for the non-user. While thenumber of subjects in both groups was too small to allow ofdefinite statements, the trend seemed to indicate that theingestion or smoking of marihuana has a greater adverse ordisorganizing effect on the neophyte than on the experiencedsmoker, again, as was the case in the study of mentalfunctioning, suggesting the possibility of psychologicalhabituation. When the protocols obtained from these marihuana users intheir undrugged state are compared with those of the nonusers orwith the norms postulated for average adults of this age level,certain deviating personality traits in these users may be noted.The most striking deviation is the small percentage of users whoshowed an extraversive personality. Only 15 per cent of themarihuana users used in this study responded primarily toemotional stimuli in the world about them as compared with 28 percent of the non-users. While no definite figures are given in the literature for thedegree of extraversion in the general population, it seemsdefinitely more than 15 per cent. Altogether the personalitytypes among the non-users show a much more even distribution thanthose among the users as seen in Table 15. Judging by thepersonality types the majority of marihuana users lack socialease and adroitness and are likely to find it difficult to makegood outgoing social contacts. (TABLE 15) Sixty-two per cent of the marihuana users' interpretationswere determined by the form or outline of the blot. Suchresponses require an objective critical attitude unmodified byemotional factors. However, when this attitude is maintained tothe point where more than 50 per cent of the answers are of thisnature the individual has a constricted affective life the degreeof constriction being in proportion to the increase in forminterpretations Thus, as was previously noted, there was morethan average emotional inhibition evident among the marihuanausers studied in this experiment. Since emotional inhibitionfrequently causes intellectual constriction it is not surprisingto find that the stereotypy in these records was slightly aboveexpectancy, as indicated by the fact that 59 per cent of theresponses were animal or animal detail interpretations ascompared with a norm of from 25 to 50 per cent. Finally the marihuana users (as well as the non-users in thisexperiment) showed a depressive outlook in that more of theirresponses were determined by the gray and black colors than bythe vivid colors. In interpreting this fact it must be borne inmind that the subjects were all prisoners and their depressiveattitude may have been a reflection of their present situationrather than of a basic trait. Goodenough Test (Drawing of a Man) This test is helpful in studying each individual both in thedrugged and undrugged state, but group results are not meaningful(except for one finding given below) because of a lack ofsimilarity both in the drawings obtained in the undrugged stateand in the direction of change which occurred after drugingestion or smoking. However, certain qualitative findingsproved interesting and are therefore reported here. In a numberof cases the identical drawing was produced in the undrugged, 2cc., 5 cc., and cigarette state, but the size of the figureincreased consistently with the amount of marihuana taken. Thisincrease in size may have been a reflection of a physicalsensation induced by the drug, rnay have been due to a tendencyto macrographia which was noted in the writing of some subjects,or may have been the psychological representation of increasedfeelings of confidence and security. With marihuana there was an increase in the percentage ofsubjects who remembered to give their man ears. This again mayhave been due to a heightened awareness of ears because ofphysical or auditory sensations or might denote a greaterreceptivity to what others have to say. In some cases the amount of time consumed in execution of thedrawings was considerably greater when the subject was"high." This additional time was rarely used forelaborating the picture but was caused by the subject's alteredmood. In many instances the laughter and joking in which heindulged kept him from completing the job with dispatch. In othercases depression or nausea slowed him up. Although aware of thedetails which should be included, the subject was often satisfiedto indicate such items by a single line or dash rather thandiscipline himself to the point where he could make a carefulpicture. In some of these cases the drawing had attributes whichresemble the findings sometimes seen in productions ofindividuals in a manic mood. When a person is given a sheet of paper and is asked to draw aman on it, the paper and the figure he draws become the situationhe must manipulate. If the figure is well centered so that thefinished product gives a balanced composition, the subject hashandled the circumstance in adequate fashion. The one consistentfinding for this test was the fact that the subject's ability tohandle situations was not improved by drug ingestion or smoking.In the case of both user and non-user the percentage of balancedcompositions produced in the various drug states did not changefrom the results obtained in the undrugged condition. It is,however, interesting to note that 59 per cent of the marihuanausers made "unbalanced" drawings in the undrugged stateas compared with only 29 per cent of the non-users. It may beinferred from this that fewer users than non-users are inclinedto come out into the center of the scene. This carries with itimplications of poor adjustment and insecurity. Level of Aspiration Test In the undrugged state the majority of the subjects manifestedreactions which are usual in the experience of other experiments,namely, the tendency to place their estimate just a little abovetheir actual performance. This was demonstrated by the fact thatwhile the average performance time needed for carrying out a settask (putting sixteen blocks in a box, red side up) was 23.6seconds, the subjects' average estimate for accomplishing thiswas 21.9 seconds. As their performance improved with practice,the subjects tended to allow themselves less time for the job.Such statements as, "I should do better this time," or"I'll take a chance," were not infrequent. Somesubjects wanted to know the best score ever made, and workedenergetically to attain it. With 2 cc. of marihuana there was a slight increase in theaverage estimated time for the entire group although there was noconcomitant increase in performance time. Under this dosage theestimated time was 23.1 seconds, performance time 23.4 seconds.Although the subject actually took no longer to do the job hethought he would work more slowly and in predicting hisachievement gave himself more time. His attitude during the testwas a much easier, more happy go-lucky one. He occasionallystopped in the middle of the experiment to discuss something withthe examiner or call out to someone passing in the hall. Therethus appeared to be a small loss in drive which, though notrevealed by significant statistical differences, was indicated bythe numerical trend and by the subject's attitude toward thetest. After the ingestion of 5 cc. of marihuana the averageestimated time was 23.2 seconds and the performance time 24.4seconds. Here the relationship between estimated and performancetime was similar to that found in the undrugged phase, that is,there was a 1.2 second gap between them. During this drug phasethe subjects seemed less relaxed than they were under 2 cc., andtheir main interest seemed to be to get back to bed and be leftundisturbed. Under the influence of marihuana cigarettes the trend wassimilar to that found with 2 cc., the difference between theestimated time and the performance time being only 0.3 second. Aswith 2 cc., subjects behavior was generally happy and relaxed. When the group was divided into users and non-users the trendwas the same for both. (TABLE 16) On the whole it appears that small doses of marihuana and ofmarihuana cigarettes tend to lower the individual level ofaspiration, that is, there is a slight lessening in the subject'sdrive and his will to achieve. Larger doses (5 cc.) do notproduce this effect. Frustration Test The results of the frustration experiment indicated nostatistically significant differences between the subject'sreactions before and after he had taken marihuana. Again, afterthe ingestion of marihuana there was a slight trend towardlowering the level of aspiration (Table 17), but the over-allchange was not startling when compared with results on the Levelof Aspiration Test when no frustrating experience was introduced. (TABLE 17) Binet Lines Binet's interpretation of this test was based upon theprinciple that suggestible individuals, once embarked on aparticular form of activity (in this instance, drawing lines ofincreasing length), ale more prone to continue this activity whenthe stimulus is altered than are less suggestible people. Judgingby the results as given in Table 18, small doses of marihuana (2cc. and cigarettes) induced thus type of perseverative behaviorin the users but not in the non- users. In other words, themarihuana user when under the influence of the drug tended tocontinue an activity he had started without being toodiscriminatory or controlled about it. The non-user, on the otherhand, showed a curtailment in activity and responsiveness. Onepossible explanation of this difference in effect on user andnon-user appears to lie in the fact that the drug made the usermore relaxed and easy-going and less controlled in motor activitythan he was in his undrugged state, while the non-user was oftenmore tense and disturbed. As was so often the case in thepersonality tests, the effect on the user of large doses of thedrug (S cc.) was contrary to that of the small ones, probablybecause in many cases he was made physically uncomfortable andintellectually disorganized. (TABLE 18) The lack of consistency in the findings seems to suggest thatthe individual's psychological and physiological "set"toward the drug affects his reaction and behavior. Thus smalldoses, which the marihuana user anticipates with pleasure makehim more easy-going and therefore probably more suggestible thanhe would be in his undrugged state, while large doses have acontrary effect. The non-user, on the other hand, appears to beless suggestible as a result of drug ingestion than he ordinarilyis. Wechsler Vocational Interest Blank The average number of positions chosen by the subjects whenthey were in the undrugged state was 13.2. With 2 cc. ofmarihuana the average was 12.9; with 5 cc., 12.7; and withcigarettes, 11.8. There was a very slight but not statisticallysignificant trend toward a decrease in job interest. However, theabsence of any appreciable change in the number of positionsliked after the ingestion or smoking of marihuana indicates thatno real withdrawal is implied. Analysis of the type of position chosen shows that under theinfluence of marihuana there was no swing to the more feminineoccupations, but in the case of some subjects, especiallymarihuana users, there was a falling off in the popularity ofsome jobs which require considerable activity. For example, underthe influence of 2 cc. of marihuana or of marihuana cigarettesthe jobs of detective, policeman and taxi driver were found amonghis least desired occupations though they were not in this placewhen he was in the undrugged state. The trend was the same for the user and the non-user in boththe drugged and undrugged phase. For the user the jobs ofaviator, gymnasium teacher, newspaper reporter, sailor andsoldier were most frequently chosen; for the non-user aviator,doctor, explorer, forest ranger, newspaper reporter and prizefighter were most popular. Loofbourrow Personal Index: Test I Before taking marihuana, the user and non-user on an averageindicated familiarity with an identical number of words, 65.2.After he had smoked marihuana cigarettes, the user's vocabularyshowed a gain of 6 words, the non-user's 5 words. In both casesthe subject's confidence in his verbal capacity was enhanced bythe use of marihuana. Wechsler Free Association Test In the undrugged state the user and non-user were disturbed bythe same stimulus words, namely "lonely,""passionate," "insult," and "sin."The only differences were the disturbance the user showed inresponse to the words "wish" and "murder" andthe delayed reaction of the non-user to the word"pity." Under the influence of 5 cc. of marihuana or of marihuanacigarettes the user was less disturbed by all these words withthe possible exception of "insult," but there was asharp increase in the agitation aroused by the words"suicide" and "death." It appears that thefeeling of well-being produced by the drug tended to alleviatethe loneliness, guilt, and frustration which the subject felt,but it was also accompanied by a fear of death. This may be tiedup with the anxiety the marihuana user always experiences inregard to the amount of drug he is taking, the always presentfear of his "blowing his top," or it may be areflection of the problems which were most disturbing to him. The non-user, after taking marihuana, was also less disturbedby the words "lonely," "passionate," and"sin." His reaction to "pity" was alsodiminished but he, too, was still upset by the word"insult." The new disturbing stimulus words were notthose which upset the user but those which were more closelyrelated to his own immediate problems namely "honest,""money," and "sex." Since the non-user in ourgroup was generally an individual who had been sent to prisonbecause of stealing or a sex offense, it seems it was theseproblems which the disinhibiting action of the drug brought tothe fore. Pressey X-O Test This test was taken by only 10 subjects, 5 users and 5nonusers. In general, the smoking of marihuana brought about someincrease in the number of words which had an unpleasant meaningto the subject and in the number of things about which he hadworried. There was some decrease in the number of things forwhich the drugged subject thought a person should be blamed. Thenumber of his associations with any one word remained roughly thesame in the drugged and undrugged state. Although less inclined to censure when under the influence ofmarihuana, the subject was nevertheless more readily disturbedand worried. This undercurrent of irritability and anxiety seemedto be a concomitant of the more obvious feeling of generalwell-being which is the predominant effect of the drug. Twopossible explanations can be given here for this finding: thephysiological changes occurring with the smoking -of the druggave the subject a feeling of anxiety, and the disinhibitionwhich occurred at this time released the restraints which hadbeen imposed not only on the happier reactions but on all therepressed unpleasantness as well, and things which the subjecthad repressed because he wished to forget them now came to thefore. This was noted when at least two of the subjects had"crying jags" when drugged, reproaching themselves forwhat they had done to their mothers and wives. Downey Will-Temperament Test: Test I The changes in the subjects' responses on this test showed ashift in their attitude toward themselves as a result ofmarihuana ingestion. On the whole, more subjects appeared tothink better of themselves when they were "high" thanthey did in their undrugged state. This is indicated by the factthat there was an increase in the number of individuals who underthe influence of 5 cc. of marihuana or of marihuana cigarettesbelieved themselves to be careful, cautious, ambitious, accurate,industrious, impulsive, enthusiastic, and possessing superiorcharacters. There was also a decrease in the number whoconsidered themselves suggestible or extravagant. The onlynegative traits which the subject admitted to more frequentlywhen he was "high" than he did in his normal state weresuggestibility, poor memory and aggression. The change inattitude in regard to aggression was most striking among themarihuana users, 88 per cent of whom considered themselvesaggressive after they had had the drug as compared with only 42per cent in the undrugged state. This increase in the feeling ofaggression was not paralleled by the findings of the other testsnor by the behavior of the subjects when they had taken the drug.Like the increased vocabulary noted on the Loofbourrow it canbest be interpreted as an indication of the subject's increasedfeelings of confidence and self-assurance. (Table 19) In general the changes which occurred on this test after thesubject had had marihuana were not consistent for the user andthe non-user or for different amounts of the drug. They merelyserved to indicate that when the subject was under the influenceof marihuana there were shifts in his feelings about himselfwhich reflected a prevailing mood of confidence and self-satisfaction. Thematic Apperception Test Without cigarettes the needs most frequently expressed in thesubjects' stories were "affiliation,""aggression," "sex," "dominance,""succorance," "self-abasement," and"play." These terms may be defined as follows:(1)Affiliation: to be sociable, to make friends, to love.Aggression: to fight, to criticize, to blame, to accuse orridicule maliciously, to injure or kill, sadism. Sex: to seek sexobjects, to court, to enjoy intercourse. Dominance: to influenceor control others, leadership. Succorance: to seek aid,protection or sympathy. Selfabasement: to comply, to surrender,to accept punishment, to apologize, to condone, to atone, todepreciate ego, masochism. Play: to relax tension and alleviatestress by pleasurable and humorously irresponsible activity,motor, verbal or mental. In general the frequency with which all needs were expressedfell off after the subjects had smoked marihuana cigarettes. Themost striking drops were in the need for self-abasement andaggression where the frequency of occurrence changed from 2.4 to1.1 for the former, and from 2.7 to 1.7 for the latter. Contraryto the general trend there was an increase in the need fordominance. When the subjects were not "high" the environmentalinfluences most frequently mentioned in their stories wereillness and death and accepting parents. After smoking marihuanathe general trend was similar to that noted for the"needs," that is there was a falling off in thefrequency with which the subjects used most of the concepts. There was, however, no diminution in the number of times thatillness and death played a part in their tales, the averagenumber being 2.1 before smoking and 2.2 after smoking. Likewisethe awareness of restraint and imprisonment remained constant,occurring 1.1 times before smoking and 1.2 after. Contrary to thegeneral trend there was an increased awareness of an acceptinglove object. This concept appeared in the stories on an averageof .8 time before smoking and 1.2 after. The decrease in the number of times both needs andenvironmental pressures were expressed in the stories given afterthe subjects had had cigarettes was not due to a curtailment inthe length of the story. The tales were often more wordy in thedrugged than in the undrugged state, but their length wasfrequently due to embellishment and repetition, and there waslikely to be less meaningful material. In general the storiesobtained from the subjects after smoking indicated that they hadless capacity for expressing themselves directly and clearly, andalso less concern with self-abasement and aggression. As definedon this test these needs represent a conflict between aggressionagainst the self and against others and appear to stem frominsecurity and feelings of guilt and inadequacy. In the druggedstate the subjects appeared less disturbed by this conflict andhad less need to harry themselves and others. They had a greaterneed for dominance, a desire for leadership. This ties in withthe greater self-assurance demonstrated by other tests and withthe increased awareness of acceptance by a love object found onthis test. It is interesting to note that these subjects showed nofalling off in their awareness of illness and death or ofrestraint and imprisonment after smoking. The frequency of thelatter concept was undoubtedly related to their status asprisoners, while the former ties in with the findings on the FreeAssociation Test where the word "death" remained adisturbing factor even after marihuana had been smoked oringested. (1) Directions for Thematic Apperception Test prepared byRobert W. White and R. Nevitt-Sanford, Harvard PsychologicalClinic, February 1941. FINDINGS ON WOMEN SUBJECTS As in the case with the men, when the female subject was underthe influence of marihuana her basic personality structure didnot change and only some relatively superficial emotionalreactions were different. As a group, the women used in thisstudy showed a somewhat constricted personality, and thisconstriction was not lessened when the subject was"high." The emotional reactions revealed in theRorschach Test showed that the subjects in this particular groupwere primarily extraversive, and this remained unchanged afterthe administration of marihuana. Again, like the men, when underthe influence of the drug the women lowered the achievementlevels they set for themselves. However, they did not show anyincreased self-confidence as did the men, either by an increasein the number of words they claimed to know in the LoofbourrowTest or in their appraisal of themselves as indicated in theDowney Will-Temperament Test. In general, the women exhibited aloss of drive for participation in anything requiring effort.This is inferred from their performance in the Level ofAspiration Test, the Vocational Interest Blank, and the BinetLines Test, as well as from their behavior. BEHAVIOR DURING THE TEST PERIOD OF SUBJECTS UNDER THEINFLUENCE OF MARIHUANA The findings reported here have all been in terms ofobjective, quantitative measures. Some effects of the drug,observable during examinations, cannot be quantified but arenevertheless important to the understanding of the drug action.These effects were reflected in those reactions of the subjectswhich were not directly related to the test situation Behaviorwas somewhat different when the subject had ingested marihuanaconcentrate than it was when he had taken the drug in cigaretteform. With pills gastrointestinal disturbances were morepronounced and drowsiness and fatigue seemed greater and moreenduring. Some individuals were so overcome by fatigue that theyworked for a few seconds only, and then sat with their heads onthe table. If spoken to, they made a great effort to do the workbut rarely continued for very long. When summoned to take thetest, especially toward the end of the day when they were almostinvariably lying on their beds, the subjects were overcome withfatigue and were aroused only with the greatest difficulty. Insome instances there was definite resentment of this disturbanceand the impression was that only the presence of the policeofficer and all the implications in the prison set-up prevented adefinite refusal to continue cooperatively. With both pills andcigarettes many of the men had difficulty in concentrating andmaintaining a fixed goal. Subjects often stared vacantly for longperiods and when addressed came back to the test with a start.Many burst into uncontrollable laughter over a test which intheir undrugged state had evoked no merriment. The laughterfrequently affected the entire group and most markedly those whohad been given marihuana. The behavior of the user and non-user with marihuanacigarettes was somewhat different. The user was pleasantlyexcited at the thought of smoking, selected his cigarettes withthe manner of a connoisseur, and criticized or praised theproduct offered him. His smoking took on something of aritualistic ceremony and was done in a careful and prearrangedfashion which varied slightly from individual to individual. Ingeneral the men first opened the end of the cigarette to examinethe marihuana, then wet the "stick" by inserting it intheir mouths to prevent the paper from burning too rapidly. Whenthe cigarette was ignited the men took several short puffs, atthe same time inhaling as much air as possible. This caused thetip of the "stick" to glow and resulted in a successionof low gasping sounds from the subject The smoke was retained aslong as possible, occasionally causing severe paroxysms ofcoughing. Although eager to be "high" the user wasconsistent in his fear of "blowing his top," and therewas always a point beyond which no amount of talking or cajolingcould make them continue smoking. As a rule, the user liked to smoke in company. He wasgenerally satisfied if one friend, a "kick partner,"could be with him. To this friend he would explain his thoughtsand feelings which to the objective observer were verysuperficial. In trying to make a point, and usually a minor oneat that, the user, when smoking, would talk on endlessly and soonlose his goal. He cracked many "jokes" which wereuproariously funny to him. In some instances "leaping"or involuntary jerking of the arms, head, shoulders or legsoccurred The subject described his sensations as floating,leaping, rocking or most often as being "in thegroove." He was obviously enjoying pleasant physicalsensations and wanted to be left to himself to lie on his bed,listen to soft music and dream or carry on "deep"conversations. The test questions were frequently called a"bring down" in that they forced the subject to facereality and abandon his pleasurable feelings. Several subjectsconcurred in describing part of their drug experience ascomparable to the twilight state between sleeping and waking inwhich the individual floats pleasantly and does not allow outsidestimuli to impinge. Just as strong extraneous sensations willbring the sleeper face to face with reality, so the insistence ofthe examiner that the subject perform certain tasks served todestroy his general feeling of well-being. Aside from the testsituation any unpleasant circumstances can serve as a "bringdown." This "bring down" apparently only resultsin destroying the subject's pleasure but cannot do away with thedisadvantageous effect on intellectual functioning. When testing was completed the subject generally lay on hisbed and dozed or listened to the radio. His drowsiness persistedfor many hours. Most non-users approached the smoking with apprehension. Theywere instructed by the users in the art of lighting and inhaling,but they rarely cooperated to the fullest extent? though this wasundoubtedly unconscious on their part. The effects of marihuana on the non-users were variable. A fewof them enjoyed the results so much that they claimed they wouldcontinue to smoke whenever they had a chance. They described suchsensations as "lying in fur," and "floating inspace." Some became acutely nauseous and could not continuewith their work, while others experienced little or no change infeeling, undoubtedly because they never smoked correctly. When the subjects were "high," particularly in thecase of the non- user, there was a general loss of inhibition andlessening of many social restraints which had previously beenexercised. Thus, all the men talked much more freely, confrontedeach other more directly, and manifested a state of well-being attimes amounting to euphoria. They were much more confiding?talked spontaneously about love and sexual affairs, and in twoinstances exposed themselves and masturbated. Although there was an undeniable increase in overt sexinterest following the ingestion of marihuana, it seems probablethat this interest was not the result of direct sexualstimulation but rather a manifestation of a falling off ininhibiting factors. This sex interest seems to have been dueprimarily to the fact that these men had been imprisoned forvarying periods and had not had access to women. It is not at allcertain that under free conditions or with different subjectsthis behavior would have been manifested. In any case, thebehavior of these prisoners was more like that which any mandeprived of sexual activity for a long period of time woulddisplay under a releasing stimulus and not at all like thebehavior shown at marihuana "tea-pads." Contents | Feedback | Search DRCNet Library | Schaffer Library | Major Studies | LaGuardiaCommittee Report WT02-B03-22IA086-000614-B042-258http://206.61.184.43:80/schaffer/Library/studies/ledain/NONMED.HTM 206.61.184.43 19970122020559 text/html 5933HTTP/1.0 200 OKDate: Wednesday, 22-Jan-97 02:05:42 GMTServer: WebSitePro/1.1f (S/N wpo-0deb)Allow-ranges: bytesContent-type: text/htmlLast-modified: Saturday, 28-Dec-96 07:01:16 GMTContent-length: 5716 Canadian Government Commission - Table of Contents Contents | Feedback | Search DRCNet Library | Schaffer Library | Major Studies The Le Dain Commission Report The Report of the Canadian GovernmentCommission of Inquiry into the Non-Medical Use of Drugs This report, the largest study ever conducted by theGovernment of Canada, is coming soon to these pages. CONTENTS Chapter 1 - THE COMMISSION'SINTERPRETATION OF ITS TASK The Commission's Terms of References The Implications of the Terms of Reference Methods of Inquiry The Role of the Interim Report Staff and Research Chapter 2 - THE DRUGS AND THEIREFFECTS Introduction The Role of Science The Classification of Drugs Psychological Considerations Pharmacological Considerations Tolerance and Dependence Scientific Methods A Review of Selected Drugs Barbiturates Alcohol Minor Tranquillizers and Other Drugs Amphetamines LSD Cannabis Some Cannabis Studies of Current Significance I. The 'La Guardia Report' (1944) II. Isbell et al (1967) III. Weil, Zinberg and Nelsen (1969) IV. Jones and Stone (1969) V. Clark and Nakashima (1968) VI. Crancer et al (1969) VII. Robins et al (1969) VIII. ARF's Marijuana Users Study (1970) IX. Report of the Indian Hemp Drugs Commission (1894) Opiate Narcotics Volatile Solvents References and Selected Bibliography Chapter 3 - THE EXTENT AND PATTERNS OF NON-MEDICAL DRUG USEIN CANADA Introduction Alcohol Barbiturates and Tranquillizers The Barbiturates The Minor Tranquillizers The Amphetamines The 'Speed' Phenomenon LSD and Other Strong Hallucinogens Cannabis Opiate Narcotics Solvents References Chapter 4 - SOME CAUSES OF NON-MEDICAL DRUG USE References Chapter 5 - PRESENT CANADIAN POLICY - THE LAW Introduction Law and Law Enforcement Some Historical Background International Framework Constitutional Framework Federal Legislation and its Enforcement The Statutes and Administrative Regulations The Role of Possession and Possessional Offences Burden of Proof The Definition of Trafficking Methods of Enforcement Sentencing Policy Empirical Study of Law Enforcement and Correctional System References Chapter 6 - THE ISSUES - SOME INTERIM RECOMMENDATIONS Introduction The Effects of the Drugs General Cannabis LSD Amphetamines Multiple Drug Use Drugs and Crime Extent and Patterns of Non-Medical Drug Use Causes of Non-Medical Drug Use Social Response Research, Information and Education The Law Treatment and Supportive Services Prescribing Practices and Controls Disagreement by M.-A. Bertrand References Appendices: APPENDIX A. Submissions to the Commission APPENDIX B. Letters from Private Citizens APPENDIX C. Commissioners and Staff APPENDIX D. Some Surveys of Drug Use Among Canadian HighSchool and University Students APPENDIX E. Current Research on Cannabis and Other Drugs APPENDIX F. Innovative Services GLOSSARY OF SCIENTIFIC AND 'TECHNICAL TERMS Contents | Feedback | Search DRCNet Library | Schaffer Library | Major StudiesWT02-B03-23IA087-000632-B015-298http://206.61.184.43:80/schaffer/Library/studies/ledain/nonmed1.htm 206.61.184.43 19970122091356 text/html 8025HTTP/1.0 200 OKDate: Wednesday, 22-Jan-97 09:13:48 GMTServer: WebSitePro/1.1f (S/N wpo-0deb)Allow-ranges: bytesContent-type: text/htmlLast-modified: Saturday, 28-Dec-96 07:01:12 GMTContent-length: 7808 Canadian Government Commission of Inquiry - Table ofContents Contents | Feedback | Search DRCNet Library | Schaffer Library | Major Studies THE NON-MEDICAL USE OF DRUGS Interim Report of the Canadian Government Commission ofInquiry CONTENTS Chapter 1. THE COMMISSION'SINTERPRETATION OF ITS TASK The Commission's Terms of References The Implications of the Terms of Reference Methods of Inquiry The Role of the Interim Report Staff and Research Chapter 2. THE DRUGS AND THEIREFFECTS 29 Introduction The Role of Science The Classification of Drugs Psychological Considerations Pharmacological Considerations Tolerance and Dependence Scientific Methods A Review of Selected Drugs Barbiturates Medical Use Administration, Absorption, Distribution and PhysiologicalFate Psychological Effects Physiological Effects Tolerance and Dependence Barbiturates and Other Drugs Alcohol Medical Use Administration, Absorption, Distribution and PhysiologicalFate Short-Term Effects Long-Term Effects Tolerance and Dependence Alcohol and Other Drugs Minor Tranquillizers Medical Use Administration, Absorption, Distribution, and PhysiologicalFate Psychological Effects Physiological Effects Tolerance and Dependence Minor Tranquillizers and Other Drugs Amphetamines Medical Use Administration, Absorption, Distribution and PhysiologicalFate Effects Moderate-Dose Effects Tolerance and Dependence with Moderate Doses High-Dose Effects High-Dose Dependency 'Speed Kills' Amphetamines and Other Drugs LSD Medical Use Administration, Absorption, Distribution and PhysiologicalFate Psychological Effects Physiological Effects Tolerance and Dependence LSD and Other Drugs Cannabis Medical Use Administration, Absorption, Distribution and PhysiologicalFate Effects of Cannabis Overview of Effects Physiological Effects Psychological Effects Tolerance and Dependence Cannabis and Other Drugs Initiation of Cannabis Use Some Cannabis Studies of Current Significance I. The 'La Guardia Report' (1944) II. Isbell et al (1967) III. Weil, Zinberg and Nelsen (1969) IV. Jones and Stone (1969) V. Clark and Nakashima (1968) VI. Crancer et al (1969) VII. Robins et al (1969) VIII. ARF's Marijuana Users Study (1970) IX. Report of the Indian Hemp Drugs Commission (1894) Opiate Narcotics Medical Use Administration, Absorption, Distribution and PhysiologicalFate Physiological Effects Psychological Effects Tolerance and Dependence Opiate Narcotics and Crime The Development of Dependence Opiate Narcotics and Other Drugs Volatile Solvents Medical Use Administration, Absorption, Distribution and PhysiologicalFate Effects Tolerance and Dependence Solvents and Other Drugs References and Selected Bibliography Chapter 3. THE EXTENT AND PATTERNS OF NON-MEDICAL DRUG USE INCANADA Introduction Alcohol Barbiturates and Tranquillizers The Barbiturates The Minor Tranquillizers The Amphetamines The 'Speed' Phenomenon LSD and Other Strong Hallucinogens Cannabis Opiate Narcotics Solvents References Chapter 4. SOME CAUSES OFNON-MEDICAL DRUG USE References Chapter 5. PRESENT CANADIAN POLICY - THE LAW Introduction Law and Law Enforcement Some Historical Background International Framework Constitutional Framework Federal Legislation and its Enforcement The Statutes and Administrative Regulations The Role of Possession and Possessional Offences Burden of Proof The Definition of Trafficking Methods of Enforcement Sentencing Policy Empirical Study of Law Enforcement and Correctional System References Chapter 6. THE ISSUES - SOME INTERIM RECOMMENDATIONS Introduction The Effects of the Drugs General Cannabis LSD Amphetamines Multiple Drug Use Drugs and Crime Extent and Patterns of Non-Medical Drug Use Causes of Non-Medical Drug Use Social Response Research, Information and Education The Law Treatment and Supportive Services Prescribing Practices and Controls Disagreement by M.-A. Bertrand References Appendices: APPENDIX A. Submissions to the Commission APPENDIX B. Letters from Private Citizens APPENDIX C. Commissioners and Staff APPENDIX D. Some Surveys of Drug Use Among CanadianHigh School and University Students APPENDIX E. Current Research on Cannabis and OtherDrugs APPENDIX F. Innovative Services GLOSSARY OF SCIENTIFIC AND TECHNICAL TERMS Contents | Feedback | Search DRCNet Library | Schaffer Library | Major Studies WT02-B03-24IA086-000614-B043-2http://206.61.184.43:80/schaffer/Library/studies/ledain/nonmed2.htm 206.61.184.43 19970122020738 text/html 52266HTTP/1.0 200 OKDate: Wednesday, 22-Jan-97 02:07:10 GMTServer: WebSitePro/1.1f (S/N wpo-0deb)Allow-ranges: bytesContent-type: text/htmlLast-modified: Saturday, 28-Dec-96 07:00:58 GMTContent-length: 52048 Canadian Government Commission - Drugs and Their Effects Contents | Feedback | Search DRCNet Library | Schaffer Library | Major Studies Canadian Government Commission ofInquiry CHAPTER TWO : THE DRUGS AND THEIR EFFECTS INTRODUCTION 20. The primary purpose of this chapter is to review inpreliminary fashion the current scientific knowledge of certainpsychotropic drugs used non-medically in Canada. In addition,this section will introduce a few basic concepts which may behelpful to the understanding of some of the potentials andlimitations of the scientific method as applied to the study ofhuman behaviour and drugs.* Psychopharmacology, the branch ofscience specifically concerned with these issues, can be definedas the study of the interaction of drugs with ongoingpsychological and behavioural activity. A certain amount of the current controversy and lack ofcommunication regarding the 'drug problem' has been attributed tothe multitude of meanings that the term 'drug' has to differentpeople, and to the often arbitrary way in which our societydefines, and endeavours to solve, the problems arising from man'spersistent use of chemical substances to alter his existence. Tosome people the word 'drug' means a medicine used in theprevention, diagnosis, of treatment of an abnormal orpathological condition. In other situations, it is often used torefer only to illegal or socially disapproved substances. Someindividuals employ the word in a manner suggesting dependence oraddiction, regardless of whether it refers to some chemicalsubstance or to other preoccupations such as television, music,books, or sports and games. Some consider alcohol, tea and coffeeas drugs, while to others these are simply normal beverages notto be confused with the more foreign and unfamiliar substancesviewed as drugs. Furthermore, the terms 'drug' and 'narcotic' aregiven special meanings in legal areas. * A glossary of technical terms, as used in this report, ispresented at the end of this volume. Even scientists frequently disagree as to the precisedefinition of the term 'drug'. Modell164 has suggested a comprehensive pharmacologicaldefinition of drugs which the Commission has adopted. As noted inChapter One, a drug is considered to be any substancethat by its chemical nature alters structure or function in theliving organism. Modell observed that: Drug action is therefore a general biological phenomenon ...pharmacologic effects are exerted by foods, vitamins, hormones,microbial metabolites, plants, snake venoms, stings, products ofdecay, air pollutants, pesticides, minerals, synthetic chemicals,virtually all foreign materials (very few are completely inert)and many materials normally in the body. While this interpretation may be too broad for certainpractical purposes, it provides some perspective into theubiquitous nature of our internal and external chemicalenvironment, and the complexity of the question of human druguse. The Commission's primary concern is focused on the use andeffects of drugs taken for their psychotropic or psychoactive propertiesas defined by their capacity to alter sensation, mood,consciousness or other psychological or behavioural functions. 21. The use of psychoactive drugs seems to be an almostuniversal phenomenon and has apparently occurred throughoutrecorded history, in almost all societies. Some scholars havesuggested that this use of drugs may have been among the earliestbehavioural characteristics distinguishing man from the otheranimals. Blum, in the United States Task Force Report (1967),has stated:27 Mind-altering drug use is common to mankind. Such drugs havebeen employed for millennia in almost all cultures. In our workwe have been able to identify only a few societies in the worldtoday where no mind-altering drugs are used; these are small andisolated cultures. Our own society puts great stress onmind-altering drugs as desirable products which are used in manyacceptable ways (under medical supervision, as part of the familyhome remedies, in self-medication, in social use [alcohol, teaparties, coffee klatches, etc.] and in private use [cigarettes,etc.] ). In terms of drug use, 'the rarest or most abnormal formof behaviour is not to take any mind-altering drugs at all.... Ifone is to use the term 'drug user', it applies to nearly all ofus. TheRole of Science 22. It has been suggested that the potential role of sciencein the solution of the 'drug problem' is to provide informationto better enable individuals and society to make informed anddiscriminating decisions regarding the availability and use ofparticular drugs. Unfortunately, considerable disparity oftenexists between the need for such information and the capacity ofscience to acquire and communicate it. Helen Nowlis has noted: 172 There are many reasons why the 'facts' invoked innon-scientific discussions of drugs are often not facts at all.They may be second or third-hand quotations of statementsattributed to scientists. There is a readiness on the part ofmany to accept as 'scientific fact' any statement made by, orattributed to, someone labelled as scientist, whether it is astatement based on research, on uncontrolled observation, ormerely on personal opinion. While science may be able to serve as a useful guideline andsource of information, science itself is not a policy-makingprocess, but merely a practical system designed to explore andtest notions of a certain abstract nature. Even though the aim ofscience is to maximize objectivity, the interpretation andapplication of scientific data is usually a subjective ventureregardless of the controls maintained in the formal analyses. Thepractical use of such information in the social sphere oftenentails economic, legal, philosophical and moral issues which arenot amenable to scientific analysis as we know it today. Even though considerable progress has been made in advancingour knowledge of biology, science has provided only a minimalunderstanding of the essential nature of psychological andbehavioural functions and their relationship to underlyingphysiological processes. Consequently, psychopharmacology todaymust be content with exploring the interaction of chemicals(often with certain identified physical characteristics) with alargely unknown largely unknown human psychobiological system ofenormous complexity. TheClassification of Drugs 23. Drug classifications, based on a variety of differentconsiderations have been developed and there appears to be littlegeneral agreement as to the optimal scheme for ordering theuniverse of biologically active substances. For example, drugsmight be organized according to chemical structure,clinical-therapeutic use, potential health hazards, liability tonon-medical use, public availability and legality, effects onspecific neural or other physiological systems, or influence oncertain psychological and behavioural processes. Theclassification systems developed from these different approachesmay show considerable overlap, although there are often strikingincongruities. For example, some drugs which appear very similarin chemical structure may be quite different in pharmacologicalactivity and vice-versa. The most useful organization depends onthe intended use of the classifications. Since our major concern here is with the effects ofpsychologically active substances, our interim drugclassification system is based primarily on general psychologicaland pharmacological considerations. In Table I eight majorclasses are presented along with some examples of drugs from eachgroup. While the categories are not considered to be exhaustive,the general system is applicable to the majority of drugs usedfor their psychological effects. Since the effects of drugsdepend on a vast number of psychological and physiologicalcomponents, many of which seem unpredictable, these categoriesare to some extent based on a typical reaction by an averagesubject to a common dose. Large variations in any of variousfactors can greatly alter the effects and may reduce thereliability of the descriptions. CLASSIFICATION OF MAJOR PSYCHOACTIVE DRUGS I - Sedatives and Hypnotics (a) Barbiturates - e.g., Verpnal* (barbital) Seconal* (secobarbital) Nembutal* (pentobarbital) Minor tranquilizers - e.g., Librium* (chlordiazepoxide) Valium* (diazepam) Doriden* (glutethimide) Mittown* (meprobamate) Others - e.g., bromides, alcohol (ethanol), paraldehyde, chloral hydrate,antihistamines (e.g., Gravol*), anticholinergics (e.g., datura stramonium, atropine,scopolamine [Sominex* and Compoz*]) II - Stimulants (a) Amphetamines - e.g., Benzedrine* (amphetamine) Dexedrine* (dextroamphetamine) Methedrine* (methamphetamine) Others - e.g., Ritalin* (methylphenidate), Meratran* (pipradol), Preludin*(phenmetrazine), cocaine, ephedrine, caffeine (coffee, tea andcola drinks), nicotine (tobacco), khat III - Psychedelics and Hallucinogens (b) LSD (lysergic acid diethylamide-25, lysergide) Cannabis (marijuana, hashish) THC (tetrahydrocannabinol) Mescaline (peyote) Psilocybin DMT (dimethyltryptamine) DET (diethyltryptamine) DOM (STP, dimethoxymethamphetamine), MDA (methylenedioxyamphetamine ) MMDA (methoxymethylenedioxyamphetamine ) LBJ (methylipiperidylbenzilate) PCP (Sernyl*, phencyclidine) IV - Opiate Narcotics (a) Opium (e.g. Paregoric*, Pantopon*) Heroin (diacetylmorphine) Morphine Codeine (methoxymorphine) Synthetics -e.g., Deremol* (pethidine) Alvodine* (piminodine) Dolophine* (methadone) V - Volatile Solvents (b) Sources: Glue, gasoline, paint thinner, nail polish,nail polish remover, lighter and cleaning fluid, spray cans, etc. Active agents: Toluene, acetone, benzene, naphtha,trichloroethylene, ether, chloroform, amyl nitrate, nitrousoxide, freon, etc. VI - Non-Narcotic Analgesics (a) Aspirin* (acetylsacylic acid) Phenacetin* (acetophenetidin) VII - Clinical Anti-Depressants (c) Monoamine oxidase (MAO) inhibitors - e.g., Nardil* (Phenezine) Tricyclics - e.g., Trofanil* (Imipramine) VIII - Major Tranquillizers (c) Phenothiazines - e.g., Largactil * (chlopromazine) Rauwolfia alkaloids, (snake root) - e.g., Serpasil* (reserpine) Butyrophenones - e.g., Haldol* (haloperidol) Thioxanthenes - e.g., Taractan* (chlorprothixene) (a) Used medically and non-medically. (b) Little or no medical use. (c) Wide medical use, and little or no non-medical use * Registered Trade Name 24. The sedatives and hypnotics (e.g., alcohol,barbiturates, 'sleeping pills' and minor tranquillizers)generally decrease central nervous system (CNS) arousal (althoughsome psychological stimulation may result at low doses). Most ofthese drugs are used medically to reduce anxiety and tension, toproduce general sedation and, at higher doses, sleep. Theanticholinergic substances (e.g., belladonna alkaloids) are oftenused as sedatives at low doses although larger amounts mayproduce excitation and delirium. 25. The stimulants (e.g., amphetamines or 'speed','diet' and 'pep pills', caffeine, and cocaine) generally suppressappetite, increase activity, alertness, tension and general CNSarousal, and, at higher doses, block sleep. Tobacco (nicotine andcoal tars) is usually considered a physiological stimulantalthough a variety of other effects are not uncommon. 26. The third group includes drugs described as psychedelic(mind-manifesting), hallucinogenic (hallucination-producing),psychotomimetic (psychosis-imitating), illusinogenic (illusion-producing),and psychodysleptic (mind-disrupting). While these termsrefer to somewhat overlapping effects alleged to occur with thedrugs in this class, the various labels emphasize differentcharacteristics which are neither synonymous nor necessarilymutually exclusive. Probably none are entirely adequate asdescriptive terms. These drugs may produce profound alteration insensation, mood and consciousness at doses which result incomparatively light physiological activity . LSD and marijuanaare examples from this group. The medical value of these drugs isthe subject of considerable current controversy. 27. The drugs in the fourth category have, traditionally beenreferred to as narcotics or opiates, and are derivatives of, orpharmacologically related to, products of the opium plant. Thebest known examples are heroin, morphine and codeine. The word'narcotic' has been used inconsistently in scientific as well aslay language and has been the subject of considerabledisagreement in legal matters (for example, marijuana, cocaine,and other non-opiates are frequently controlled under lawsregulating narcotics, in spite of the fact that they arepharmacologically different from this group). The use of the term'opiates' is generally more specific, although its applicationhas not always been limited to these drugs. Consequently, thespecific term opiate narcotics is suggested to reduceambiguity. These drugs are used medically mainly for theirpain-relieving effects. 28. The fifth group is an aggregate of chemically diversesubstances perhaps best described on a physical basis as volatilesolvents. They are usually inhaled and include the vapour ofsuch common materials as glue, gasoline and lacquer thinner. Someof these drugs have been called deliriants althoughdelirium is only one of many potential effects and is clearly notrestricted to these substances. Many are quite similar in effectto the sedative group and might be considered in a sub-class ofthat category. Others may have slight psychedelic orhallucinogenic effects. Most of these substances have no knownmedical use although several have been employed as clinicalanaesthetics. 29. The non-narcotic analgesics (e.g., Aspirin* andPhenacetin*) are primarily used to reduce aching pain and tolower fever. In some instances they may also serve as mildsedatives. 30. The clinical anti-depressants (e.g., Tofranil* andNardil*) are used medically to improve mood in severely depressedpatients. These drugs are rarely used for non-medical purposessince they have little effect on normal mood states. 31. The final group, the major tranquillizers, areprimarily used to reduce the symptoms of severe psychosis (e.g.,schizophrenia). Largactil* and reserpine are examples. Whilethese have initiated a widespread revolution in chemo-therapy inpsychiatry, they are rarely involved in non-medical use. * Throughout this chapter an asterisk indicates a registereddrug trade name. PsychologicalConsiderations 32. The general effect of most drugs is greatly influenced bya variety of psychological and environmental factors. Uniquequalities of an individual's personality, his past history ofdrug experience, his attitudes towards the drug, his expectationsof its effects and his motivation for taking it are extremelyimportant and in some instances may completely obscure thetypical pharmacological response to a drug. These factors areoften referred to collectively as the person's mental 'set'. 'The'setting' or total environment in which the drug is taken mayalso be a factor of major significance. A few drinks of alcohol may produce drowsiness and fatigue insome situations, while the same individual under differentcircumstances may be psychologically stimulated and aroused bythe same dose. It appears that the set and setting may be ofgreater significance with the psychedelic-hallucinogenicsubstances than with the other drugs, and it has been suggestedthat psychological factors may often be the primary components indetermining the quality or character of the psychedelic drugexperience. The so-called placebo effect is a striking example ofthe importance of set and setting in determining the drugresponse. A placebo, in this context, refers to apharmacologically inactive substance which elicits a significantreaction, entirely because of what the individual expects ordesires to happen. In certain individuals in some settings aplacebo substance may have surprisingly powerful consequences.The placebo effect is specific to the individual and the setting,and not to any chemical properties of the substance involved.Therefore, in spite of an apparent 'drug effect', the placebo isnot considered a drug since it does not alter function 'by itschemical nature'. Placebos have been reported in therapeutic situations tosignificantly relieve such symptoms as headache and a variety ofother pains, hay fever, colds, seasickness, neuroses, and anumber of gastrointestinal complaints.97 Some scientists havesuggested that the bulk of medical history may actually have beena history of the placebo, since many 'effective cures' of thepast have been shown to be without relevant directpharmacological action, and are today of no value as therapeuticagents. To control for the influence of such psychological factors indrug research, testing is usually done under at least twoconditions: an assessment is made using the actual drug ofinterest, and a separate measurement is taken after a placebo isgiven under identical circumstances. By comparing these twoconditions some of the effects of set and setting can often becontrolled and the actual drug effect uncovered. PharmacologicalConsiderations 33. In studying how drugs affect the body, pharmacologistsgenerally divide the analysis into several processes: 1. Administration: how does the drug enter the body? 2. Absorption: how does the drug get from the site ofadministration into the physiological system of the body? 3. Distribution: how is the drug distributed to variousareas in the body? 4. Action: how and where does the drug produce whateffects? 5. Physiological Fate: how is the druginactivated, metabolized, and/or eliminated from the body? Different routes or modes of administration can haveconsiderable influence on the latency, duration, intensity andthe general nature of the drug effect. Many drugs are wellabsorbed from the stomach and intestines after ingestion whileothers are poorly taken up or may be destroyed by the gastricjuices. Certain drugs may be injected, with a hypodermic syringefor example, just under the skin (subcutaneous or S.C,), into themuscle (intramuscular or I.M.), or into a blood vein (intravenousor I.V.). The effects are generally most rapid and intense afterintravenous injection and, consequently, this mode ofadministration can be quite dangerous in inexperienced hands. Inaddition, certain volatile substances can be rapidly andefficiently absorbed from the lungs by inhalation. 34. The action of a drug is in many cases terminated bychemical changes which it undergoes in the body, Certain organs(often the liver) metabolize or 'break down' the originalsubstance into other chemicals which are usually (but not always)less active and more easily eliminated from the body. Some drugsmay be excreted unchanged in the urine, faeces, or breath. Actionis not always terminated by excretion, however, and the effectsof some drugs greatly outlast the actual presence of the chemicalin the body. Numerous physiological factors alter absorption,distribution, action and fate, and must therefore be taken intoconsideration in the study of drug effects. The details of cellular physiology are largely unknown andwith rare exceptions there is little information as to themechanism by which any particular drug changes the activity ofthe nervous system. At the simplest level, it appears that a drugalters the functioning of the living cell by entering into somesort of chemical combination with substances already present.Even if this molecular process were well understood, it would notprovide a straightforward basis for predicting the overalleffects of the drug on a group of interacting cells, or, athigher level, on the total nervous system (comprising billions ofcells) and associated psychological and behavioural processes. 35. The importance of dose. One of the basic principlesof pharmacology is that specific statements about drug effectscan not be made without consideration of the quantity or dose ofthe drug involved. With all drugs, the response differs both inthe intensity and the character of the reaction, according to theamount of the drug administered. The relation between the doseand the intensity of an effect is often referred to by scientistsas the dose-response or dose-effect relationship. Although the magnitude of the effects of some drugs mayincrease in a rather uniform (monotonic) fashion as dose isincreased, other drugs, particularly the sedatives, may show a bi-phasicresponse and actually produce behaviourally opposite effectsat some doses compared to others. Low doses of alcohol may, incertain instances, be somewhat stimulating, while higher dosesgenerally have a strong sedating effect. Scopolamine (abelladonna alkaloid) may produce sedation at low doses, andexcitation, delirium and hallucinations with larger quantities.Very toxic doses of this drug can again produce sedation, comaand even death. For every drug there is a dose low enough so as to produce nonoticeable reaction, and at the opposite extreme, some degree oftoxicity or poisoning can be produced by any substance if enoughis taken. The concept of a poison, in fact, really refers to thequantity of a drug which exceeds the body's capacity to cope withit without damage. No drug can be designated either safe,beneficial, or harmful without consideration of the dose likelyto be consumed. Chlorine, for example, which is present in mosturban drinking water in concentration so low as to have little orno pharmacological effect on humans, is intended to poisonharmful bacteria. The same substance, highly concentrated ingaseous form, was developed during World War I as an extremelypotent respiratory poison. Even the concept of a psychotropicdrug implies some notion of the range of doses likely to beconsumed, since almost any drug can, in high quantities, affectpsychological function. In many instances, however, considerablephysical toxicity or poisoning develops before significantpsychological effects occur. It is usually essential to study a drug's effect over a rangeof doses in order to obtain an adequate understanding of thenature of the response. It is also important to consider doseswhich have some relevance to existing or potential patterns ofuse if social implications are to be inferred from experimentalfindings. 36. The importance of time. Another importantpharmacological concept is the time-response relationship orthe relation between the time which has elapsed sinceadministration and the effect produced. Such a temporal analysismay be restricted to immediate or short-term (acute) effects of asingle dose, or on the other extreme, may involve the long-termeffects of persistently repeated (chronic) use of a drug. The intensity and often the character or quality of theoverall drug effect may change substantially within a shortperiod of time. For example, the main intoxicating effects of alarge dose of alcohol generally reach a peak in less than anhour, then gradually taper off. An initially stimulating effectmay later change to one of sedation. With some drugs, an initialstate of tension or anxiety may later turn into one of relaxationand sense of well-being, or vice-versa, as a function of time. It may also be important with some drugs to consider thelong-term consequences of chronic use. Usually such effects cannot be readily predicted from what is known of the immediateresponse. For instance, while there is little doubt that thesmoking of a few tobacco cigarettes has no lasting detrimentaleffect on lung or cardiac function, there is increasingscientific evidence that long-term heavy use of this substancehas serious consequences. As another example, the clinicalpicture of the chronic alcoholic involves psychological andphysiological disturbances which do not develop with moderatedrinking. In simple terms, it is essential to ask: 'How much?';'How often?'; and 'For how long?' (as well as 'By whom?') whendiscussing the long-term reaction to repeated drug use. 37. Main effects and side effects. It is highlyunlikely that any drug has only a single action on a particularbehavioural or physiological function. Most drugs can produce analmost unlimited number of effects on the body, each with asomewhat unique dose-response and time-response relationship. Therelative strength of the different responses to a drug generallyvaries with the amount taken, and a particular effect which isprominent at one dosage level may be quite secondary at another. In a therapeutic or clinical setting, one is usuallyinterested in a single or perhaps a small number of the manypossible effects. Those which are desired are generallyconsidered 'main effects' whilst the other unwanted butconcurrent drug responses are labelled 'side effects'. Thisdistinction between main and side effects is a relative one anddepends on the purpose or the anticipated use of the drug. Aresponse which is considered unnecessary or undesirable in oneapplication may, in fact, be the main or desired effect inanother. For example, in the clinical treatment of severe pain,the analgesic (pain-reducing) properties of morphine areconsidered the main effect, and the psychological euphoria andthe intestinal constipation also produced are undesirable sideeffects. To the 'street addict', however, the euphoric propertiesare the main effects, and the analgesic and constipating effectsmay be irrelevant or undesired. Certain opiate compounds such asparegoric are used in treatment of diarrhoea and, in thisinstance, the constipating effect of the drug is desired and theother responses are considered side effects. It is universal thatdrugs have undesirable and toxic side effects if the dose issufficiently increased. 38. Drug interaction. Even in cases where theindividual effects of different drugs are well known andreliable, if several substances are taken at the same time, tileinteraction may produce a response which is quite unpredictableon the basis of the knowledge of the individual drugs alone. Lesscommonly, a particular interaction effect may be anticipated. Ifthe drugs normally have similar properties, they may often havean additive effect if taken together, resulting in a generalincrease in responses similar to that produced by a larger singledose of either one. There are also instances in which one drugmay potentiate the action of another, and the two togetherproduce a greater effect than would be expected by merely addingthe individual reactions. Furthermore, some drugs haveantagonistic effects, and one may counteract or inhibit certainnormal responses to the other. Toleranceand Dependence 38a. Tolerance is said to develop when the response to thesame dose of a drug decreases with repeated use. With mosttolerance-producing drugs, effects of original intensity can beretained. to a certain extent, if the dose is increased. Theextent of tolerance, and the rate at which it is acquired, dependon the drug, the individual using it, and the magnitude andfrequency of administration. The body does not lose sensitivityto all aspects of the reaction to a particular drug with equalrapidity, or to the same degree. Some of the effects of a drugmay 'drop out' sooner than others with repeated use. Tolerance tothe effects which are reinforcing or rewarding drug use (i.e.,'main effects') is usually reflected by a tendency for users toincrease dose. Most aspects of tolerance dissipate withabstinence from the drug. A moderate degree of tolerance to most effects of alcohol andbarbiturates develops and a heavy drinker may be able to consumetwo to three times the alcohol tolerated by a novice. Littletolerance develops to the lethal toxicity of these drugs,however, and a heavy user of sedatives is just as susceptible todeath by overdose as is a non-tolerant individual. Opiatenarcotics, such as morphine, are capable of producing profoundtolerance, and heavy users have been known to take up to tentimes the amount which would normally produce death. By contrast,no noticeable tolerance develops to cocaine (a short-actingstimulant). The exact mechanisms by which the body adapts, or becomestolerant, to different drug effects are not completelyunderstood, although several processes have been suggested.Certain drugs (e.g., barbiturates) stimulate the body'sproduction of the metabolic enzymes which inactivate them. Inaddition, there is evidence that a considerable degree of centralnervous system (CNS) tolerance may develop to certain drugsindependent of changes in the rate of absorption, metabolism orexcretion. An individual tolerant to alcohol, for example, can berelatively unaffected by a large dose even though the resultinghigh level of alcohol in his blood may accurately reflect themagnitude of his intake. It is uncertain as to whether thisrepresents some general molecular adaptation to the drug at thelevel of the individual nerve cell, or perhaps a specificresponse by the central nervous system to counteract the sedatingeffects and maintain normal function. Learning factors oftenappear to play an important role in changing the individual'sresponse to a drug after experience with it. Effects whichinitially may be strange or frightening may later be acceptedwithout reaction or concern, or perhaps, even be desired. Thereis evidence that people may learn to control some drug effects,or otherwise come to function normally in the presence of certainresponses which might originally have been distracting, orotherwise disrupting of behaviour. A phenomenon often referred to as 'reverse tolerance' has beennoted with some drugs (notably the psychedelics) in which thedesired effects may be achieved with smaller doses afterexperience with the drug. Both learning and pharmacologicalmechanisms have been suggested to underly this process. In many instances, after an individual becomes tolerant to theeffects of one drug, he will also show tolerance to others withsimilar action. This is called cross-tolerance. Forexample, a heavy drinker will normally show a reduced response tobarbiturates, tranquillizers and anaesthetics, as well as toalcohol. 39. Physical dependence is a physiological state ofadaptation to a drug, normally following thedevelopment of tolerance, which results in a characteristic setof withdrawal symptoms (often called the 'abstinence syndrome'),when administration of the drug is stopped. These symptomsmay be of an intense nature after persistent heavy use, and withsome sedatives and opiate narcotics, may include tremors,vomiting, delirium, cramps and, in severe cases with some drugs,convulsions and death. There are generally no overt signs ofphysical dependence if the drug level is kept high enough toavoid the withdrawal syndrome. In a sense, the body comes todepend on the drug for 'normal' functioning after adapting to itspresence, and when the drug is absent, considerable disruption ofessential physiological processes occurs until readjustmentdevelops. The withdrawal syndrome may also he elicited withoutabstinence, by the administration of a substance whichspecifically antagonizes or blocks certain effects of theoriginal drug. Withdrawal symptoms can be prevented or promptly relieved bythe administration of a sufficient quantity of the original drugor one with similar pharmacological activity. The latter case, inwhich different drugs can be used interchangeably in preventingwithdrawal symptoms, is called cross-dependence. As anexample, barbiturates and tranquillizers can be used in treatingthe abstinence syndrome associated with chronic alcoholism. Often the recovery phase associated with different drugs ischaracterized by a rebound phenomenon dominated by activityopposite to that produced by the drug. For instance, withdrawalfrom the sedatives generally results in symptoms of acute andtoxic hyperactivation and physiological arousal, while thepattern following intense stimulant (e.g. 'speed') use usuallyinvolves sedation, depression and sleep. Although physical dependence can develop with such commondrugs as alcohol and barbiturates, it is not a factor in thedrug-taking behaviour of the vast majority of regular users. Inthe few individuals who become physically dependent on theseparticular drugs, serious social, personal and physiologicalconsequences of drug use usually precede the physical dependence.Therefore, although physical dependence is a serious medicalproblem in a minority of sedative users, the abstinence syndromeitself is not the cause of major public health problems. Thepotent opiate narcotics, by contrast, tend to produce verypronounced tolerance and physical dependence early in the historyof regular use. These features then soon become an integral partof the particular drug problem presented by the opiate narcotics.However, with these and other drugs, psychological factors in thedependence are often more significant in the long run. 40. Psychological dependence (also often calledbehavioural, psychic or emotional dependence, and habituation) isa much more elusive concept and is difficult to define in asatisfactory manner. A World Health Organization paper69 definespsychic dependence thus: 'In this situation there is a feeling ofsatisfaction and a psychic drive that require periodic orcontinuous administration of the drug to produce a desired effector to avoid discomfort.' A major problem with this definition isthe difficulty in operationally defining and objectivelyidentifying the characteristics of the dependence in a practicalsituation. By contrast, some scientists224 have identified behaviouraldependence as repeated self-administration of a drug. Thisapproach seems far too broad for most purposes since it onlyindicates that the drug is in some way reinforcing or rewardingto the user, and merely restates the observation that he takesthe drug. Extreme instances of psychological dependence are easier toidentify and may be characterized by an intense craving for, orcompulsion to continue the use of, a drug with obviousbehavioural manifestations. In many instances, psychologicalaspects may be considerably more important than physicaldependence in maintaining chronic drug use. The major problemwith opiate dependence is not the physical aspects, sincewithdrawal can be successfully achieved in a few weeks, but thegreat likelihood that the individual will later return to chronicuse due to psychological dependence. In most instances of even regular non-medical use of drugs,such intense psychological dependence probably does not occur.However, more subtle psychological and social factors usuallyhave persisting effects in maintaining the behaviour of drugconsumption. In talking about dependency in any context, whether dealingwith drugs or not, it would seem useful to specify what it isthat is being depended upon and for what reasons, and to identifythe consequences of its presence or its absence. The significanceof dependency changes considerably if the entity is relied upon,for example, for the maintenance of life (e.g., insulin for thediabetic) or for the escape from an unpleasant or intolerablesituation (e.g., privacy), or perhaps for a feeling of well-beingor satisfaction with life. In one sense psychological dependencemay be said to exist with respect to anything which is part ofone's preferred way of life. In our society, this kind ofdependency occurs regularly with respect to such things astelevision, music, books, religion, sex, money, favourite foods,certain drugs, hobbies, sports or games and, often, otherpersons. Some degree of psychological dependence is, in thissense, a general and normal psychological condition. A statement in the preliminary brief of the Addiction ResearchFoundation of Ontario reflects the complexity of interpreting thequestion of dependency:4 It should be recognized, however, that dependence is notnecessarily bad in itself, either for the individual or forsociety. The question to he evaluated, therefore, is not whetherdependence can occur, but whether dependence in a given caseresults in physical, psychological or social harm. 41. The concept of addiction. The term 'addiction' hashad a variety of meanings, and a consensus as to the properdefinition seems unlikely, even in scientific circles. Often ithas been used interchangeably with dependence (psychologicaland/or physiological), while at other times it appears to besynonymous with the term 'drug abuse'. The classical model of theaddiction- producing drug was based on the opiate narcotics, andhas traditionally required the presence of tolerance, andphysical and psychological dependence. However, this approach hasnot been generally satisfactory since only a few commonly useddrugs (e.g., alcohol and other sedatives), in addition to theopiates, seem to fit the model at all. It is clearlyinappropriate for many other drugs which can cause seriousdependency problems. For example, amphetamines can produceconsiderable tolerance and strong psychological dependence withlittle or no physical dependence, and cocaine can producepsychological dependence without tolerance or physicaldependence. Furthermore, in certain medical applications,morphine has been reported to produce tolerance and physicaldependence without a significant psychological component. Recognizing the problems with the concept of addiction, theWorld Health Organization (WHO) proposed the following:69 It has become impossible in practice, and is scientificallyunsound, to maintain a single definition for all forms of drugaddiction and/or habituation. A feature common to theseconditions as well as to drug abuse in general is dependence,psychic or physical or both, of the individual on a chemicalagent. Therefore, better understanding should be attained bysubstitution of the term drug dependence of this or that type,according to the agent or class of agents involved.... It must beemphasized that drug dependence is a general term that has beenselected for its applicability to all types of drug abuse andthus carries no connotation of the degree of risk to publichealth or need for any or a particular type of drug control. The WHO committee presented short descriptions of variousdifferent types of drug dependence which may occur in someindividuals and situations. The list identifies drug dependenceof the morphine type, the barbiturate - alcohol type, the cocainetype, the cannabis (marijuana) type, the amphetamine type, thekhat type, and the hallucinogen (LSD) type. Details of thesevarious kinds of drug dependence are discussed separately laterin this chapter. For reasons analogous to those presented above, it is furthersuggested here that the term dependent rather than the ambiguousdescription 'addict' be used to refer to aft individual who hasdeveloped drug dependence of either the physical or psychologicalforms. ScientificMethods 42. The role of statistics. Statistics can be helpfulin collecting and handling numerical or quantified information,interpreting data, and making inferences or generalizations fromit. The simplest use of statistics is to describe or summarizecertain abstract characteristics of a group or sample. Forexample, the average height of players on a basketball teamprovides a shorthand description of the group. The numerical meanis a common index of the average. Considerably more informationcould be communicated if some idea of the variability of heightswithin the team were known. The range of measures, for example,is a crude index of the variance of 'spread' in the distributionwithin a group. A second function of statistics is to provide a system forinference about some population on the basis of a smaller groupor sample selected from that population. For example, the meanI.Q. of a group of 50 students randomly selected from a schoolwith 500 individuals might provide a reasonable estimate of theaverage intelligence of the entire student population of thatschool. The success of such generalization or extrapolationdepends on the relative size of the sample and the accuracy orfidelity with which the group studied represents the overallpopulation of interest. Any bias in sampling which reduces thesimilarity between the selected group and the population to whichthe results are to be generalized reduces the validity of suchextrapolation. Statistics may also assist in distinguishing between thedifferences in measurements resulting from random variation andthe variance due to the factor which is being studied. Byobtaining an estimate of the natural variability in a population,it may be possible to distinguish, with some confidence, betweena 'real effect' associated with a particular condition ortreatment, and the difference which might be expected by chancealone. The phrase 'statistically significant' is used to indicatean effect considered significantly greater than that likely dueto chance. However, statistical techniques alone can only indicate anassociation between different variables and can not actuallyidentify cause and effect. Such causal inferences must be basedon an overall consideration of the research design. In manylaboratory experiments, the stimulus and its response may bereadily identified, but in less tightly controlled social studies(e.g., surveys) and clinical observations, it is often verydifficult or impossible to positively identify the causalvariable in a complex pattern of associations among differentcharacteristics of the sample. For example, the demonstrationthat persons who are heavy users of tranquillizers also tend tobe regular alcohol drinkers does not necessarily indicate thatone causes the other. It may well be that a third factor (e.g.,the desire to avoid or escape anxiety and tension) may beresponsible for both behaviours. Interpretation of the datagenerally requires considerations beyond that involved in thestatistical analysis. 43. Experimental methods. Details of research designwould not be appropriate here, although some simple notions as toelementary requirements for adequate experimental techniques inpsychopharmacology may be worthwhile. A major goal of scientificresearch is to eliminate or control all factors, other than thoseto be studied, which can influence or bias measurement. As discussed above, the subjects of the study must besufficiently similar to the general population of ultimateinterest to allow generalization from the data. Extrapolationfrom one animal species to another, from one human society toanother, or from one social group to another is oftenquite tenuous and must be viewed with extreme caution. Variablessuch as age, sex, and social class often exert considerableinfluence on psychological measures, and must be taken intocareful consideration. Unless there is some reason why a particular dose level is of singularsignificance, more than one dose should be studied. If thepurpose of the experiment is to allow inferences of a generalsocial nature, then the dose, mode of administration and thegeneral circumstances of the study must be relevant to thepattern of use in the general population. In order to determine the effect of a particular treatment, itis necessary to have a reference or control condition forcomparison, which has been treated identically to theexperimental condition except for the factor under analysis.These data may be obtained from a separate group of controlsubjects, which is sufficiently similar to the experimentalgroup, or from the same subjects studied at a different time. Dueto the great variation between individuals in response to drugs,the latter approach is often most efficient, although it issometimes inappropriate or impractical. Using subjects as theirown controls requires special statistical techniques for handlingthe data, since repeated experience in the situation will affectthe subject's subsequent performance through such mechanisms asgeneral adaptation, practice and other learning variables, andoften fatigue. Care must be taken to control or eliminate the possibleeffects of the subject's and researcher's expectations andbiases. Since set and setting play an important role indetermining drug effects, an inactive placebo substance should betested in a control situation under conditions which areidentical to those present when the drug is studied. Sometimes,however, if the subject has had previous experience with theexperimental drug, he may soon realize whether he was given theactive drug or an inactive substance despite his initial lack ofinformation, and consequently the placebo control may not becomplete. An experimental design in which the subject is notinformed as to which treatment is being investigated is called a single-blindstudy. Since the scientist's bias and expectations can also influencethe subject's performance and the interpretation of his behaviour(as well as the later data analysis), the validity of themeasurements can often be further increased it the researcher isalso unaware of which treatment condition is in effect at thetime of the experiment. A study in which neither the subject northe researcher knows which of the experimental treatmentvariables are operating is called a double-blind design.There are certain circumstances where a double-blind isinappropriate or impossible, although it is often the mostefficient way to acquire specific information about drug effectsin an experimental situation. AReview of Selected Drugs 44. The remainder of this chapter is devoted to a shortcritical review of the scientific literature pertaining to theeffects of certain psychoactive drugs. Barbiturates, alcohol,minor tranquillizers, amphetamines, LSD, cannabis, opiatenarcotics, and volatile solvents are discussed. In these interimreviews an attempt has been made to concentrate on humanpsychopharmacological studies rather than on animal experimentsor general social reports. Although original scientific sourceswere sought and used as often as possible, it wasfrequently necessary at this interim stage to rely on reviewsprepared by others. There has been no attempt to be exhaustive in the referencespresented in the text. These citations often indicate a typicalexample chosen from among numerous sources which would have beenappropriate. The bibliography at the end of this chapter containsa broader representation of some of the materials used inpreparing the summaries. Contents | Feedback | Search DRCNet Library | Schaffer Library | Major Studies Canadian Government Commission ofInquiry WT02-B03-25IA086-000614-B042-339http://206.61.184.43:80/schaffer/Library/studies/ledain/nonmed1a.htm 206.61.184.43 19970122020705 text/html 36024HTTP/1.0 200 OKDate: Wednesday, 22-Jan-97 02:06:56 GMTServer: WebSitePro/1.1f (S/N wpo-0deb)Allow-ranges: bytesContent-type: text/htmlLast-modified: Saturday, 28-Dec-96 07:01:08 GMTContent-length: 35806 Canadian Government Commission - The Commission'sInterpretation of Its Task Contents | Feedback | Search DRCNet Library | Schaffer Library | Major Studies Canadian Government Commission ofInquiry CHAPTER ONE THE COMMISSION'S INTERPRETATION OF ITS TASK The Background of the Commission's Appointment 1. The Commission of Inquiry into the Non-Medical Use of Drugswas appointed by the Government of Canada under Part I of theInquiries Act on May 29, 1969, on the recommendation of theHonourable John Munro, Minister of National Health and Welfare. The concern that gave rise to the appointment of theCommission is described in Order-in-Council P.C. 1969-1112, whichauthorized the appointment, in the following terms: The Committee of the Privy Council have had before them areport from the Minister of National Health and Welfare,representing: 'That there is growing concern in Canada about the non-medicaluse of certain drugs and substances, particularly, those havingsedative, stimulant, tranquillizing or hallucinogenic properties,and the effect of such use on the individual and the socialimplications thereof; That within recent years, there has developed also thepractice of inhaling the fumes of certain solvents having anhallucinogenic effect, and resulting in serious physical damageand a number of deaths, such solvents being found in certainhousehold substances. Despite warnings and considerablepublicity, this practice has developed among young people and canbe said to be related to the use of drugs for other than medicalpurposes; That certain of these drugs and substances including lysergicacid diethylamide, LSD, methamphetamines, commonly referred to as'Speed', and certain others, have been made the subject ofcontrolling or prohibiting legislation under the Food and DrugsAct, and cannabis, marijuana, has been a substance, thepossession of or trafficking in which has been prohibited underthe Narcotic Control Act; That notwithstanding these measures and the competentenforcement thereof by the R.C.M. Police and other enforcementbodies, the incidence of possession and use of these substancesfor non-medical purposes has increased and the need for aninvestigation as to the cause of such increasing use has becomeimperative. During the year or so preceding the appointment of theCommission, members of parliament had called for an inquiry intothe use of drugs. One member spoke of 'the galloping increase inthe use of marijuana and the increasing number of young peopletragically being paraded daily before the courts' and of 'theextreme urgency of dealing properly with these cases'. Inannouncing the Government's intention to appoint the Commission,the Minister of National Health and Welfare spoke of 'the graveconcern felt by the Government at the expanding proportions ofthe use of drugs and related substances for non-medicalpurposes'. The Commission's Terms of Reference 3. The Order-in-Council authorizing the appointment of theCommission sets out its terms of reference as follows; That inquiry be made into and concerning the factorsunderlying or relating to the non-medical use of the drugs andsubstances above described and that for this purpose a Commissionof Inquiry be established, constituted and with authority ashereinafter provided. (a) to marshal from available sources, both in Canada andabroad, data and information comprising the present fund ofknowledge concerning the non-medical use of sedative, stimulant,tranquillizing, hallucinogenic and other psychotropic drugs orsubstances; (b) to report on the current state of medical knowledgerespecting the effect of the drugs and substances referred to in(a); (c) to inquire into and report on the motivationunderlying the non-medical use referred to in (a); (d) to inquire into and report on the social,economic, educational and philosophical factors relating tothe use for non-medical purposes of the drugs and substancesreferred to in (a) and in particular, on the extent of thephenomenon, the social factors that had led to it, the age groupsinvolved, and problems of communication; and (e) to inquire into and recommend with respect tothe ways or means by which the Federal Government can act,alone or in its relations with Government at other levels, in thereduction of the dimensions of the problems involved in such use. The Implications of the Terms of Reference 4. While the Commission's terms of reference make specificmention of the sedative, stimulant, tranquillizing andhallucinogenic drugs, they also require inquiry concerning otherpsychotropic drugs and substances. The Commission understandsdrug to mean any substance that by its chemical nature altersstructure or function in the living organism. The psychotropicdrugs are those drugs which alter sensation, mood, consciousnessor other psychological or behavioural functions. Theseconcepts are further clarified in Chapter Two of thisreport. A number of classifications of psychotropic drugs havebeen brought to the Commission's attention. Chapter Two presentsthe classification that has been accepted by the Commission. Italso contains a detailed account of the psychotropic propertiesand medical and non-medical uses of certain of the drugs causingthe greatest public concern. It is clear to the Commission thatit would not be appropriate to confine its attention to theso-called 'soft drugs' such as marijuana, hashish and LSD. The'hard drugs' such as the opiate narcotics, of which heroin is anexample, have marked psychotropic effects. The amphetamines or'speed' drugs which are popularly considered as hard drugs appearto be increasing in their non-medical use. Moreover, both thestructure of present Canadian drug laws and the nature of thedrug controversy make it impossible to consider the 'soft drugs'without reference to the amphetamines and the opiates. Indeed,the opiate narcotics have been and are an important referencepoint in, establishing the public perspective for the non-medicaluse of many other drugs. The Commission believes that it hasproperly focused its primary attention in the initial phase ofits inquiry on the non-medical use of drugs such as cannabis, LSDand amphetamines by young people. However, we have had a growingconcern for the facts and implications of the use of drugs suchas alcohol and tobacco by people of all ages. These two drugs,both of which are psychotropic, remain the most popular drugs innon-medical use among both young people and adults. Adultsgenerally seem unwilling to accept the fact that alcohol andtobacco are drugs, and often find it difficult to view thenon-medical drug use of youth with reference to and in thecontext of the socially acceptable use of drugs by adults. 5. Two broad categories in which the use of psychotropic drugscan be classified are: (a) medical and non-medical use, and (b)legal and illegal use. While the distinction between legal andillegal use is simple and derives directly from the law, it isdifficult to find a satisfactory definition of medical andnon-medical drug use. Medical use of drugs is taken bythe Commission to be use which is indicated for generallyaccepted medical reasons, whether under medical supervision ornot; all drug use which is not indicated on generally acceptedmedical grounds is considered to be non-medical use. Thus,the occasional use of aspirin to control the pain of an ordinaryheadache is considered to be medical use, while the dependent useof large quantities of barbiturates obtained through one or moreprescriptions is not. Clearly, non-medical use is not to beequated with illegal use. The use of alcohol by adults isgenerally non-medical but it is legal, whereas the use ofmarijuana is both non-medical and illegal. 6. The commission is invited to marshal the present fund ofworld knowledge concerning the non-medical use of psychotropicdrugs and substances. Taken literally, this task is impossible,with the time and resources available to the Commission. Theworld literature on all the psychotropic drugs and substances isvery extensive. There are over 40,000 items on alcohol alone atRutgers University, a major centre of alcohol studies. There areestimated to be over 2,000 items on cannabis. Experts in thefield have testified to the extreme difficulty of keeping abreastof the literature, particularly because of its multi-disciplinarycharacter. There are only a few sources of comprehensiveinformation on this continent: the Addiction Research Foundationof Ontario is by far the best equipped in this country; theNational Institute of Mental Health in the United States providesa computerized data retrieval service. In Geneva, the WorldHealth Organization of the United Nations possesses extensivebibliographical resources. Collecting the available data and information is only onestage. It is also necessary to establish and apply criteria ofscientific validity to such data and information. In manyinstances, the Commission is obliged to rely heavily on the workof experts who have themselves sifted and critically evaluatedthe available literature. It must form its judgements on thebasis of the materials which they have identified as mostrelevant and reliable. The Commission cannot carry out acomprehensive bibliographical work for the whole range ofpsychotropic drugs and substances. It must try to seize upon theessentials in the present fund of knowledge as they bear upon theareas of concern and the issues in this inquiry. 7. The Commission is required to report on the current stateof medical knowledge concerning the effect of psychotropic drugsand substances. This it has attempted to do in an interimfashion, in Chapter Two, entitled 'The Drugs and Their Effects'.The effects contemplated by paragraph (b) in the terms ofreference are presumably the physiological and psychologicalones, including their behavioural manifestations. The term'medical' is rather too narrow as a reference to the expertisewhich is in the determination of drug effects since these are acomplex result of many factors, including the expectation of theuser and the social setting in which the drug is taken. In itsinterim brief to the Commission, the Canadian Medical Associationstressed the multi-disciplinary character of the study requiredfor a proper understanding of non-medical drug use. We have,therefore, interpreted the word 'medical' to refer broadly to allscientific knowledge concerning the effects of drug use. Thelanguage of paragraph (b) of the terms of reference suggests thatit was not intended that the Commission would itself undertakeoriginal research into the effects of non-medical drug use.Although we do not exclude the possibility of some clinical orexperimental work, particularly with respect to the effect ofcertain drugs on psychomotor functions, it is our opinion thatwith the time and resources at our disposal, and having regard tothe research currently being conducted by such organizations asthe Addiction Research Foundation and the National Institute ofMental Health, we should confine ourselves to carrying out acritical review of the existing knowledge and ongoing research,as well as attempting to identify research priorities and therole which the federal government can play in relation toresearch. 8. The remaining paragraphs in the terms of reference dealwith the extent and the causes of non-medical drug use. Theyreflect a broad concern to understand the reasons for theincrease in such use. They invite the Commission to attempt toplace this phenomenon in a proper social and philosophic context.We cannot help feeling that this is one of the most importantaspects of our task: one on which there is a compelling need foran understanding of current Canadian attitudes. This is impliedby the allusion in paragraph (d) of the terms of reference to'problems of communication'. To understand the factors underlyingnon-medical drug use and the problems for which government actionmay be indicated, it is necessary to consider not only theeffects, extent, and causes of such use, but the range of socialresponse and attitude which such use has elicited fromgovernment, other institutions and individuals. For non-medicaldrug use and the social response to it are interacting andmutually conditioning phenomena. Methods of Inquiry 9. The Commission has used a variety of methods of inquiry.Because of the profound social significance of the non-medicaldrug use phenomenon and of the importance of personal and publicattitudes to it, the Commission decided early to conduct publichearings in all of the provinces. It has attached particularimportant to these hearings. They have been used to foster thewidest possible public discussion. In order to encourage theparticipation of young people, it was decided to hold some of thepublic hearings in more informal settings than may have beencustomary for such commissions in the past. In addition to thepublic hearings, the Commissioners have collectively andindividually held numerous private hearings, have consulted withexperts in several fields related to non-medical drug use, andhave read extensively in the scientific and legal literature. TheCommission has also received many communications, written andoral, from Canadians in all walks of life. 10. At the beginning of September, 1969, the Commission wroteto over 750 individuals and organizations inviting them to submitbriefs or to make oral submissions. In particular, the Commissionsolicited briefs from: federal and provincial governmentdepartments; law enforcement authorities, educationalinstitutions and associations; members of university facultiesand departments; medical and pharmaceutical institutions andassociations, addiction research foundations; street clinics andother innovative services; correctional and welfareorganizations; bar associations; youth organizations; studentorganizations; and a wide variety of other organizations andindividuals having an evident concern or point of contact withthe phenomenon of non-medical drug use in Canada. The Commissionreceived a gratifying response to this invitation, and despitethe relatively short time available in some cases for thepreparation of briefs, individuals and organizations made a verycommendable effort to prepare submissions for the public hearingswhich began in the middle of October. 11. A list of the organizations and individuals who have beenidentified with submissions to the Commission in the initialphase of this inquiry is contained in Appendix A to this report,Fifty-five organizations have been represented at the publichearings at which they have submitted written briefs; twenty havebeen represented by oral submissions; forty-five have madewritten submissions to the Commission without appearing at apublic hearing. Thirty two individuals have submitted writtenbriefs and 45 others have made oral submissions at publichearings. In addition, there have been numerous oral submissionsand interventions by members of the public who have attended thehearings. The Commission has also received several hundredletters from individuals, and a selection of these letters orexcerpts from them is included in the Report as Appendix B. Weemphasize that this selection is not intended to convey theweight of opinion in this correspondence, but simply to reflectsomething of the range of response. 12. In the initial phase of this inquiry, the Commission hasheld public hearings in the following centres: Toronto - October16, 17 and 18; Vancouver - October 30 and 31; Victoria - November1; Montreal - November 6, 7 and 8; Winnipeg - November 13 and 14;Ottawa - December 12 and 13; Halifax - January 29 and 30; St.John's - January 31; Fredericton - February 19; Moncton -February 20; Sackville - February 20; and Charlottetown -February 21; Kingston - March 5. A special word may be appropriate concerning the nature of thepublic hearings. They have been conducted in a rather informalmanner. There has been a considerable degree of audienceparticipation. People have felt free to comment on formalsubmissions, and there has been a great deal of informal exchangeamong persons attending the hearings. On the whole, response tothis style of hearing has been favourable, although there hasbeen some criticism from one or two organizations who haveexpressed the opinion that we should not have permitted questionsand critical comments from members of the public. Because of thenature of the phenomenon which it is required to investigate, theCommission is convinced that it has been essential to attempt toestablish a true public forum for discussion of theissues. Most organizations have reacted favourably to this kindof inquiry. In addition to the more traditional settings ofhotels and public buildings, the Commission has held publichearings at universities and from time to time in coffee housesthat have become centres of the new youth culture. Informal hearings have been held in the followinguniversities: York University; the University of Toronto; theUniversity of British Columbia; the University of Montreal;McGill University; Sir George Williams University; the Universityof Manitoba; the University of Winnipeg; the University ofOttawa; Carleton University; Dalhousie University; MemorialUniversity; the University of New Brunswick; the University ofMoncton; Mount Allison University; the University of PrinceEdward Island; and in the following coffee houses: 'The PennyFarthing' in Yorkville, Toronto; 'The Bistro' in Vancouver, andthe 'Back Door' in Montreal. The hearings in these more informal settings have given theCommission direct and vivid contact with the opinions andattitudes of young people in Canada. All the Commission hearingshave been recorded on tape, and in addition there has been astenographic record. In many ways it is a matter of regret thatan audio-visual record could not have been made, but the natureof the subject matter is such that the Commission felt obliged toprotect individuals appearing before it from undue publicity. Themedia have cooperated with the Commission in respecting itsrequest that members of the public should not be photographedwhile making submissions. In many cases, the submissions havebeen of a highly personal nature, and the hearings would havebeen much inhibited if they had been photographed. At the sametime, the Commission has been intensely aware of the fact that itwas listening to an unusual social commentary. Opinions andfeelings have poured forth in the hearings with greatspontaneity, particularly in the more informal settings. TheCommission has been deeply impressed, and on several occasions,moved by the testimony which it has heard. It has been struck bythe depth of feeling which this phenomenon and the socialresponse to it have aroused. As a result of the initial phase ofits inquiry, the Commission is more than ever convinced that theproper response to the non-medical use of psychotropic drugs is aquestion which must be worked out by the people of Canada,examining it and talking it over together. It goes to the rootsof our society and touches the values underlying our wholeapproach to life. It is not a matter which can be confined to thediscrete consultation of experts, although experts obviously havetheir role, and a very important one, to play. 13. A word should be said about the protection of witnesses.The terms of reference of the Commission empower it to taketestimony in such manner as to safeguard the anonymity ofwitnesses. The Order-in-Council authorizing the appointment ofthe Commission provides: That the said Commissioners may, if they deem the sameexpedient, cause a record to be made of the evidence which shallbe given or produced before them, or any part of that evidence,as to the matters to be inquired into and reported upon and maydirect that the oral evidence of witnesses, before them, or anysuch witness, shall be taken in shorthand by a shorthand writer,approved and sworn by the said Commissioners or one of them, andmay direct that the oral evidence of any such witness may be sogiven and recorded, whether under oath or otherwise, without adisclosure of the identity of that witness, and that any evidenceso recorded shall be certified by the person or persons takingthe same in shorthand, as correct. The notices which the Commission has published of its hearingshave given prominence to this readiness to take evidence givenprivately and anonymously, and many witnesses have availedthemselves of this opportunity. The Commission has also receiveda number of anonymous submissions through the mail. At the sametime, concern has been expressed from time to time that thepublic hearings might be used for law enforcement purposes. As aresult of an understanding at the outset of this inquiry with theofficers of the R.C.M.P., the Commission has been able to assurethe public that its hearings would not be exploited for lawenforcement purposes. It has every reason to believe that thisunderstanding has been respected. Although there have beenrumours from time to time that law enforcement personnel havetaken advantage of the hearings for purposes of investigation, noevidence of this has been brought to the attention of theCommission, despite public statements by the Chairman that anysuch instances should be reported to him. The Commission has been very impressed by the candour withwhich people of all ages have come forward and spoken from adepth of conviction, and feeling about the phenomenon ofnon-medical drug usage and its relation to other aspects ofsocial and cultural change today. 14. Altogether, it is estimated that nearly 12,000 Canadianshave attended the hearings up to the end of February. TheCommissioners have travelled some 17,000 miles, and in the monthsahead they will continue to move back and forth across thecountry until every province and major city have been visited, aswell as many of the smaller communities. 15. The Commission has had the benefit of a wide range ofadvice from experts in the field of non-medical drug use. It isonly possible here to mention some of those who were particularlyhelpful. The Commission has had several sessions with officers of theR.C.M.P, and has received the fullest cooperation from the Forcein its attempt to understand the lessons of law enforcement inthis field. In addition to the public submission of the Force,each Division prepared a brief, and the Commission has had theadvantage of private hearings with officers from each Division.Moreover, research consultants of the Commission have beenpermitted to observe law enforcement by the Force at first hand.The Commission has also received a number of writtencommunications from the Force in addition to its formalsubmissions. We can not speak too highly of the cooperation thatwe have received from the R.C.M.P., who went to particulartrouble, on relatively short notice in the initial stages of theinquiry, to give the Commission the benefit of their experience.Whatever view one may take of law enforcement policy in thiscontroversial field, we feel obliged to record our respect forthe highly professional manner in which the R.C.M.P. have soughtto per-form their duty in relation to this inquiry. We lookforward to their continued cooperation as we deepen our study ofthe problems of law enforcement and the administration of justicein the field of non-medical drug use. The Commission has also received a great deal of valuableassistance from addiction foundations, notably the AddictionResearch Foundation of Ontario, the Narcotic Addiction Foundationof British Columbia, and OPTAT (Office de la Prevention et duTraitement de l'Alcoolisme et des Autres Toxicomanies). From theoutset of its inquiry the Commission has had the benefit offrequent consultation with members of the Ontario Foundation, andthe Commission's research staff have made extensive use of thebibliographical and documentary resources of the Foundation. The Commission has also consulted with many other experts, inCanada and the United States. It plans to consult with many more,including experts outside North America, in the ensuing year. Forthe present, it would like to make special mention of theassistance which it has received from Dr J. Robertson Unwin, DrLionel Solursh and Mr Wilfred Clement, whose intimate knowledgeof the Canadian drug scene from a scientific, yet deeply humanperspective, has made their observations and advice invaluable.The Commission should also record its indebtedness for advicereceived in the early stages of the inquiry from Dr Helen Nowlisof the University of Rochester, Samuel Pearlman of the CityUniversity of New York, Dr Daniel Glaser of the New York StateNarcotic Addiction Control Commission; members of the NationalInstitute of Mental Health, and Department of Justice in theUnited States. The Role of the Interim Report 16. We have had some difficulty in determining what should bethe role of our interim report. In particular, we have beensomewhat perplexed as to how far we are justified in coming toconclusions and making recommendations at this time. But we arerequired by our terms of reference to render an interim report,and we assume that something more is expected than a simplereport of progress. We believe that what is expected, at the veryleast, is a report, which conveys our initial understanding ofthe subject matter of the inquiry and makes such recommendationsas we feel are urgent and for which we believe we have asufficient basis at this time. We hope it will serve to put thephenomenon of non-medical drug use in some perspective, toidentify the issues, and to provide the basis for furtherconsideration and discussion by the people of Canada. Further, byidentifying certain attitudes, hypotheses, and tentativeopinions, the interim report will serve, we hope, as a soundingboard, eliciting further evidence and opinion, and indicating tous wherein our definition of the issues and our preliminaryopinions may require revision. 17. The function of the final report will be to complete thepicture begun by the interim report and to report upon the systemof social response which we recommend for the phenomenon ofnon-medical drug use. The inquiry between the interim report andthe final report will test the definitions of issues and thehypotheses reflected in the interim report, add necessaryinformation with respect to the effects, the extent, and thecauses of non-medical drug use, as well as the role played by thevarious aspects of social control and response, and lay thefoundation for specific recommendations concerning these variousaspects. The interim report is primarily concerned with astatement of the issues and applicable principles, and the finalreport is to be concerned with the detailed application of theseprinciples to the development of a satisfactory system of socialresponse. We recognize, however, that the urgency of some of theproblems involved in non-medical drug use and the time requiredto develop adequate resources to cope with them may indicate theappropriateness of certain recommendations at this time. This isparticularly true with respect to preparations and organizationfor which considerable lead time is required. In such cases itmay be sufficient to indicate the general direction which certainresponses should take, leaving it to further study andconsultation in the ensuing year to settle matters of detail. 18. Chapter Two on the effect of the drugs is offered at thistime for two reasons. First, we have been profoundly impressed byrepeated assertions of the need for more reliable information,and we hope that this chapter will serve a useful purpose asmaterial for drug education. Secondly, we feel that it is anindispensable basis for the development of public understandingof the issues. In effect, in Chapter Two we disclose our initialassumptions concerning the effects of the drugs. Our object is to identify the body of reliable and generally acceptedknowledge, and to determine where the important uncertainties andgaps exist. We certainly concur in the impression which othershave conveyed of a field of knowledge bedevilled by controversy,conflicting professional opinion, and uncertainty. Some observersquestion whether it is possible, in view of the intense feelingson this subject, ever to come to agreement on what should beaccepted as scientifically known. Erich Goode in his article,'Marijuana and the Politics of Reality', observes that 'themultitude of results from the many marijuana reports forms a seaof ambiguity into which nearly any message may be read'. He makesthe point that whether a particular drug effect is good or baddepends on one's subjective point of view - the implications ofthe effect in term's of one's own system of values. Goode sees nopossible reconciliation of these 'differential evaluationsof the same "objective" consequences', and heconcludes that 'the essential meaning of the marijuana issue isthe meaning which each individual brings to it'. The AddictionResearch Foundation of Ontario makes the same point in itspreliminary submission to the Commission. It puts the matter thisway: However, after all possible information has been acquired andverified scientifically, the final steps in the formulation oflegislation or governmental policy will be based upon valuejudgements. Even the classification of the effects of drug use as'beneficial' or 'adverse' is a process of evaluation with respectto subjective standards. The response to non-medical drug use is profoundly a matter ofattitudes. At the same time we must make every effort toascertain what should be accepted as scientific knowledge of the'objective' effects. It is intolerable that the process ofsubjective evaluation should take place in ignorance of theobjective facts. At the same, we would do well to heed Goode'scaution that there is an inevitable tendency to select andemphasize those views of 'objective' facts which support our ownsubjective evaluation. And as Goode points out, with specialreference to the La Guardia Report on marijuana, the variousfindings can be used to support conflicting points of view. Arewe to conclude that the task is hopeless? We think not. We cancertainly make progress by attempting to identify what should beaccepted scientifically concerning the 'objective' effects, bypointing out the important areas of scientific controversy or lackof scientific knowledge, and by making explicit the valuejudgements underlying the conflicting views as to how the effectsshould be subjectively characterized. We believe it is helpful toclarify the issues of the debate. Staff and Research 19. The members of the Commission and their staff are listedin Appendix C. The Commission is carrying out its task with asmall nucleus of full-time staff and with research consultants ona part-time basis for special aspects of its study. TheCommission's Research Associates, Dr Charles Farmilo and Dr RalphD. Miller, are concentrating on psychopharmacologicalresearch into the effects of the drugs. Dr Miller is the author,with the assistance of Dr Farmilo, of Chapter Two on 'The Drugsand Their Effects'. Research that has been commissioned so farincludes survey research to determine the extent and patterns ofnon-medical drug use in Canada, as well as Canadian perceptionsof and attitudes towards this phenomenon, and legal studies, bothdoctrinal and empirical, of the various problems involved in theregulation of non-medical drug use. The section of Chapter Fivedealing with the law is based in part on preliminary work byProfessor Paul Weiler and John Hogarth. Research is only part of the work that is involved in aninquiry of this kind. Special mention should be made of theadministrative staff who have had to work under particularpressure because of the requirement of an interim report,impinging concurrently with the organization and conduct of thepublic hearings. We would like to express our appreciation of thework of Mr James J. Moore, Executive-Secretary of the Commission,who has had the general direction of operations and who has alsoparticipated in the writing of the report; Mr Jack Macbeth, whohas been of great assistance in the organization of hearings andthe preparation of the report; Mrs Vivian Luscombe who hassupervised the secretarial staff of the Commission; Mr C. WilliamDoylend, the Ottawa Office Manager, and other members of theadministrative, secretarial and research staff. Contents | Feedback | Search DRCNet Library | Schaffer Library | Major Studies Canadian Government Commission ofInquiry WT02-B03-26IA086-000614-B043-36http://206.61.184.43:80/schaffer/Library/studies/ledain/nonmed2a.htm 206.61.184.43 19970122020813 text/html 22723HTTP/1.0 200 OKDate: Wednesday, 22-Jan-97 02:07:58 GMTServer: WebSitePro/1.1f (S/N wpo-0deb)Allow-ranges: bytesContent-type: text/htmlLast-modified: Saturday, 28-Dec-96 07:00:47 GMTContent-length: 22505 Canadian Government Commission - Barbiturates Contents | Feedback | Search DRCNet Library | Schaffer Library | Major Studies Canadian Government Commission ofInquiry BARBITURATES 45. The term 'barbiturate' generally refers to drugs which arederivatives of barbituric acid. Barbital, the first drug of thisclass to be synthesized, was introduced into medicine in Germanyin 1903. Barbiturates rapidly gained a wide usage astranquillizers, sedatives and hypnotics (sleep inducers) whichcontinues to this day. In the past half-century, over 2,000different barbiturates have been synthesized, although less thana dozen make up the bulk of current use. Among these areamobarbital (Amytal*), pentobarbital (Nembutal*), phenobarbital(Luminal*), and secobarbital (Seconal*). These drugs arefrequently referred to as 'barbs', 'nemmies', 'goof balls','yellow jackets', 'red devils', 'downers' or 'sleeping pills'. The barbiturates are often classified by the duration of theirsedative or hypnotic action at a standard dose. Since thesimilarities among these drugs exceed the differences, they willbe discussed in general terms as a group. 46. Barbiturates are among the most widely used psychoactivedrugs (medically and non-medically) in our society, and are thetoxic agents in thousands of accidental or intentional deathsannually in North America. In addition, the barbiturates haveconsiderable potential for producing psychological andphysiological dependence, and are probably second only to alcoholin frequency of drug-induced debilitation in modern society.While a considerable body of research exists into the manymedical applications of these drugs, there has been relativelylittle careful investigation of non-medical use. Although the medical and non-medical use of barbituratesappears to be widespread across age groups and social class, thechronic use of these drugs, as with alcohol, seems to beprimarily an adult practice. Good epidemiological data in thisarea are not available. Since prescription control is onlypartially effective and possession of these drugs for personaluse without medical authorization is not a criminal offence and,perhaps, because the users do not appear to form any homogeneous,cohesive or easily recognized minority, the usual medical and lawenforcement statistics are of little assistance in assessing theextent of non-medical use. 47. It has been frequently said that in Canada, the supply ofbarbiturates lawfully manufactured or imported greatly exceedsthe requirements of legitimate medical use. It appears that manycurrent non-medical users were initiated into barbiturate use formedical reasons. Numerous medical users develop dependence andcontinue use long after the original medical purpose orprescription is absent, and there are indications that mostchronic barbiturate users obtain the drugs through legitimatechannels.98 Since many physicians do not adequately maintain ormonitor prescription records, a patient may be able to arrange anincrease in the frequency and/or quantity of drug prescribed. Inaddition, many chronic barbiturate (and other prescriptiondrug) users obtain 'legitimate' prescriptions from a number ofdifferent doctors simultaneously, without the physicians'awareness.79 Because of these patterns, the distinction betweenmedical and non-medical use of barbiturates is often particularlydifficult. Essentially all of the medical and non-medicalbarbiturate supply in Canada is legitimately and professionallymanufactured; 'home-made' versions have not been identified. MedicalUse 48. Barbiturates are commonly used in medical practice todayand it would seem likely that many households have had first-handexperience with them. Most of the medical uses are based on thesedative, hypnotic, and anti-convulsant effects of the drugs.Barbiturates are widely prescribed where a general depression ofnervous system activity is desired. In low doses, they are widelyused as day-time sedatives or tranquillizers. The hypnotic effectof these drugs is familiar to thousands of Canadians who usebarbiturates in higher dose in the form of the common sleepingpill. Barbiturates are also often administered alone, and inconjunction with other drugs, as anaesthetics in surgical andrelated medical situations; but they are poor analgesics if usedalone. The anti-convulsant effects of certain barbiturates havebeen very important in the treatment of acute convulsionsassociated with drug dependence withdrawal symptoms, variousneurological disorders (including epilepsy), and poisoning due tothe overdose of such stimulants as strychnine, nicotine andcocaine. Other medical applications include diagnosis and attemptedtherapy of certain psychiatric disorders. In these instances thedrug is usually administered intravenously in a dose adjusted tokeep the patient in a semi-conscious state in which inhibitionsare reduced and various suppressed and emotionally chargedmaterial may be released. This procedure is essentially that usedin the so-called 'truth serum' application in criminalinvestigations. This effect, then, is really just a carefullymonitored dose-response to ordinary short-acting barbituratesand, while this procedure frequently results in informationdifferent from that communicated normally, there is littleevidence that it really exposes the 'truth' as such. Administration,Absorption, Distribution and Physiological Fate 49. In crystalline form, barbiturates are odourless, white oryellow powders, with a slightly bitter taste. They are availableas powders, elixirs, injections, suppositories, capsules ortablets (both in sustained and delayed release forms). They arefrequently marketed for medical use in mixtures with other drugs,such as other sedatives or tranquillizers, analgesics, belladonnaalkaloids (e.g., atropine or scopolamine), various stimulants(e.g., amphetamine or caffeine), vitamins and variousgastrointestinal agents. Barbiturates are usually administered orally for both medicaland non-medical purposes and are readily and efficiently absorbedby the stomach, small intestine, and rectum. Absorption is morerapid on an empty stomach than if the drug is taken immediatelyafter eating. Both intramuscular and intravenous injections arealso effective, but they are more prone to physiologicalcomplication and are generally avoided except for specialpurposes. While most chronic dependent users take barbituratesorally, those who are experienced with self-injections (e.g.,opiate narcotic or amphetamine dependents) may use theintravenous route. After absorption into the bloodstream, barbiturates areinitially distributed rather uniformly throughout the body, withthe latency of the psychological response being partly a functionof the facility of the particular drug in entering the brain. Thebody eliminates barbiturate activity in several ways. Mostbarbiturates are broken down or metabolized in the liver intorelatively inactive substances which are excreted by the kidneyin the urine, along with various quantities of the unaltereddrug. Temporary binding of drug molecules by plasma and tissueprotein soon after distribution, plus the affinity of certainbarbiturates for body tissue fats, may further shorten theinitial central nervous system (CNS) effects (and possiblyprolong other more subtle reactions). The preceding factors ofmetabolism, excretion, and distribution are largely responsiblefor the differences in potency and duration of action among thedifferent barbiturates. Acute and chronic barbiturate use can beidentified from blood and urine samples. 198 PsychologicalEffects 50. Many of the psychological and behavioural effects of hypnoticdoses of barbiturates are quite similar to the alcoholinebriation syndrome and consequently do not need muchelaboration. While the drug user may be able to discriminatebetween the alcohol and barbiturate states subjectively, it isextremely difficult to tell the difference from the user'sbehaviour. Although high doses invariably produce behavioural sedation,drowsiness, and sleep, the effects of mailer quantities may bequite unpredictable. As with alcohol and other sedatives,barbiturates may initially produce behavioural excitation,stimulation and lack of inhibition (especially at low doses),rather than sedation, depending on the situation and theindividual. In certain persons, sedation is not produced until aconsiderable quantity has been administered, whereas otherpsychological and behavioural effects may be quite pronounced.The user may become happy, pleasant, euphoric or 'mellow' on oneextreme, or possibly hostile, suspicious, aggressive and violenton the other. Emotional depression, self-pity, and withdrawal arealso not uncommon, and barbiturate-related suicides arefrequently reported. Although low-dose effects are often erratic,moderate to high doses generally slow down reaction time, impaircomplicated mental functions, and produce a lessening ofinhibition, a reduction in emotional control, and an impairmentof physical co-ordination as well as a variety of other effectsresembling alcohol inebriation. Acute toxic psychoses are rare.The extreme variability in response, even within the sameindividual over a short period of time, is illustrated byWikler's report.243 After intravenous injection of 0.25 to 1.0gm of amobarbital, asubject may fall asleep if he lies in bed undisturbed, yet he maybe awake and voluble if interviewed by a psychiatrist, or he mayexhibit ataxia on attempting to walk back to his bed, but he may'sober up' promptly when instructed to pose for a motion picturedemonstration of ataxia. 51. Frequent mention is made of a phenomenon called 'drugautomatism', associated with toxic barbiturate overdose,although, many observers have expressed doubts as to itssignificance. In this situation, the individual, in adrug-induced state of confusion or stupor, is said to administeradditional doses of the drug without being fully aware of theprevious administration.148 52. Although it appears certain that driving skills would bediminished by barbiturate intoxication, little directinvestigation has been conducted. Related behavioural studies dosuggest such an effect. Low therapeutic doses may not reducedriving ability, however, if the drug is not taken in conjunctionwith other sedatives such as alcohol.72 53. On the basis of existing evidence it would appear that thelong-term psychological effects of moderate barbiturate use arenegligible for most users. Some of the complications of chronichigh-dose use will be dealt with later. PhysiologicalEffects 54. The short-term effect of moderate to high doses ofbarbiturates is a general depression of neural and muscularactivity. As with psychological and behavioural effects, theresponse to low dose is much more variable. Initially, theelectroencephalogram (EEG) may suggest cortical activation,although this pattern is usually soon replaced by signs ofdrowsiness or sleep. The sleep induced by hypnotic dosesgenerally resembles normal sleep with the exception of a markedreduction in the rapid eye movement (REM) stage, the significanceof which is only beginning to be understood. Drowsiness or'hangover' symptoms may follow acute intoxication or drug-inducedsleep. Although the sedative action of the barbiturates hasfrequently been attributed to their effects on the reticularactivating system of the brain, little is known of the specificdetails, and this action might occur through a variety ofdifferent pharmacological mechanisms. A variety of other transient or temporary physiologicalchanges may occur with moderate barbiturate use; the majority ofthese apparently reflect a general 'slowing down' ofphysiological activity (in the respiratory, cardiovascular andother systems) normally occurring with behavioural sedation, andare of little clinical significance. After even chronicnon-medical use there is generally a fairly complete recovery ofpsychological and physiological capabilities following withdrawalinstances of permanent psychological or neurological disorder, orof irreversible liver or kidney damage are rarely reported. Thisis a rather surprising picture in light of the vast number ofdisabilities attributed to chronic alcoholism and the generalpharmacological similarities between alcohol and thebarbiturates. It may be significant to note here that personsphysically dependent on barbiturates seem to be more likely tomaintain a reasonable state of nutrition than do chronicalcoholics. The toxic or poisoned state induced by barbiturate over-doseis characterized by coma, a general shock syndrome (e.g., weakrapid pulse, low blood pressure and cold sweaty skin) and mayresult in death due to respiratory arrest, cardiovascularcollapse or kidney failure. If the over-dose is not fatal, atemporary jaundice due to impaired liver function is likely tofollow and skin reactions may result. Some of these responseswill also occur to normal doses in individuals allergic to orabnormally sensitive to the barbiturates. Because of the welldocumented additive or potentiating effects (as well ascross-tolerance) among the sedatives, users of related drugs,such as alcohol, must be especially attentive to dose levels. Toleranceand Dependence 55. Tolerance to some of the effects of barbiturates can bedemonstrated, although the degree and rate of toleranceacquisition varies considerably with the dose, frequency ofadministration and the individual. The potential for tolerance ismuch lower with barbiturates than with the opiate narcotics, andappears to level off at a maximum of 1.0 - 2.5gm. per day. (Anormal sleep-inducing dose might be around 0.1 - 0.3gm.) Whilethis loss of drug sensitivity is quite general and applies toboth sedative and mood effects, no tolerance appears to developto the lethal toxicity level since chronic users are assusceptible to fatal over-doses as are initiates. In other words,the safety margin decreases with increased tolerance. Severalmechanisms operate in producing tolerance. Barbiturates stimulatethe body's production of the metabolic enzymes which inactivatethe drug. Also, some insensitivity to the depressant effectsappears which might reflect a general neurological adaptation.Certain learning processes are also probably involved in changingthe character of the response upon repeated administrations. Mostaspects of tolerance disappear after a few weeks of abstinencefrom the drug. Although barbiturates were not recognized as 'addictive' drugsfor decades after their general medical acceptance and usage, inchronic users, physical dependence may develop along withtolerance. Barbiturate dependence is in some respects similar toopiate narcotic dependence, although barbiturate (and alcohol)withdrawal symptoms are frequently more severe and are morelikely to result in death. The abstinence syndrome followingwithdrawal of the drug in chronic heavy users may begin with areduction in intoxication and an apparent improvement incondition. Within a few hours, however, general physicalweakness, dizziness, anxiety, tremors, hyperactivity, nausea,abdominal cramps and vomiting may occur. These may be followedafter one-and-one-half to five days by muscle spasms and grandmal (epileptic) seizures. Between the third and seventh day,delusions and hallucinations may appear; this psychosis may lastfor days or even months although recovery usually occurs within aweek or two. Death during the convulsive phase occasionallyoccurs. 111, 89 56. The full picture of barbiturate withdrawal only appearsafter heavy chronic use, and the effects of abstinence followingmore moderate consumption are considerably less severe, and maymanifest only a few of the classic symptoms. Many regular usersof therapeutic doses develop neither significant tolerance norphysical dependence. As is the case with alcohol and opiatenarcotics, babies born of mothers physically dependent onbarbiturates are also physically dependent on the same drugs. Psychological dependence also occurs in some users, andanxious or tense individuals may become dependent on even smalldoses in order to function in a manner which they considersatisfactory. Many persons depend upon the hypnotic effects ofthe barbiturates and can not sleep without a pill. In otherindividuals, the drug may be depended upon for a variety ofsubjective effects which the user considers essential to hiswell-being. The problem of psychological and behaviouraldependence on barbiturates has not been adequately explored,however, and remains in the area of clinical impression andconjecture. Barbituratesand Other Drugs 57. Because of the many similarities between barbiturates andother sedatives, they are often used interchangeably. A certainamount of cross-tolerance exists among these drugs, and chronicusers of barbiturates are generally quite resistant to many ofthe effects of alcohol, minor tranquillizers and volatileanaesthetics, as well. This cross-tolerance, however, does notappear to affect the lethal dose, and large quantities of alcoholand barbiturates taken simultaneously (acting in an additivefashion) may produce a toxic or fatal reaction. In addition, thesedative drugs have the capacity to be substituted for each otherin diminishing withdrawal symptoms, and barbiturates arefrequently used therapeutically to reduce the severity ofwithdrawal in alcoholics. Since the sedatives show thiscross-dependence, individuals dependent on one may turn to othersedatives if the supply of the preferred drug is restricted.Consequently, chronic barbiturate dependents are usually heavyalcohol users as well. Such multiple users often refer to thebarbiturate intoxication as a 'dry drunk'. Barbiturates have theadvantage of producing inebriation without the obvious odour ofalcohol. The relationship between barbiturates and the opiate narcoticsis more complicated. These drugs may not show significantcross-tolerance, although barbiturates can be useful in thetreatment of opiate narcotic withdrawal symptoms and mayeffectively reduce the unpleasantness of the abstinence syndrome.The drugs do interact in some sort of complementary way sincebarbiturates are frequently, used by opiate narcotic dependentsto strengthen or reinforce a weak heroin dose or as a substitutein an emergency. Many opiate users, however, avoid barbituratesand consider the barbiturate-dependent person to be at the bottomof the 'addict' community, together with the alcoholics. Barbiturates are often used in conjunction with amphetamines. Dexamyl*, for example, is a combination of dextroamphetamine and amobarbital which supposedly produces stimulation without certain of the irritation or tension-producing effects of the amphetamines. More important clinically, is the frequently noted alternating cycle of sedation and stimulation which many medical and non-medical drug users demonstrate. A stimulant may be used to overcome the drowsy hangover the day after a hypnotic dose of barbiturate. By evening, another sedative dose may be necessary to overcome the insomnia potentiated by the day's amphetamine. This continuing cycle is apparently not at all uncommon among otherwise socially respectable drug users. A somewhat related pattern has been demonstrated by some amphetamine injecting 'speed freaks' who use barbiturates to terminate the stimulant effect or produce sleep after a 'high' of several days' duration. Contents | Feedback | Search DRCNet Library | Schaffer Library | Major Studies Canadian Government Commission ofInquiryWT02-B03-27IA086-000614-B043-62http://206.61.184.43:80/schaffer/Library/studies/ledain/nonmed2b.htm 206.61.184.43 19970122020827 text/html 28669HTTP/1.0 200 OKDate: Wednesday, 22-Jan-97 02:08:21 GMTServer: WebSitePro/1.1f (S/N wpo-0deb)Allow-ranges: bytesContent-type: text/htmlLast-modified: Saturday, 28-Dec-96 07:00:39 GMTContent-length: 28451 Canadian Government Commission - Alcohol Contents | Feedback | Search DRCNet Library | Schaffer Library | Major Studies Canadian Government Commission ofInquiry ALCOHOL 59. Alcohol is one of the most widely used psychoactive drugsknown to man; it has apparently been with us since the dawn ofcivilization. Breweries flourished in Egypt almost six thousandyears ago and there is evidence that Stone Age prehistoric manmade alcoholic beverages long before that.223 The use of alcoholhas appeared in varying degrees in most societies throughoutrecorded history and has traditionally played an importantsymbolic as well as pharmacological role in many social,religious and medical practices and customs. Just as the use ofalcohol has been almost universal, so, apparently, has itsmisuse. Consequently, some degree of opposition to 'drink'appears to have arisen in all indulging cultures, althoughattempts to eradicate its use have met with a uniform lack ofsuccess. What is this drug which has been hailed as the 'water of life'and 'nectar of the gods' by some, and damned by others as 'secondonly to war' as a source of human problems? Made up of threecommon elements, carbon, hydrogen and oxygen, ethyl alcohol(C2H5OH) is a colourless, inflammable and volatile liquid. Theword 'alcohol' by itself is usually taken to mean ethyl alcoholor ethanol (common beverage alcohol), although there is avast number of other substances in the aliphatic alcohol family,many of which are highly toxic in even low doses. Although the technique of producing alcoholic beverages byfermenting fruit, grain, vegetables, and other food-stuffs hashardly been a secret over the past few thousand years, the exactprocess by which the drug is generated was first illuminated byLouis Pasteur in the middle of the nineteenth century. Hisinvestigations revealed that alcohol was produced by a singlecelled microscopic plant, one of the yeast fungi, which by ametabolic form of combustion breaks down certain sugars,releasing carbon dioxide (CO2) with ethyl alcohol as aby-product. This production of CO2 is responsible for the 'head'on a glass of beer, and the 'popping' of champagne corks, as wellas the leavening effects of yeast in the rising of bread. Sinceyeast cannot digest starch, mash from cereal grains such asbarley, rye, corn and rice must be malted (i.e., converted tomaltose sugar) prior to fermentation in the production of beer,gin and whisky. 60. Fermentation normally continues until the sugar supply isexhausted. However, as the amount of alcohol in the fermentingsolution increases, the metabolic activity of the yeast is sloweduntil it is finally killed when the alcohol level reaches about14%, thus setting a limit on the maximum strength of natural(undistilled) beverages. The distillation process of boiling offand isolating the more volatile alcohol from the other fluids(mostly water) allows a further increase in ethanolconcentration. Although this technique was used in Middle Easterncultures centuries earlier, the production of 'spirits' bydistillation has been known in Europe for less than seven hundredyears. Today, ethanol can be produced synthetically. In Canada, beer usually contains about 5% alcohol by volume,natural wine 7% to 14%, fortified wine up to 20% and spirits orliquor (distilled) approximately 40% alcohol. In other words, a12 oz. bottle of beer or 3 to 4 oz. of wine contain about as muchalcohol as 11/2 oz. of whisky. 61. The notion of alcohol 'proof' originated centuries agofrom a crude but effective analytic technique designed to assessthe strength of spirits. If gun powder soaked with the beverageexploded on ignition, this was taken as 'proof' that the liquorwas more than half alcohol. 'Proof spirit' in the United Kingdomand Canadian system contains about 57% alcohol, while in theUnited States proof is calculated as twice the per cent by volume(e.g., 80% proof whisky is 40% alcohol).80 Canada has experimented with alcohol prohibition in varyingways since 1878. Although there are currently some 'dry'localities, alcohol is generally legally available across thecountry. An interesting bit of drug history is connected withalcohol law: over 300 years ago the prohibition of liquor salesto Indians was Canada's first alcohol regulation. Some suchdiscriminatory policies are only now being eliminated. 32 62. There was a 15-year period of prohibition in the UnitedStates, ending in 1934. The failure of that programme has beenattributed to the unworkable form of the laws, inadequateenforcement, corruption among public authorities and, perhapsmost importantly, a general lack of public support. During thatperiod, the elimination of legitimate alcohol outlets resulted inhome breweries and distilleries, 'bootleg' liquor or toxicsubstitutes, and smuggling, and created an economic vacuumrapidly filled by organized crime. Many authorities feel thatthis multi-million-dollar illicit market provided the initialcapital for the construction of a network of syndicated criminaland quasilegal business empires which have considerable economicand political strength in North America today. Alcohol is now used by more than three-quarters of theCanadian population over the age of 15. Although most of it isundoubtedly consumed primarily for its pharmacologicalproperties, there is a significant aspect of alcohol usage whichis, in some respects, independent of its immediate drug effects.There are many long-standing customs, traditions andsuperstitions which pervade alcohol use in the Western world.Because it has become an integral part of our culture, the setand setting surrounding alcohol use is substantially differentfrom that associated with other drugs in Canada. 63. Alcohol may have special meanings in various socialcontexts. Alcohol use is often symbolically and pharmacologicallyassociated with the acknowledgment of birth, death, marriage andother contracts, adulthood, friendship, and, to some, it mayimply virility and masculinity. Although it is employed in somereligious ceremonies, many individuals have moral apprehensionsabout alcohol and may approach its use with feelings ofambivalence and guilt. Some reject it outright on grounds ofprinciple, while still others feel that moderate use is morallyacceptable. In many social circles abstinence is frowned upon and'teetotallers' are looked upon with suspicion. On the other hand,it is obvious that considerable alcohol intoxication istolerated, condoned and even encouraged in many situations inNorth American society. When one considers the fact that thesevarious attitudes are ultimately tied to, or interact with, thediverse pharmacological potentials of alcohol in determining theoverall drug effect, the complexity of the psychopharmacology ofthe drug in North America becomes apparent. Because its use is soingrained at all levels of society, there is a tendency for manyCanadians not to even consider alcohol a drug. In a wider context, Jaffe, in The Pharmacological Basis ofTherapeutics observes: 111 The large role that the production and consumption ofalcoholic beverages plays in the economic and social life inWestern society should not permit us to minimize the fact thatalcoholism is a more significant problem than all other forms ofdrug abuse combined. Medical Use 64. Alcohol is currently recognized as an official drug in theBritish and U.S. Pharmacopeias, although the various alcoholicbeverages, as such, are no longer listed for medical use. Alcoholhas been cited over the past few thousand years as a cure fornearly every ailment or disease. Most of the medical benefitswere probably more imagined than real, and many of alcohol'slegitimate pharmacological functions have now been filled by moreeffective drugs, although it still plays a useful role inmedicine. Alcohol is often used as a preservative, solvent, and vehiclefor other drugs, and is contained in tinctures, elixirs, spiritsand many medicinal syrups. It is used to cleanse, disinfect andharden the skin, to cool it during fever, to decrease sweating(and is included in many antiperspirant deodorant), to reduce bedsores, to treat fainting, to temporarily or permanently blocknerves by injection, and to stimulate appetite and digestion. Inconcentrations around 70%, alcohol is an effective antibacterialagent, although it is not satisfactory for disinfecting openwounds since it damages the raw tissue.186 Alcohol is still sometimes recommended as a tranquillizer,sedative, or hypnotic and may also serve as a mild mood stimulantfor some individuals. It is no longer considered a safesurgical anaesthetic, since the dose necessary to produceunconsciousness is often dangerously close to the fatal level.However, the drug does produce mild analgesia (pain reduction) atlower doses. Alcohol is still used in the lay and folk medicineto 'treat' the common cold, although its benefits, if any, areprobably limited to an improvement in mood and increasedrelaxation and rest. Administration, Absorption, Distribution and PhysiologicalFate 65. Alcohol is usually taken orally and is rapidly andcompletely absorbed in the gastrointestinal tract. Someabsorption takes place in the stomach although diffusion into theblood stream is most rapid from the upper intestine and,consequently, the quicker the alcohol passes through the stomachthe shorter the latency of its action. Food eaten before or withalcohol tends to decrease the drug effect by slowing stomachemptying, and a meal before drinking alcohol may reduce the peakalcohol level in the blood by almost one-half compared to thatattained by drinking on an empty stomach. Once absorbed, alcoholis distributed quite uniformly in all bodily fluids, easilyenters the brain, and in pregnant women crosses the placentalbarrier into the foetus. Alcohol temporarily diffuses into fattissue and consequently, a lean muscular individual will normallyexperience a greater pharmacological effect with a given dosethan will a person with much body fat. Approximately 95% of the alcohol in the body is broken down byoxidation in the liver and the rest is excreted unchanged,primarily in the urine and breath. While certain alcoholicbeverages, such as beer, contain some protein and carbohydrates,alcohol itself provides only calories when metabolized and haslittle general food value. Depending on the form of alcoholicbeverage and possible mixers, an ordinary drink may contain 90 to150 calories or more. The rate of disappearance of alcoholfrom the body is quite constant within individuals at a giventime, and the average 150 lb. man can metabolize about 9 ml. (0.3oz) of alcohol per hour. A convenient index of the quantity of the drug in the body isthe blood alcohol level, represented in per cent byweight. Since the amount of alcohol excreted in the breath bearsa fixed relationship to that in the blood, it is possible toaccurately estimate the blood alcohol level from expired air.This principle is utilized in the Breathalyzer tests nowemployed in the enforcement of driving laws. Short-Term Effects 66. Alcohol exerts its more significant effects through thecentral nervous system, usually producing a general sedation ordepression of neural activity over a wide dosage range, althoughin certain circumstances, considerable behavioural andpsychological arousal may result. Little is known as to thespecific mechanism by which alcohol produces itspsychopharmacological action. As with most drugs, alcoholeffects, especially those resulting from low or moderate amounts,depend to a large extent on the individual and the situation inwhich the drinking occurs. A drink or two may produce drowsinessand lethargy in some instances, while the same quantity mightlead to increased activity and psychological stimulation inanother individual, or in the same person in differentcircumstances. Furthermore, a dose which is initially stimulatingmay later produce sedation. In many social settings, alcohol seems to result in alessening of inhibition and a feeling of well being, sociabilityand camaraderie in most individuals. For many people alcoholrelieves tension and anxiety - the common notion that one 'needsa drink' when worried, irritated or upset, reflects a generalacknowledgment of this function. Although alcohol usuallyelevates mood at first, a general lack of emotional control,including anxiety, withdrawal, self-pity and depression may occurlater. Alcohol has been frequently cited as an importantcontributing factor in many suicides. Hostility and aggression are not at all uncommon in somedrinkers, and fights and other forms of violent antisocialbehaviour are often reported to accompany bouts of heavydrinking. It appears that some criminals fortify their courage bydrinking prior to a sortie and alcohol intoxication reportedlyplays a significant role in a large proportion of the violentcrimes (murder, rape and assault against persons and property) inNorth America.18 67. Alcohol does not have a specific aphrodisiac (sexstimulating) effect per se, although the emotionality andgeneral lessening of inhibitions often induced may lead to anincrease in sexual activity and other normally restrictedbehaviour. An increase in desire or opportunity may be neglectedby acute sexual impotence, however. Although delusions, illusions and amnesic 'black outs' mayoccur in some individuals, acute alcohol psychosis (pathologicalintoxication) in normally moderate drinkers is rare. Even so,many persons might sympathize with the Roman philosopher Senecawho, almost 2,000 years ago, observed that, 'Drunkenness isnothing but a condition of insanity purposely assumed'.197 In moderate amounts (e.g., a few drinks) alcohol may increaseor decrease heart rate, produce a 'flushing' or dilation of smallblood vessels in the skin (giving a sensation of warmth), lowerbody temperature, stimulate appetite and the secretion of salivaand gastric juices, increase urination, produce a slowing of theelectroencephalogram (EEG), increase reaction time, reducemuscular co-ordination. In addition, alcohol generally reducesperformance on tests of a wide variety of psychologicalfunctions. Tests requiring a high degree of attention,concentration or vigilance are particularly sensitive to alcoholeffects, and impairment is usually most pronounced on complex andrecently learned tasks. In a few situations, however, a smallamount of alcohol may actually improve performance. In highdoses, alcohol produces drunkenness, disorientation andconfusion, slurred speech, blurred vision, inadequate muscularcontrol, and often induces nausea and vomiting. As an increasingquantity is ingested, there occurs a depression of respiration,general anesthesia and unconsciousness and, rarely, death due torespiratory arrest and circulatory failure. Acute alcoholintoxication is often followed by pronounced 'hangover' symptomscharacterized by nausea, weakness, dizziness, poor coordinationand a variety of aches and pains. Some authorities consider thispost-inebriation phase a form of acute withdrawal syndrome. 68. Effects of alcohol on driving ability are well known -even moderate amounts produce serious impairment in manyindividuals. A recent study of alcohol involvement in fatal motorvehicle accidents in three Canadian provinces presented findingssimilar to those reported regularly across North America.37 Ithas commonly been observed that alcohol is a factor in a largeproportion of all fatal traffic accidents. Approximately 70% ofdrivers killed in single vehicle accidents and 50% of driverskilled in multi-vehicle collisions had been drinking. Among alldriver fatalities, alcohol was detected in the blood of 60 to 70per cent of those considered responsible for their own deaths.Furthermore, more than half of the pedestrians killed in trafficaccidents had recently been drinking, and there are numerousreports that alcohol is a contributing factor in a great numberof industrial accidents as well. A large proportion of the peopleinvolved in such accidents are chronic alcoholics, although themajority are apparently 'social' drinkers. The intensity of the acute effects of alcohol can, to acertain extent, be predicted from the amount of alcohol in theblood, although the relationship between the quantity of alcoholpresent and the central nervous system (CNS) response may varyconsiderably from individual to individual. Recent Federallegislation prohibits driving with blood alcohol level greaterthan 0.08%. Depending on the person, this concentration may beproduced by three or four ordinary drinks, if consumed in a shorttime. While certain individuals might be capable of drivingsatisfactorily with this much alcohol, most persons are probablyimpaired by even lower quantities. Although the Breathalyzer canbe used to assess acute alcohol intoxication, there are no simplemethods of detecting a 'hangover', and there are indications thatthis post-inebriation phase also has severe effects onpsychomotor performance. Long-Term Effects 69. Many authorities differentiate between 'low risk'(moderate) and 'high risk' (heavy) drinking in discussing thelong-term effects of alcohol. For most otherwise normalindividuals, moderate drinking over a prolonged period of timemay produce little significant psychological or physiologicalchange. High risk or heavy drinking (e.g., five or six or moredrinks a day) may lead to a variety of disorders, however, manyof which are subsumed under the general term 'alcoholism'. There is considerable disagreement among authorities asto the proper delineation of the concept of alcoholism -definitions may be as general as 'a family of disordersaccompanying chronic heavy drinking 'with various social andeconomic complications, or may contain more restrictivespecifications of physical dependency or psychological andphysiological harm. Jellinek has described five different typesof alcoholics which differ in degree and kind of psychological,behavioural and physiological involvement.112 In some areas ofNorth America, at least two per cent to five per cent of alcoholusers become alcoholics and many more would be considered problemdrinkers. 70. No group of drug-dependent persons presents a sorrierpicture of psychological and physiological pathology than that ofthe 'skid row' derelict alcoholics. Frequently observed in theseindividuals and many other alcoholics are disorders of thedigestive tract, cardiovascular system, lungs, kidney, pancreasand the nervous system, with sleep disturbance and various kindsof irreversible neurological damage and cerebral atrophy.Considerable attention has been focused on liver disorders inheavy drinkers, and it is well established that alcohol is amajor contributing or causal factor in liver cirrhosis.Alcoholics may develop specific psychotic syndromes, permanentlyimpaired memory, epilepsy, chronic incoordination, sexualimpotence, loss of appetite and a variety of nutritionaldisorders which may result in an increased susceptibility toother diseases and infections.111 In the past, these and numerous other disorders were thoughtto be a direct result of alcohol toxicity, but now many of thesepathologies are considered to be of secondary origin - often afunction of chronic dietary deficiencies, poor personal care andother aspects of the general life style which may accompanyalcoholism. The diet of certain alcoholics may consist of 40-50%alcohol, with periods of weeks or even months of nothing else,and thus may be dangerously low in proteins, vitamins, mineralsand other essential foodstuffs. Proper diet and medical care maybe able to prevent or alleviate many, but not all, of theproblems associated with chronic alcoholism.182 Only a minority of alcoholics are 'down and out' derelicts,and there are many alcohol-dependent persons in all levels ofsociety who function in varying degrees of effectiveness in spiteof the handicap. Psychological and physiological disorders inthese individuals vary considerably as a function of general lifestyle, drinking patterns and perhaps certain inheritedcharacteristics. Many heavy drinkers show little functionalimpairment. Tolerance and Dependence 71. Tolerance to most of the effects of alcohol develops withfrequent use, although it does not occur as rapidly or to thesame degree as with the opiate narcotics. The rate of acquisitionand extent of tolerance depends on the pattern of use, andregular heavy drinkers may be able to consume two or three timesas much alcohol as a novice. In Western culture, some symbolicmasculinity frequently accompanies the development of toleranceand the ability to 'hold one's liquor'. Most intermittent or moderate drinkers show little tendency toincrease dose, although regular heavy drinkers may, in order toobtain the desired psychological effects, ingest quantities whichlead to chronic alcohol toxicity symptoms. In addition to theprobable neurophysiological and metabolic mechanisms involved intolerance, learning to function under the influence of alcoholmay further reduce some of the acute behavioural effects ofintoxication in regular users. Little or no tolerance develops tothe lethal dose, however, and acute alcohol poisoning is a notedcause of death in alcoholics, although nausea, vomiting andunconsciousness usually prevent self-administration of a fataloverdose. In some alcoholics, tolerance later seems to declineand a special response or oversensitivity to certain effects ofalcohol develops. In such individuals even a single drink mayproduce profound loss of control and initiate unrestrictedfurther indulgence. 72. Physical dependence on alcohol occurs in some long-termheavy drinkers after the development of tolerance. Althoughalcoholic hallucinosis, delirium tremens ('DT's), and convulsions('rum fits') were noted and studied in the nineteenth century,until recently there was a lack of consensus as to whether thesesymptoms were essentially the direct result of acute or chronicalcohol toxicity, secondary nutritional deficiencies, or part ofa physical dependence withdrawal syndrome. Isbell et al108 and Mendelson et al156have clearly demonstrated that even when diet is controlled,a characteristic severe abstinence syndrome can occur after onlya few weeks of continual heavy drinking. The quantities ofalcohol ingested in these studies were much greater than thosenormally consumed, however, and with the usual drinking patterns,such physiological dependence does not occur until after 3 to 15or more years of heavy consumption. Some heavy drinkers neverbecome physically dependent on alcohol.112 73. The overall picture of the alcohol withdrawal syndrome isgenerally similar to that noted earlier for barbiturates. Nausea,anxiety, severe agitation, confusion, tremors, and sweating arefollowed by cramps, vomiting and illusions and hallucinations.After several days, delirium tremens may develop and convulsions,exhaustion and cardiovascular collapse may occur. The deliriumtremens stage is fatal in about 10% of cases. Major recovery inthose surviving usually occurs within a week, although certainpsychological symptoms may continue for a longer period.234 Psychological dependence on alcohol seems to occur inmany individuals, and such dependence appears to be generallyaccepted in contemporary North America. A great number of peopleregularly turn to alcohol for relief or aid prior to or afterfacing a stressful situation, to escape worries, troubles orboredom, to relax and enjoy a party, or even to sleep, and manyfeel they do not function as well in certain situations without adrink or two. There would appear to be a strong psychologicalcomponent in the drinking behaviour of the developing alcoholic,as is exemplified in the usually compulsive nature of hisdrinking and his frequent inability to control his use of alcoholin spite of obvious consequences. Alcohol and Other Drugs 74. A certain degree of cross-tolerance and cross-dependenceoccurs among the sedative drugs. Heavy alcohol users are normallyresistant to the effects of barbiturates, minor tranquillizers,volatile solvents and anaesthetics, as well as alcohol, althoughthe cross-tolerance does not significantly affect the lethaldose. Consequently, many over-dose deaths occur due to the mixingof these drugs in chronic users. Barbiturates and minortranquillizers effectively block alcohol withdrawal symptoms andare frequently used in treating alcoholics in the acute phase ofabstinence. Alcoholics are often heavy users of other sedativedrugs as well and may switch from one to another, if it isconvenient or necessary. The use of high toxic alcohols, such asmethyl or 'wood' alcohol, and even automobile anti-freeze, hasbeen reported in derelict alcoholics. In addition, personsdependent on opiate narcotics generally have a history of heavyalcohol consumption. 75. Certain drugs, such as disulfiram (Antabuse*) orTemposil*, which may have little direct pharmacological activitythemselves, have the capacity to inhibit certain stages ofalcohol metabolism in the body and can thereby produce a highlyunpleasant toxic reaction known as the acetaldehyde syndrome whenused in conjunction with alcohol. Such drugs have been used inthe treatment of problem drinkers. Amphetamines, caffeine and other stimulants may reduce thedrowsiness often associated with inebriation, although they cannot fully compensate for most of the effects of alcoholintoxication. Contents | Feedback | Search DRCNet Library | Schaffer Library | Major Studies Canadian Government Commission ofInquiry WT02-B03-28IA086-000614-B043-91http://206.61.184.43:80/schaffer/Library/studies/ledain/nonmed2c.htm 206.61.184.43 19970122020840 text/html 13599HTTP/1.0 200 OKDate: Wednesday, 22-Jan-97 02:08:32 GMTServer: WebSitePro/1.1f (S/N wpo-0deb)Allow-ranges: bytesContent-type: text/htmlLast-modified: Saturday, 28-Dec-96 07:00:31 GMTContent-length: 13381 Canadian Government Commission - Tranquilizers Contents | Feedback | Search DRCNet Library | Schaffer Library | Major Studies Canadian Government Commission ofInquiry MINOR TRANQUILIZERS 76. The term 'minor tranquilizers' was introduced into thescientific literature in the 1950s to distinguish the medicinesprescribed to reduce anxiety and tension from the major tranquillizers,like reserpine and chlorpromazine, which are employed (asantipsychotic drugs) in the treatment of severe mental illnesssuch as schizophrenia. Another phrase, often used interchangeablywith the words 'minor tranquilizers' is anxiolytic sedatives. Thisclass of drugs may be defined as substances which reduce anxiety,tension and agitation without other significant effects oncognition or perceptual processes. It seems safe to say that the optimal anxiolytic sedative,which effectively separates anxiety-reducing properties fromthose producing undesired psychological side effects does not yetexist. There are a variety of drugs of several chemical classeswhich approximate these criteria, however: bromides, paraldehyde,chloral hydrate; the newer minor tranquillizers such asmeprobamate (Miltown*), diazepam (Valium*), and chlordiazepoxide(Librium*) and assorted other compounds (e.g., ethchlorvynol,glutethimide) which do not fall into a neat chemicalclassification. Alcohol and barbiturates are also oftenconsidered with the anxiolytic sedatives, although we will keepthem separate in the following discussions since they havealready been covered in previous sections of this report. 77. Most minor tranquillizers fall between alcohol andbarbiturates in sedative action at a therapeutic dose. Thedisparate classes of chemicals have generally similarphysiological action and will be treated as a group, withindividual differences sometimes characterized. The minortranquillizers have tended to replace barbiturates as day-timesedatives in recent years. These drugs and other sedatives arecommonly referred to as 'downers' in the drug argot. In Canada and the U.S.A., well over $500 million is spent eachyear on sedative drugs, to treat a wide variety of symptomsfalling under the category of anixety.131 Although there are nostatistics available to us at this time on the Canadian imports,exports, manufacture, production or sale of minor tranquillizers,many observers feel that the supply greatly exceeds medicalneeds. The distribution route which the drugs follow afterproduction is not known, and a considerable percentage may bediverted for non-medical use. Clandestine manufacture of minortranquillizers does not appear to occur and all such drugsinitially start into the market as lawful materials. As describedin the section on barbiturates, patients may be able to procurelarge quantities of these drugs through legitimate prescriptionchannels. 79. In the U.S., production figures for tranquillizers exceedthose for 'sleeping pills', 'pep pills', and opiate narcoticscombined.77 In additional,178 In 1965 in the U.S.A., some 58 million new prescriptions and108 million refills were written for psychotropes (sedatives,tranquillizers and stimulants) and these 166 millionprescriptions accounted for 14% of the total prescriptions of allkinds written in the United States. 79. Minor tranquillizers are so widely prescribed that theAmerican Medical Association warned doctors aboutoverprescription and outlined ways in which the 'misuse ofsedatives' by 'the prolonged and unsupervised administrationof (tranquillizers) for symptomatic relief often without adequatediagnosis or knowledge of the patient's past experience withmedications, or attitudes towards drugs' is aggravated.8 Evidencein these recent U.S. surveys indicates that the minortranquillizers and other sedatives are more commonly used thanthe stimulants among respondents above age 20. The minor tranquillizers, along with barbiturates, tobacco,and alcohol, are among the most widely used drugs in NorthAmerican society, and are the toxic agents in a large number ofpoisoning cases. Since chronic tranquillizer dependence may bequite frequent, and may involve considerable impairment, thepublic's relative indifference to the hazards of tranquillizerpill-popping is quite alarming. As in the case of alcohol andbarbiturates, much research on medical use has been done, butlittle investigation of non-medical use of tranquillizers hasbeen carried out. Medical Use 80. Minor tranquillizers are widely used in medical practicetoday, and are mainly prescribed for patients suffering fromanxiety, tension, behavioural excitement and insomnia. They arealso used in the treatment of lower back pain, convulsivedisorders and withdrawal symptoms of opiate narcotic and alcoholdependence. Some clinicians feel that chemotherapy of anxiety is asecondary approach (although frequently the most expedient) andthat the minor tranquillizers should be used primarily to relieveimmediate distress, and to aid the patient only until othertreatment procedures become effective. Administration, Absorption, Distribution and PhysiologicalFate 81. Minor tranquillizers are usually administered orally aselixirs or tablets, but are also sometimes injected, forboth medical and non-medical purposes. They are generally rapidlyabsorbed by the stomach, intestine and rectum, and the absorptionis most rapid with an empty stomach. Once absorbed, the drugs aredistributed quite uniformly throughout the body, with the latencyof response dependent on the particular chemical class. Some aremetabolized, or otherwise chemically altered (usually in theliver), and excreted into the urine, while others are eliminatedunchanged. The factors of distribution, metabolism, andexcretion, are primarily responsible for differences in potencyand duration of action of the different minor tranquillizers. Thedetection of some acute and chronic tranquillizer use is noteasy, and the methods of detection of the metabolites in urineare highly sophisticated and expensive. Psychological Effects 82. Many of the psychological effects of minor tranquillizersare similar to those observed with alcohol and barbiturates. Aswith these other sedatives, psychological and behaviouralresponses to low doses of minor tranquillizers are quitevariable. There may be a sedation in some instances and, inothers, an increase in activity. Studies reveal that complexinteractions between the type of drug and the level of anxietyoccur, even within the same pharmacological group; the drugs mayimpair or improve performance, depending on dose and the degreeof anxiety present.131 Normal doses usually provide relaxation, a feeling ofwell-being and perhaps some loss of inhibition. With excessiveuse of these drugs the following effects may be observed;disorientation, confusion, memory impairment, trance-likeepisodes, double vision, personality alterations, rage reactionsand other symptoms resembling those of drunkenness. Suchmanifestations are difficult to differentiate from theinebriation caused by barbiturates and alcohol. 83. It appears that driving skills may not be impaired atclinical doses, so long as the user is not already drowsy or hasnot taken other sedatives such as alcohol. At higher doses,driving skills are more likely to be seriously impaired. Onereport states that the accident rate in a group of drivers usingprescribed doses of Librium* was 10 times the general accidentrate for New York State, but it is not clear whether the accidentrate among these drivers who 'needed' a tranquillizer, was sohigh because of, or in spite of, the drug they were taking.167 InCanada it is an offence to drive under the influence of drugs,and the penalties are similar to those for drunken driving,although convictions involving tranquillizers are rarelyreported.. Physiological Effects 84. The response to moderate and high doses of minortranquillizers is a general depression of nervous and muscularactivity and several other bodily functions. Compared with othersedatives, the newer minor tranquillizers may have lessinhibitory effect on the parts of the brain which are responsiblefor arousal and motor control and may have greater musclerelaxant effects. The minor tranquillizers affect the levels ofsome neurohumors in the brain which may be involved in thetension-anxiety states. However, the exact mechanism by whichthese drugs produce their effects is unknown. Side effects observed with these drugs include drowsiness,ataxia, lethargy, skin rashes, nausea, diminished sex interest,menstrual and ovulatory irregularities, blood abnormalities andincreased sensitivity to alcohol. High doses may depressrespiration, produce unconsciousness and coma and can producedeath. There is no clear evidence of permanent irreversibledamage to neurological or other physiological processes even withlong-term non-medical use. The fact that chronic users of minortranquillizers maintain a reasonable diet and are not reported tosuffer from malnutrition, may account for some of the differencesbetween the chronic effects of tranquillizer use and alcoholism. Tolerance and Dependence 85. Tolerance usually develops to most of the effects of theminor tranquillizers on repeated use and the dose must often beincreased in order to obtain the desired effects. No tolerancedevelops to the lethal toxicity, however, and chronic users mustbe especially attentive to the quantities consumed. With one ortwo exceptions, these drugs have been reported to produce bothpsychological and physiological dependence, resembling that seenwith alcohol and the barbiturates. The clinical descriptions of the abstinence syndrome, reportedto follow abrupt withdrawal, after excessive dosages of the minortranquillizers, indicate a marked similarity to one another andto alcohol and barbiturates. The syndrome may be characterized byanxiety, apprehension, tremulousness, muscle twitches, insomnia,headache, fever, loss of appetite, nausea, vomit, abdominalcramps, sweating, tachycardia, fainting, hyperactive reflexes,convulsions, and uncontrolled urination and defecation. Inaddition, delirious states can occur with motor agitation,hallucinations, delusions, disorientation and confusion. Theabstinence syndrome can be very serious, and deaths have beenattributed to withdrawal of meprobamate (Miltown*) andmethyprylon (Noludar*).72 Minor Tranquillizers and Other Drugs Cross-tolerance and cross-dependence exist among the minor tranquillizers and with other sedative drugs. This cross-tolerance does not appear to affect the lethal dose and, consequently, alcohol or barbiturates taken simultaneously with large quantities of minor tranquillizers may act additively and produce toxic or fatal reactions. Heavy users of these drugs may switch among the sedatives, if necessary or convenient, and alcoholics often use barbiturates and tranquillizers to sustain inebriation. Individuals dependent on opiate narcotics often also use large quantities of minor tranquillizers. Contents | Feedback | Search DRCNet Library | Schaffer Library | Major Studies Canadian Government Commission ofInquiry WT02-B03-29IA086-000614-B043-117http://206.61.184.43:80/schaffer/Library/studies/ledain/nonmed2d.htm 206.61.184.43 19970122020856 text/html 27740HTTP/1.0 200 OKDate: Wednesday, 22-Jan-97 02:08:47 GMTServer: WebSitePro/1.1f (S/N wpo-0deb)Allow-ranges: bytesContent-type: text/htmlLast-modified: Saturday, 28-Dec-96 07:00:26 GMTContent-length: 27522 Canadian Government Commission - Amphetamines Contents | Feedback | Search DRCNet Library | Schaffer Library | Major Studies Canadian Government Commission ofInquiry AMPHETAMINES 87. Amphetamines are synthetic amines which are in many wayssimilar to the body's own adrenaline (epinephrine). These drugsgenerally evoke an arousal or activating response not unlikeone's normal reaction to emergency or stress. Amphetamines werefirst synthesized in the early part of the century and enteredmedical use by the 1930s. Although a variety of related drugs andmixtures currently exist, the most common amphetamine substancesare amphetamine (Benzedrine*), dextroamphetamine (Dexedrine*),and methamphetamine (Methedrine* or Desoxyn*), with Benzedrine*being the least potent. Generally, if the dose is adjusted, thepsychological effects of these various drugs are similar and,consequently, they will be discussed as a group. Other drugs withsomewhat similar pharmacological properties are phenmetrazine(Preludin*), methylphenidate (Ritalin*) and pipradol (Meratran*).Common slang terms for amphetamines include: 'speed', 'crystal','meth', 'bennies', 'dexies', 'A', 'uppers', 'pep pills', 'dietpills', 'jolly beans', 'truck drivers', 'co-pilots', 'eyeopeners', 'wake-ups', 'hearts' and 'footballs'. The stimulating effects of the amphetamines were widely usedby soldiers during World War II to counteract fatigue. Sincethen, they have been commonly used both medically andnon-medically by vehicle drivers on long trips, night-shiftworkers, fatigued housewives, students studying for exams andothers who must meet deadlines, athletes for increasingperformance, and others for general stimulation, pleasure or fun. 88. In the 1940s, much of the wartime stockpile was dumped onthe world market and in many countries amphetamines wereavailable on a non-prescription 'over the counter' basis.Widespread use followed in most industrialized areas withnumerous unpleasant consequences. Use reached epidemicproportions, for example, in Japan in the 1950s - a country whichhad never had a previous serious drug problem.34 Since this time,amphetamines have been quite uniformly put under governmentalcontrol and in some countries (e.g., Sweden) are currentlyprohibited from medical and non medical applications. Althoughthe popularity of both medical and non-medical rise of thesedrugs spread rapidly in all age groups and social classes inNorth America after the war, heavy use was apparently largelyconfined to delinquents and to members of the criminal-addictpopulation of a few decades ago. The drug was usually takenorally, sometimes injected by heroin addicts, or sniffed. In manyinstances it was used interchangeably with cocaine (a shortactingbut powerful stimulant). Frequent use was made of 'dismantled'Denzedrine inhalers, which were on the unrestricted legal marketat that time. More recently, major concern has developed in many circles fora relatively new amphetamine phenomenon - that of massive dosesused intravenously by persons often referred to as ,speedfreaks'. Although this practice has been most frequently notedamong youthful multi-drug-taking individuals, considerableopposition to such use of amphetamines has developed within the'hip' community. The 'speed trip' is in many respects theantithesis of the experience sought with the psychedelic drugs.Instead of the orientation towards the 'consciousness expansion',personal insight, and aesthetic and religious awareness oftenattributed to the psychedelic drug experience by users, the speedphenomenon is usually characterized by action, power, arroganceand physical pleasure ('kicks'), and regularly leads tosuspicion, paranoia, hostility and often aggression. In additionto these undesirable personality changes, which render 'speedfreaks' highly unpopular in the community, such individualsgenerally present a picture of chronic ill-health unparalleledamong youthful drug users. 89. The message received by the Commission at public andprivate hearings, and in written communications with youthfuldrug users has been mostly negative towards 'speed'. Manyexperienced illicit drug users consider amphetamines extremelydangerous and undesirable, and have expressed surprisinglyhostile attitudes towards these drugs in no uncertain terms.Recently, numerous persons well known to youth, who have hadconsiderable influence on drug attitudes during the past decade(e.g.,, John Lennon and the Beatles, Frank Zappa and the Mothersof Invention, Timothy Leary, and Donovan), have made publicstatements against the use of 'speed' and related drugs. Many physicians have suggested that the supply of amphetamineslegitimately imported and manufactured in Canada greatly exceedsmedical need. As with other prescription drugs which are widelyused, such as the barbiturates and tranquillizers, thedistinction between medical and non-medical use is not alwayseasily made. Medical Use 90. As early as 1935, amphetamines (in doses from 20-200 mg)were found to be a specific treatment for narcolepsy, an uncommonillness which is characterized by sudden attacks of sleep andweakness. Since the 1940s, amphetamines (in doses of 10-50 mg)have been used in the treatment of overactive children who showeddisorders of attention and impairment of learning capacity. Inthe last few years, several investigators have again publishedresults of clinical trials which revealed that amphetamines andmethylphenidate were among the most effective treatments forthese childhood disorders. Psychiatrists have frequently used intravenous injections ofmethedrine (in doses of 15-30mg) for diagnostic purposes.Administered in this fashion, the drug induces a state ofexcitation, elation and increased talkativeness, during which apreviously inhibited patient might reveal information andsymptoms which may be considered important for the understandingof his disorder. He might also express, more freely, previouslysuppressed emotions. It has been observed that some patients witha borderline psychosis show typical psychotic symptoms moreclearly following an injection of amphetamines. At one time, these drugs were used in the treatment ofalcoholism and opiate narcotic dependency, but this practice wasabandoned because amphetamines often produce dependency whentaken for longer than two or three weeks. Since alcoholism is achronic condition, some alcoholics who took this treatment forlong periods of time became dependent on amphetamines andalcohol. 91. Early hopes that amphetamines would prove to be aneffective general treatment for severe depression were soondisappointed. Although these drugs are powerful stimulants andincrease a depressed person's activity, they may also make himmore anxious and agitated, deprive him of sleep, and may fail toelevate his mood or to reverse the fundamental depressiveprocess. In some individuals, these drugs have been effective inrelieving mild depression and chronic fatigue, however. Amphetamines, and some related drugs, have a strongsuppressive effect on appetite. Most so-called 'diet pills'contain amphetamines or similar preparations. However, theappetite suppressing action of amphetamines usually disappearsafter about two weeks, together with the pleasant stimulatingeffects, unless the dose is continuously increased. Amphetamines have also been occasionally used to treat petitmal epilepsy, parkinsonism, pregnancy nausea, asthma, nasalcongestion and sedative poisoning. Many observers feel thatbecause of the risk of dependency and undesirable personalitychange with amphetamines, even the medical use of thesesubstances should be severely restricted. Administration, Absorption, Distribution and PhysiologicalFate 92. Amphetamines are available in a variety of tablets,capsules (both in immediate and delayed release forms), elixirs,injections and, until recently, inhalers. These drugs also appearin powder ('crystal') form on the black market. Amphetamines areavailable commercially combined with such drugs as barbiturates(e.g., Dexamyl*) and other sedatives, atropine, caffeine,vitamins and minerals, thyroid extract, and, on theillicit market, amphetamines are reportedly sometimes added toLSD. One of the most esoteric pharmaceutical combinations hasbeen described as follows:133 'This is a multi-coated tablet ofpentobarbital on the outside to induce sleep rapidly,phenobarbital under a delayed dissolving coating to extend thesleep, and under another coating, an amphetamine to awaken thepatient in the morning.' Amphetamines are usually administered orally and are readilyabsorbed from the gastrointestinal tract. Occasionally bothintramuscular and intravenous injections are used medically. Inthe past, an amphetamine-base inhaler was also available.Non-medical users may employ any of these administration routes,including sniffing 'crystal', although chronic 'speed freaks'prefer intravenous injections. About half of the amphetamine which enters the body isexcreted unchanged in the urine, the remainder being previouslydeactivated or chemically altered in the liver prior toelimination. Although excretion is generally rather rapid, tracesof the drug can be found in the urine up to a week afterwithdrawal. Because of the considerable proportion excretedunchanged, certain individuals have been known to extract andreuse crystals obtained from the urine. (This general practice of'reclaiming' excreted drugs is not new and such procedures havebeen recorded for centuries.) Effects 93. Both the psychological and physiological response toamphetamines vary profoundly with dose, and the effects ofintravenous injections of massive quantities may differgreatly in character from, and bear little resemblance to,responses to low doses administered orally. These effects varycontinuously over the full dosage range, but for clarification inthe following discussions, the use of moderate quantities ofamphetamines will be separated from the discussion of thepractice of high-dose intravenous injection. 94. Moderate dose effects. At typical therapeutic doses(e.g., 5-30 mg), amphetamines produce electrophysiological signsof central nervous system (CNS) activation along with a varietyof adrenaline-like peripheral (sympathomimetic) effects such asincreased blood pressure, pulse-rate and blood sugar, slightdilation of some blood vessels and constriction of others,widening of the pupils, increased respiration rate, depression ofappetite and some relaxation of smooth muscle. Such effects mightlast 3-4 hours. The psychological response varies considerably amongindividuals, but might typically include increased wakefulness,alertness, and vigilance, improvement in concentration and afeeling of clearer thinking, greater responsiveness toenvironmental stimuli, decreased fatigue and boredom, elevationof mood, mild euphoria, a feeling of sociability, increasedinitiative and energy, and increased verbal and other behaviouralactivity. There may be an improvement in some simple mentaltasks, and athletic performance may be increased. In general,improved functioning is most likely to occur when priorperformance was at a subnormal state due to drowsiness, fatigueor boredom. On the other hand, a moderate dose of amphetamines indifferent individuals (or perhaps even in the same individual atdifferent times) might produce irritation, restlessness,insomnia, blurred vision, tremor, nausea, headache, inability toconcentrate, dizziness, heart palpitation, confusion, anxiety,chest pains, chilliness, diarrhoea or constipation, and otheradverse symptoms. In cases of higher dose or hypersensitivity,delirium, panic, aggression, psychosis, hallucinations andcardiovascular abnormalities may occur in some individuals.Although deaths are rare, some have been reported amongathletes.15 95. After continued administration of moderate doses, recoverymay be associated with fatigue, drowsiness and, not infrequently,emotional depression. The increased energy and alertness elicitedby the drug merely postpones the need for rest and clearlyprovides no long-term substitute for it. Many regular users ofstimulants rely on the drug for energy when fatigued and often donot get proper rest for long periods of time. The amphetamine toxic psychosis may be indistinguishable fromschizophrenia.56 While this syndrome is generally associated withhigh-dose use, many of the symptoms have been observed with theuse of more moderate amounts. There does not appear to be anyirreversible physiological damage associated with long-term useof moderate doses of amphetamines although temporary disorders dooccur. 96. Tolerance and dependence with moderate doses. Toleranceto the various drug effects develops at different rates and todifferent degrees - some responses 'drop out' in chronic usesooner than others. The tendency to increase dose depends uponwhich of the potential drug effects is rewarding or reinforcingdrug use. Many individuals, for instance, who use amphetamines tocontrol narcolepsy, may reach a stabilized dose and show verylittle need for increased quantity over a period of years. On theother hand, those using the drug to control appetite generallyincrease their dose. Many psychological effects, such as themood-elevating response, may show a considerable sensitivity totolerance, and individuals who either began using the drug toobtain these effects, or who acquired the taste for them afterinitially using amphetamines for other purposes, generallyshow a marked tendency to increase dose over time. Tolerance tosome of the toxic properties occurs, and certain chronic usersadminister thousands of milligrams intravenously in a day, whileeven a fraction of that quantity would be extremely toxic in anon-tolerant user. As with other drugs, the rate of developmentof tolerance to the different pharmacological effects depends onthe doses used, the frequency of administration and variousindividual factors. No suggestion of physiological dependence onamphetamines occurs with moderate doses; but psychologicaldependence on even low doses is frequently reported, and isconsidered a major hazard in both medical and non-medicalamphetamine use. 97. High-dose effects. The chronic high-doseintravenous amphetamine syndrome has recently been described byseveral authors.124, 71 The cycle or pattern of use usuallybegins with several days of repeated injections (usually ofMethedrine*), gradually increasing in magnitude and frequency.Some users may 'shoot' or 'crank' up to several thousandmilligrams in a single day. Initially the user may feelenergetic, talkative, enthusiastic, happy, confident andpowerful, and may initiate and complete highly ambitious tasks.He does not sleep and usually eats very little. After thefirst few days, however, toxic unpleasant symptoms becomestronger, especially as the dose is increased. These toxiceffects may be similar to those described earlier for lowerdoses, but appear in amplified form. Some symptoms commonlyreported at this stage are: confused and disorganized patterns ofthought and behaviour, compulsive repetition of meaningless acts,irritability, self-consciousness, suspiciousness, fear, andhallucinations and delusions which may take on thecharacteristics of a paranoid psychosis. Aggressive andanti-social behaviour may occur at this time. Severe chest pains,abdominal pain mimicking appendicitis and fainting have also beenreported .207 Towards the end of the 'run' (usually less than a week), thetoxic symptoms dominate; the drug is discontinued, fatiguesets in, and prolonged sleep follows, sometimes lasting severaldays. Upon awakening, the user is usually lethargic, oftenemotionally depressed and ravenously hungry. The user mayovercome these effects with another injection - thusinitiating the cycle anew. Runs are often separated by days orweeks, however, at a time. In certain instances, 'down'drugs, such as barbiturates or tranquillizers, or even opiatenarcotics may be used to 'crash' or terminate a run which hasbecome intolerable or otherwise unpleasant. 98. The immediate effects of the intravenous injection ofamphetamines are a sudden, overwhelming pleasurable 'rush' or'flash' which has been described by users as 'an instant totalbody orgasm'. This effect is qualitatively different from thewarm, drifting sensation associated with the opiate narcotics,but is reported to be initially similar to the 'splash' producedby intravenous cocaine.124 Some users claim that the immediatepleasure of the injection is the prime motivation for the druguse and that other effects are secondary. Some individuals report that sexual activity is prolonged, andmay continue for hours. When orgasm finally comes it may be morepleasurable than normal, although, on the other hand, somedescribe an inability to reach a climax. While only a minority ofusers report increased sexual activity, some people give thisreason as a primary one for taking the drug. 124,23 Some investigators have reported that many users claim thatthey take the drug for euphoria or 'kicks', or because it enablesthem to be more confident and active. In addition, there arereports of 'needle freaks', in whom the use of the hypodermicsyringe has special rewarding connotations. 99. The clinical picture of the chronic 'speed freak', is adistressing one indeed. Continued use of massive doses ofamphetamines often leads to considerable weight loss, sores andnon-healing ulcers, brittle fingernails, tooth grinding, chronicchest infections, liver disease, a variety of hypertensivedisorders, and in some cases, cerebral haemorrhage. 124 Theextent to which these effects are the direct result of the drugor the secondary consequences of poor eating habits, overexertion and improper rest is unclear. Further complications maybe caused by unsterile injections, including hepatitis and avariety of other infections.47 Although some users feel thatcertain of their mental abilities have been impaired byamphetamine use, no clear picture of permanent brain damage hasbeen demonstrated. 100. Heavy use of amphetamines frequently precipitates apsychosis which is indistinguishable from paranoid schizophrenia.In addition, several investigators contend that schizophrenics,and others with borderline psychotic conditions, are more likelyto use the drug intravenously than are other individuals. In onestudy, 41 % of those requiring hospital admission for treatmentof amphetamine disorders were thought to be schizophrenic beforetaking the drug.100 However, there is still no reliableinformation on what proportion of users develop psychoses andwhat the predisposing factors actually are. The majority of acutepsychotic reactions occur towards the end of a run, and suchsymptoms are usually dissipated by a few days rest. 'Speed freaks' are generally unpopular within the multi-drugtaking community and are often shunned. Consequently, theseindividuals may live together in 'flash houses' totally occupiedby amphetamine users. Frequent 'hassles', aggression and violencehave been reported in such dwellings. Heavy users are generallyunable to hold a steady job because of the drug habit and oftenhave a parasitic relationship with the rest of the illicitdrug-using community. There are reports that many users supportthemselves through petty crime.184, 23 101. High-dose dependency. The question of physicaldependence on amphetamines depends on the definition of thewithdrawal symptoms necessary to meet the criterion. While it isclear that withdrawing amphetamine from chronic users does notproduce the dramatic, physically painful and often dangerousabstinence syndrome associated with alcohol, barbiturates, oropiate narcotics, many investigators feel that the fatigue,prolonged sleep, brain wave (EEG) changes, voracious appetite,cardiovascular abnormalities, occasional gastrointestinal cramps,lethargy and, often, severe emotional depression following the'speed binge' constitute a physiological reaction analogous tothe more dramatic withdrawal seen with depressant drugs. 56,207 The tendency for tolerance-producing drugs to manifest a'rebound' type of physiological and psychological pattern uponwithdrawal has been given considerable attention; amphetamineabstinence in chronic users is generally characterized by aprofound sedation, and depression of mood and physiologicalfunction, while drugs such as the sedatives and the opiatenarcotics (all of which produce sleep in high doses) generallyexhibit a withdrawal syndrome of severe and toxic overstimulation(in some instances to the point of convulsions). The fact that amphetamines have, it any, a physically ratherbenign withdrawal syndrome, clearly indicates that a profoundphysical dependence is not a necessary component in an overallsevere drug dependency situation. Subjective psychologicalfactors seem to have considerably greater motivational importancein many instances - especially with chronic high-dose amphetamineuse. 102. 'Speed Kills'. In recent years, the slogan 'SpeedKills' has received much attention, and the idea appears to playa significant role in the attitude that some users and non-usershave towards the drug. One commonly hears the view that onceyou're 'on speed' you have only two to five years left tolive. Some chronic 'speed freaks' incorporate this notion intothe identity they present to others and the image they entertainof themselves. Many observers contend that the chronic use ofintravenous amphetamines reflects a thinly disguised suicidaltendency, as well as an attention and sympathy gaining device.'Hello, I'm Philbert Desanex; I'm a speed freak and I'm going tobe dead by fall', is only a slightly exaggerated caricature ofthe image purposefully projected by some of these individuals. 103. What is the evidence, in fact, that 'Speed Kills' in theliteral direct physical sense? Fatalities due to acute overdoseare rarely reported. We have no reliable knowledge of the extentof intravenous amphetamine use, and although we hear many direpredictions, there is no good information on the long-termprognosis or outcome of such use. It would certainly appear,however, that chronic adherence to this practice is mostdetrimental to the individual and, often, to those with whom heinteracts. Although there is no clear evidence that the life expectancyof 'speed freaks' is lower than others living under similarcircumstances, many investigators suspect this to be so. Whilethere are few cases in the literature of death directlyattributed to chronic amphetamine use, Clement, Solursh and VanAst47 '... have recently become aware of a number of cases ofdeath on the streets (of Toronto) apparently related to high-doseamphetamine abuse. At autopsy, however, pathological evidence ofdeath directly due to amphetamines is rare in such cases'. Aftera thorough review of the literature, Cox and Smart of theAddiction Research Foundation reported: 'Currently there is noevidence available on mortality rates among speed users and it isnot certain that speed itself is a lethal drug. There is noevidence to support or deny that "Speed Kills".60 The slogan was originally borrowed from a highway trafficcampaign of the last decade and it has been suggested that,originally, in adopting this phrase, drug users were referring tothe 'death' of the personality, the 'spirit', or the freedom ofthe individual when he becomes dependent on amphetamines, ratherthan to physical mortality. Amphetamines and Other Drugs As noted earlier, amphetamines are frequently used in conjunction, or in alternation, with a variety of depressant drugs such as barbiturates, alcohol and even heroin. The barbiturate and amphetamine up-down cycle has been described in both youthful and 'respectable' adult users at a variety of doses. Amphetamines intensify, prolong or otherwise alter the effects of LSD and it is reported that the two drugs are sometimes mixed. In addition, it would appear that the majority of youthful speed users have also had experience with a variety of psychedelic and other illicit drugs. Persons dependent on the opiate narcotics also frequently make use of stimulants such as cocaine and amphetamine - either as mixtures of drugs or used separately on different occasions. It is interesting to note that STP (DOM) and the newer MDA, both extremely potent psychedelic-hallucinogenic drugs, are chemically closely related to amphetamine. Contents | Feedback | Search DRCNet Library | Schaffer Library | Major Studies Canadian Government Commission ofInquiryWT02-B03-30IA086-000614-B043-138http://206.61.184.43:80/schaffer/Library/studies/ledain/nonmed2e.htm 206.61.184.43 19970122020910 text/html 43134HTTP/1.0 200 OKDate: Wednesday, 22-Jan-97 02:09:01 GMTServer: WebSitePro/1.1f (S/N wpo-0deb)Allow-ranges: bytesContent-type: text/htmlLast-modified: Saturday, 28-Dec-96 07:00:18 GMTContent-length: 42916 Canadian Government Commission - LSD Contents | Feedback | Search DRCNet Library | Schaffer Library | Major Studies Canadian Government Commission ofInquiry LSD 105. One of the most remarkable and controversial drugs knowntoday is d-lysergic acid diethylamide-25, better known as LSD orsimply 'acid'. LSD is capable of producing profound and unusualpsychological changes in almost infinitesimal doses, withrelatively little general physiological effect and, along withother related drugs, has exerted noticeable influence in avariety of aesthetic, scientific, philosophic, religious andsocial areas over the past two decades. LSD is often consideredthe prototype of the drug class we have labelledPsychedelic-Hallucinogens, although there are a great number ofless potent synthetic and naturally occurring substances withsomewhat similar psychopharmacological properties. To date,almost 3,000 articles on LSD have been published in scientificjournals, although many of these reports do not meet adequatescientific standards. 106. LSD was developed in 1938 by Hofmann and Stoll, inSwitzerland, as part of a research programme investigatingpotential therapeutic uses of certain ergot compounds. LSD is asemi-synthetic derivative of lysergic acid, an ergot alkaloidproduced by a parasitic fungus, or 'rust', sometimes found on ryeor other grains. Closely related substances are also produced inthe seeds of certain varieties of morning glory. Most ergotalkaloids are not particularly psychoactive, although some mayhave a variety of powerful, and often toxic, physiologicalactions, and have been used for centuries for medical purposes. 107. Since LSD appeared to be relatively uninteresting,physiologically, in animal studies, it received little attentionuntil Hofmann unwittingly ingested a minute quantity some yearsafter its original synthesis. He subsequently described hisexperience as follows:102 In the afternoon of 16 April 1943, when I was working on thisproblem, I was seized by a peculiar sensation of vertigo andrestlessness. Objects, as well as the shape of my associates inthe laboratory, appeared to undergo optical change. I was unableto concentrate on my work. In a dreamlike state I left for home,where an irresistible urge to lie down overcame me. I drew thecurtains and immediately fell into a peculiar state similar todrunkenness, characterized by an exaggerated imagination. With myeyes closed, fantastic pictures of extraordinary plasticity andintensive colour seemed to surge towards me. After two hours thisstate gradually wore off. To confirm his suspicion that LSD was responsible for thiseffect, Hofmann investigated further: However, I decided to get to the root of the matter by takinga definite quantity of the compound in question. Being a cautiousman, I started my experiment by taking 0.25 mg of d-lysergic aciddiethylamide tartrate, thinking that such an extremely small dosewould surely be harmless, and bearing in mind that the naturalergot alkaloids produce toxic symptoms in man only with dosesexceeding several milligrams. After 40 minutes I noted thefollowing symptoms in my laboratory journal: slight giddiness,restlessness, difficulty in concentration, visual disturbances,laughing. And later: I lost all count of time. I noticed with dismay that myenvironment was undergoing progressive changes. My visual fieldwavered and everything appeared deformed as in a faulty mirror.Space and time became more and more disorganized and I wasovercome by a fear that I was going out of my mind. The worstpart of it being that I was clearly aware of my condition. Mypower of observation was unimpaired. . . . Occasionally I felt asif I were out of my body. I thought I had died. My ego seemedsuspended somewhere in space, from where I saw my dead body lyingon the sofa.... It was particularly striking how acousticperceptions, such as the noise of water gushing from a tap or thespoken word, were transformed into optical illusions. I then fellasleep and awakened the next morning somewhat tired but otherwisefeeling perfectly well. 108. Since various aspects of the experience were thought toresemble symptoms of naturally occurring schizophrenia, manyinvestigators became interested in using LSD as a tool forproducing an artificial or 'model psychosis' in the laboratory.The possibility of gaining insight into psychiatric disorders bythe study of the LSD-induced state stimulated considerableactivity in medical and scientific communities, and the terms psychotomimetic(psychosis-mimicking) and psychotogenic (psychosis-producing)were coined. The subsequent discovery that the LSD experience is,in fact, generally different from natural psychoses has lessenedinterest in this aspect of its use. The descriptive label hallucinogenic(hallucination-producing) has gained wide acceptance, inspite of the fact that true hallucinations do not commonly occurwith LSD. The term illusinogenic (illusion-producing) isprobably more appropriate. In the 1950s the exploration of LSD as an aid to psychotherapybegan. Much of the early work, in Canada, investigating the useof LSD in the treatment of alcoholics, was conducted under thedirection of Dr A. Hoffer at the University of Saskatchewan, In1957, after reviewing the various descriptive names given LSD andrelated drugs, Dr H. Osmond, then Superintendent of theSaskatchewan Hospital, suggested the terms psycholytic (mind-releasing)or psychedelic (mind-manifesting) as more appropriategeneral labels.174 For various reasons the latter has gainedworld-wide usage, although its common application has strayedconsiderably from its original context, and it may now denotegeneral styles of art, fashion and music which are, in somesense, felt to reflect, enhance, or substitute for thepsychedelic drug experience. 109. While LSD has had a rather short, and somewhat stormyhistory, numerous naturally occurring substances with apparentlysimilar psychological effects have been used in the WesternHemisphere for centuries. Perhaps the most widely known aremescaline, from the peyote cactus (lophophora williamsii),psilocybin, one of the active principles in 'sacred mushrooms'(teonanactl), and the Mexican morning-glory 'ololiuqui' (RiveaCorymbosa). In addition, DMT (dimethyltryptamine) and the relatedDET (diethyltryptamine) are found in special snuffs used forcenturies by certain South American Indians. Some of thesebotanical substances were considered divine by the ancient Aztecsand played an important role in religious ceremonies long beforethe Spanish invaded the land. In spite of the Conquistadors'attempts to destroy the culture and its historical and religiousunderpinnings, the sacramental use of peyote spread to theMexican Indians and, later, in the nineteenth century to certainNorth American tribes. Today, peyote is used in religiousceremonies by the Native American Church which has over 200,000Indian members in Canada and the United States. 110. Until recently, psychedelic drugs received little generalpublic attention, even though some had been intensively exploredover the past century by various writers, scientists and'adventurers'. Based on his mescaline experimentation, AidousHuxley106 presented, in his twin volumes The Doors ofPerception and Heaven and Hell, one of the most lucidand perceptive analyses of some of the possible personal,philosophical and social implications of the psychedelicexperience. Non-medical interest in LSD and related drugs began to growduring the 1950s, although such use was apparently largelyrestricted to a few professional, academic, and artisticexperimenters. The drug gained continental notoriety in the early1960s as a result of experimentation by two Harvard Universitypsychology professors, Drs Alpert and Leary, who invited other'explorers' to 'Turn on, tune in, and drop out' of the existingsocial institutions. Their unorthodox religious orientation tothe LSD experience is presented in The Psychedelic Experience128(a manual based on the Tibetan Book of the Dead), whichbecame one of the 'bibles' of the psychedelic drug movement.Another significant influence, with considerably less religiousorientation was writer Ken Kesey's group, the adventures of whichare well documented in The Electric Kool-Aid Acid Test.247 111. Since 1963, the Canadian Government has controlled themedical and scientific use of LSD, and in 1969 the possession ofLSD without governmental authorization was made a criminaloffence. Regulation of the legal supply of LSD has apparently hadlittle effect on 'street' use, however, since essentially all ofthe drug so used has come from clandestine laboratories. Althoughthe constituent chemicals are not readily available and somesophisticated apparatus is necessary for its proper synthesis,LSD can be produced by individuals without extensive training inchemistry. Since it is odourless, colourless and tasteless insolution, and active in almost invisible quantities, effectivelegal control of its transportation, distribution and use hasbeen extremely difficult. In recent years, several new synthetic drugs with effectssimilar to LSD have appeared on the black market. These includeMDA (alphamethyl-3,4-methylene - dioxyphenethylamine), STP or DOM(2,5-ditnethoxy-4-methyl-amphetamine), and PCP or Sernyl*(phencyclidine). MedicalUse 112. There is currently no widely accepted medical use of LSD,although it may be employed experimentally for therapeuticpurposes. There have been numerous impressive reports of LSDsuccesses in the treatment of alcoholics, opiate narcoticdependents, criminals and various psychiatric patients.101, 129LSD has also been used with patients dying of cancer, toalleviate their anxiety and pain, and to help them adjust to theprospects of death.176 Many of these leads have not been followedup with adequate scientific investigation, however, and severalrecent controlled studies have not substantiated the claim thatLSD adds to the effectiveness of conventional psychotherapy.205 113. Two basic forms of psychological treatment with LSD havedeveloped: psycholytic therapy, which uses small ormoderate doses on repeated occasions, sometimes over a period ofseveral months; and psychedelic therapy which calls forhigher doses and a more profound acute effect and is, as a rule,given only once or twice. While some investigators claim thatLSD, itself, is more effective than psychotherapy, others claimthat its usefulness is mainly limited to the removal oftherapeutic 'blocks' which may occur at times in the course ofpsychotherapy, and still others feel that LSD has no usefulcontribution to make to psychiatric treatment. Most clinicianswho have had experience with this form of therapy, stress theneed for a careful selection of patients and for specialqualities and experience in the therapist. More sophisticated scientific investigations of possibletherapeutic uses of LSD are now underway and may help clarifysome of these issues. It seems justified to say at this time,however, that the general medical effectiveness of LSD has notyet been adequately demonstrated. It may well be another decadebefore definitive evidence will be available. Administration,Absorption, Distribution and Physiological Fate 114. LSD is usually taken orally, and may be sniffed inpowdered form or injected in solution. While it is available inordinary capsules or tablets, LSD is often impregnated in suchinnocuous substances as sugar cubes, candies, biscuits, and clothor blotter sections for oral use. It is well absorbed from thegastro-intestinal tract, is distributed in the blood and easilydiffuses into the brain, and in pregnant females crosses theplacental barrier into the foetus. Although only a tiny portionactually reaches the central nervous system, LSD is one of themost potent biologically active substances known and, in someindividuals, exerts a noticeable psychological effect withquantities as low as 20 to 30 micrograms (millionths of a gram).Customary doses are usually around 200 mcg and some individualshave taken up to several thousand micrograms. Taken orally, LSD effects usually occur within an hour but maybe much faster; response to intramuscular injection usuallyappears within ten minutes; and if the intravenous route is used,the latency may be only a few minutes or less. The duration ofthe action depends to a certain extent on the amount taken, andwith a customary dose, major effects usually last 8-12 hours ormore with gradual recovery over a similar period. Essentially allof the LSD in the body is metabolized into an inactive substancein the liver and excreted. PsychologicalEffects 115. The psychological effects of LSD are not readilypredictable, and are determined to a considerable degree byvarious personality factors in the individual, his past historyand experiences, his attitudes, expectations, and motivations,the general setting in which the drug is taken, personsaccompanying the 'trip' and external events occurring during theexperience. While the psychological response is to some extentdose-related, certain effects appear to be relatively independentof dose over a considerable range. Increased quantities oftenseem to affect the duration more than the intensity or quality ofthe 'trip'. 116. Subjective psychological effects of LSD are extremelydifficult to describe and many scientists are quite pessimisticabout the possibility of presenting an objective list ofresponses which in any way communicates the essence of theexperience. The intensely personal nature of the effects furtherlimits description and generalization. Pahnke and Richards177have described several major types of psychological experiencewhich have been reported with psychedelic drugs. The outlinepresented below is based on, but is not identical to, thatproposed by these researchers. While the list is certainly notexhaustive and does not describe necessarily discrete ornon-overlapping categories, it provides a convenient basis forthe discussion of LSD effects. It should be noted that not all ofthe experiences listed happen in all sessions or in allindividuals, although several may occur in varying degrees, insequence or simultaneously, within a 'trip'. 117. First is the psychotic adverse reaction, or'freak-out' which may be characterized by an intense negativeexperience of fear or nightmarish terror to the point of panic,complete loss of emotional control, paranoid delusions,hallucinations, catatonic features, and, perhaps, profounddepression and sense of meaninglessness. Such states are usuallyacute, although pro1onged reactions have been noted. 118. Second is the non-psychotic adverse reaction inwhich the person may experience varying degrees of tension,anxiety and fear, unpleasant illusions, depression and despair.Inappropriate or disordered social behaviour may occur. This kindof reaction may differ from the first in the intensity of theexperience and in the degree of control and 'reality contact'expressed by the individual. Such unpleasant experiences arecommonly labelled 'bad trips' or 'bummers'. 119. Third is the psychodynamic psychedelic experience characterizedby a dramatic emergence into consciousness of material which hadpreviously been unconscious or suppressed. Strong emotionalfeelings can accompany what may be experienced subjectively as areliving of incidents from the past or a symbolic portrayal ofimportant conflicts. Such effects are often sought in LSDpsychotherapy. 120. Fourth is the cognitive psychedelic experience characterizedby an impression of astonishingly lucid thought. Problems may beseen from a novel perspective and the interrelationships of manylevels of meaning and dimensions may be sensed simultaneously.The relationship between this experience and naturally occurringinsight and creativity has been the subject of considerableinterest and speculation. 121. Fifth is the aesthetic psychedelic experience characterizedby a change and intensification of all sensory impressions, withvision often most affected. Fascinating alteration in sensationand perception may occur; synaesthesia or crossing-over ofsensory modalities may be produced (music and other sounds may be'seen'); objects such as flowers or stones may appear to pulsateor 'become alive'; ordinary things may seem imbued with greatbeauty; music may take on an incredible emotional power; andvisions of beautiful colours, intricate geometric patterns,architectural forms, landscapes and 'almost anything imaginable'may occur. 122. The sixth type of psychedelic experience has been calledby such names as psychedelic-peak, cosmic, transcendental, ormystical. Some of the psychological phenomena which are saidto characterize this experience, are: a sense of unity or 'cosmiconeness' with the universe; a feeling of transcendence of timeand space; a deeply felt positive mood of joy, blessedness, love,and peace; a sense of sacredness, awe and, wonder; afeeling of profound theological or religious awareness; a feelingof insight into reality at an intuitive, nonrational level; anawareness of things which seem logically contradictory andparadoxical; and a belief that the experience is beyond words,non-verbal and impossible to describe. The full peak experience,in its entirety, does not occur in the majority of individuals,is usually transient, and does not last for long in its fullintensity, although it may have persisting effects on attitudesand behaviour. 123. With few exceptions, little general information can begiven as to the relative frequency of occurrence of these varioustypes of psychedelic drug reaction, since the response is largelydetermined by such variable factors as the particular individualinvolved, his set and the setting. As is often the case inscience, techniques designed to measure the effects of LSD maygreatly influence or distort the phenomenon under study.Savage198 has pointed out that unless the LSD experience takesplace '. . . in a secure setting, with sufficientemotional support where S (the subject) feels safe to encounterthe bizarre and often powerful manifestations of his own mindunharassed by tests, interpretations, and the coldly precisescientific analytic attitudes, the only result can be confusionand paranoia'. Reports of 'objective' study of LSD's subjective effectsconsiderably in content and often appear to be as much a functionof the individual scientist's conceptual orientation andexperimental methods as they are of the subjects and the drugitself. Some researchers report that LSD experiences in theirsubjects, are definitely unpleasant and anxiety-ridden, and thatsubsequent sessions are uniformly avoided, while other scientistsclaim that anxiety is infrequent and that subjects generallyenjoy the sessions and are eager to participate further.228Experiences in non-supervised and indiscriminate settings areundoubtedly even more variable. 124. It is generally reported that LSD has deleterious effectson performance in tests requiring a high degree of attention,concentration or motivation. It is often difficult to getmeaningful data from such measurements, since subjects frequentlybecome engrossed in the subjective aspects of the drug experienceand lose interest in the tasks presented by the investigators.Psychological tests are often seen as absurd or irrelevant by thesubjects. Performance on standard tests of intelligence,learning, memory and other cognitive functions, as well ascertain psychomotor tasks generally show impairment and sometimeslack of change and, rarely, improvement.205 Certain types ofconduct by some persons under the influence of LSD indicate grossimpairment of judgement. Recall of events occurring during thedrug experience is generally good, however. Effects on drivingskills have not been systematically investigated, althoughavailable related data, and reports by users, as well as certaineye witness accounts, suggest that driving ability is usuallydrastically reduced by the acute effects of LSD. There is noevidence that the drug has been a significant factor inautomobile accidents, however. True hallucinations, where false sensory signals are believedto be physically real, are rarely reported, althoughpseudohallucinations and other perceptual distortions andillusions are frequently noted. One of the most uniformly citedand significant subjective effects is the alteration of ordinarytemporal perception, or time-sense. Moments may seem like hours,and time may seem to be transcended. Pleasant experiences mayextend indefinitely or, on the other hand, bad trips can becomean interminable horror. 125. Current arguments as to whether LSD is truly'consciousness-expanding' as its proponents contend or'consciousness-constricting' as its opponents assert, willprobably not be resolved by science in the near future, since itseems unlikely that such hypotheses can be put to adequateempirical test given the current state of technology. Contentions are often made that LSD can elicit new levels ofspontaneity, insight, problem-solving and creativity.214 Theseclaims are very difficult to assess, since the effects describedare often highly subjective and personal, and are hardly amenableto empirical validation. The problems of studying creativity inthe laboratory are considerable, and little is known of the basicpsychology of such cognitive processes. A generally agreed upondefinition of the concept of creativity has eluded investigatorsso far, and few meaningful tests are available. Studies of theeffects of psychedelic drugs on allegedly creativity-relatedbehaviours have produced inconsistent results. Often performancedoes not reflect the subjective impressions of the drugexperience. Although sophisticated scientific investigation inthis area is only just beginning, it is already obvious that LSDwill not perform the miracle of turning an uninspired anduntalented individual into a creative genius. The question ofmore subtle effects on creative activity in certain individualsmust be answered by future research. 126. Most authorities agree that LSD does not have a specificaphrodisiac or sex-drive stimulating effect. Some users indicatean enhanced appreciation of sexual experience, while many othersreport a total disinterest in sex while on a 'trip'. Someincrease in sexual behaviour may occur as a result of a lesseningof inhibitions and an increase in emotionality, tactileappreciation, and interpersonal contact. LSD has been used in thetreatment of sexual disorders of psychological origin (e.g.frigidity and impotence) although its general usefulness has notbeen clearly demonstrated in this area. 127. An LSD-induced 'bad trip' may range from a mildlynegative or ambivalent experience to an episode of intense terrorand nightmarish panic. Such adverse reactions often seem to focuson the fear of death, fear of permanent insanity, basic sexualconflicts, and fear of legal repercussions in illicit users, ormay be precipitated by an objective 'hassle' or problem of realor imagined significance. Under the influence of LSD, it is oftendifficult to cope with immediate problems which arise, andemotional vulnerability may be increased. 'Bad trips' seem tooccur most often when the individual is poorly prepared, alone,or in an otherwise unprotected or unsupervised setting. While anexperienced 'guide' or therapist can often help prevent oralleviate negative reactions, this is no guarantee against anunpleasant experience. Neither are earlier positive experiences -severe 'bad trips' have been noted in individuals who hadprevious long histories of unequivocally pleasant psychedelicexperiences. Certain tranquillizers can be of assistance inreducing the unpleasantness of the experience, often byterminating the drug effect non-chemical, personalsupportive guidance is most important in treating negativereactions. Although most negative LSD experiences appear to be of shortduration, prolonged psychotic episodes lasting months or evenyears have been elicited by LSD.50 Many investigators contendthat such extreme experiences occur only in individuals alreadypredisposed to psychotic reaction, and are simply precipitated bythe stress of a 'bad trip'. On the other hand, numerous exampleshave occurred in persons without obvious prior pathology, and itwould appear that there is no satisfactory method for predictingwho might suffer a serious adverse reaction. 128. Prolonged psychoses are quite rare in clinical orexperimental settings, even when psychiatric patients are used assubjects. Cohen49 surveyed 44 investigators who had given LSDor mescaline to approximately 5,000 persons a total of about25,000 times, and found that psychotic reactions lasting over 48hours occurred in 0.18 per cent of the psychiatric patientsstudied and 0.08 per cent of the experimental subjects. Therewere four suicides in the patients, all occurring months afterthe LSD experience, and none among the experimental subjects.Whether these deaths can be attributed to LSD use is not certain.Similar incidents of adverse reaction under controlledcircumstances have been reported by others and the use of LSD inmedically supervised settings has been considered by manyinvestigators to be comparatively safe from a psychiatric pointof view.65, 132 These findings do not provide a satisfactory basis forestimating the effects of illicit use, however, since set,setting, purity and quantity of drug, and consequently, thequality of the trip, are all apt to be quite different in thesesituations. The frequency of bad trips among street LSD users isunknown, although many such cases have come to the attention ofmedical authorities and certainly cannot be considered uncommon.Solursh2l3 reports that in one series of street users studiedretrospectively, 'freak-outs' occurred in 24 of 601 'acid trips',Furthermore, impressionistic accounts from individuals in closecontact with the 'drug-scene' suggest that the incidence of 'badtrips' is steadily increasing. Ungerleider229 studied 70individuals who required hospitalization in a Los Angeles Medicalcentre after illicit LSD use. One-third of these admissions werediagnosed psychotic and two-thirds were hospitalized for morethan a month. 129. Usually neither the therapist nor the patient is certainas to the identity, purity or quantity of the drug involved in'street' cases and records are further complicated by the factthat there is considerable discrepancy among reporters as to whatexactly constitutes an adverse reaction. Furthermore, it wouldappear that many 'bad trips' are treated by friends and nevercome to the attention of the medical authorities. In addition topersonal support and assistance in these situations,tranquillizers (and niacinamide) are available legally and on theblack market for such emergencies. Even if some accurate estimatecould be made of the number of negative reactions occurring, itwould not be possible to assess the relative significance of thefigures, since we have little idea as to the overall frequency ofillicit LSD use in the general population. 130. Illicit users of LSD commonly voice the opinion that badtrips are caused by bad drugs and that 'pure acid' is relativelyfree from adverse reactions. These claims are rarely based onchemical analysis, and although contaminants and other drugsreported to appear in black market LSD can undoubtedly affect theexperience, it is uncertain what proportion of the negativereactions can be accounted for by contaminants. It is certainthat well-documented 'freak-outs' have occurred with clinicallypure LSD. 131. Although suicide may be rare among illicit as well asmedically supervised LSD users, a few cases have been documented.Attempts at self-mutilation have also been reported on rareoccasions. Accidental deaths are somewhat more common and anumber of cases of fatality or serious injury have been noted asa result of a loss of critical judgement or attentionalprocesses. For example, some individuals have jumped frombuildings or trees apparently under the delusion that they couldfly or were indestructible. Stories of numerous personswho had become permanently blind while staring at the sun duringLSD trips were generated by a state official in the United Statesand widely circulated in the public media. These reports weresubsequently shown to be a hoax and no such cases are onrecord.170'b' 132. Although fear, panic and aggression may result from a'freak-out', homicides associated with LSD use are rare and onlya few have been documented. Reports of violence occurring whileunder the influence of LSD have generally not been supported,78although there may be some significant exceptions. The majorityof non-drug arrests associated with LSD use seem to be in theorder of 'disturbance of the peace' offences and there is littleevidence that LSD plays a significant role in major crimes. Recurrence of certain aspects of LSD experiences ('flashbacks'or 'echoes') of varying duration and intensity have been reportedover periods ranging from a few months to more than a year afterlast (or only) LSD use.189 The quality of these experiences,which usually last only a few minutes or less, may depend on asmany factors as the original trip. They may be triggered orprecipitated by seemingly irrelevant stimuli or events, by otherdrugs, or may appear spontaneously. We have no good informationas to frequency of these recurrences, although they appear tooccur most often in heavy users and could clearly be unpleasantor dangerous in certain circumstances. 133. The possible religious significance of psychedelic drugexperiences has been the subject of heated controversy forcenturies. While many authorities have pointed out basicsimilarities between drug-induced feelings of transcendental ormystical awareness and the satori or kensho of ZenBuddhism, the samadhi of Hinduism or the beatificvision of Christianity, others have been outraged bythe suggestion that such 'instant mysticism' could be producedchemically. It is quite apparent, however, that a considerabledegree of religiosity has pervaded the psychedelic drug movementof the 1960s and has played a major role in the use of such drugsin other cultures. The major theoretical positions and scientific research inthis area have been reviewed by several investigators208, l47 andthese reports provide experimental support for the notion thatdrug-evoked experiences may have religious significance forcertain individuals. Perhaps the most rigorous scientificevidence comes from Pahnke's175 controlled psilocybin experimentwith seminary graduate students conducted in the setting of aGood Friday religious service. He notes that: 'Those subjects whoreceived psilocybin experienced phenomena which wereindistinguishable from, if not identical with, the categoriesdefined by our typology of mysticism.' The religious aspects ofthe psychedelic experience apparently depend a great deal on theindividual, his values and expectations, and the settinginvolved, and do not normally occur with great intensity in mostpersons or in most situations. Masters and Houstonl47 report that6 out of 206 of their subjects attained a mystical experience,while other researchers report no such events and still others, amuch higher incidence. Differences in semantic meaning,definition and criteria may account for part of thesediscrepancies. The 'objective validity' of drug-elicitedreligious experiences, however, is by nature untestable in thescientific sense, and the area will doubtless remain in a stormof controversy. 134. Numerous claims have been made by various LSD users,psychotherapists and scientists that LSD can produce long-lastingbeneficial effects on personality and behaviour. On the otherhand, many observers feel that chronic use of LSD may result in alessening of work output and a deterioration of social behaviour,a general 'amotivational syndrome' in some individuals. Bothtypes of allegation are difficult to evaluate, since fewadequately controlled investigations have been done on thelong-term effects of either medically supervised or non-medicalLSD use. PhysiologicalEffects 135. LSD exerts its most significant physiological effects onand through the central nervous system, although the exactmechanism by which this occurs is not yet known. As a result ofits potent general arousal or activation capacity. LSD mayproduce a variety of autonomic nervous system (sympathomimetic)actions, considered to be of little clinical significance atnormal doses. Commonly reported are: widened pupils, increasedheart rate and blood pressure, sweating, increased bodytemperature, chills, increased blood sugar level, 'goosepimples', flushing of the facial skin, increased urination,headache, and rarely nausea and vomiting. It generally increasesthe activation of the brain (as indicated by the EEG), producesalertness, blocks sleep, decreases appetite, may induce tremorsand reduce coordination, changes respiration patterns, andfacilitates certain simple reflexes.138 In a few instancesconvulsions have occurred. LSD has remarkably low physiologicaltoxicity and, to date, no human deaths have been reported due tooverdose. Although the evidence is not clear, psychologicalindications of minor brain damage may be present in chronic heavyusers of LSD.152 l36. In the past few years, considerable controversy andsensational publicity has arisen around the possibility that LSDmay affect hereditary transmission through chromosomalalterations, produce changes in white blood cells resemblingleukemia and adversely affect the developing human focus.48Relevant studies involving test-tube preparations of human liveanimal and insect experiments, and examinations of illicit LSDusers, have been contradictory to date and provide no clearanswers to these important questions.105 The relationship betweenin vitro (test-tube) and in vivo (living organism)effects is rarely straightforward, and generalizations from onespecies to another are difficult. Furthermore, studying the usersof 'street' drugs gives little information regarding specificcompounds, since such individuals may use a variety of drugs andneither the investigator nor the subject can be sure of thepurity, quantity or identity of substances obtained from theillicit market. In the few controlled studies in whichchromosomes were examined in humans before and after clinicallysupervised administration of known doses of pure LSD, littleevidence of significant change was noted.125,58 The effects ofprolonged regular use of LSD have not been carefullyinvestigated, however, and the presence or absence of alterationsunder such conditions can not be completely predicted on thebasis of present information. Research in this area is complicated by the fact thattemporary or permanent chromosome breakage is not an uncommonresponse to a variety of non-drug experiences, and can beproduced by nuclear radioactivity, many pollutants, X-rays, feverand a number of virus infections. Furthermore, there is evidencethat such frequently used drugs as caffeine and aspirin may causechromosome breaks in certain cells.122 It should be noted thatchromosome damage per se does not necessarily affecteither the individual or his offspring, although the possibilitymust be considered. 137. High doses of LSD administered at certain times early inpregnancy have been shown to produce deformities in the offspringof some animal species and not others. No unequivocal evidence ofsuch teratogenic LSD effects in humans has been reported,although there have been a few widely publicized instances ofabnormalities in babies born of mothers who had used LSD. Whethersuch anomalies occur more frequently in LSD users than in thenormal population is uncertain. Most investigators feel that thepossibility of chromosome or foetal damage in humans forbids theuse of LSD for either medical or non-medical purposes, by womenwho are either pregnant or expect to become so in the nearfuture. Toleranceand Dependence 138. Tolerance to the psychological and physiological effectsof LSD develops on repeated use, although the form ofpsychological tolerance is unusual in several respects. Toleranceto most drugs can be overcome and effects of full intensityobtained by simply increasing dosage. With LSD, often a period ofthree or four days or longer must separate 'trips' if the fulleffects are to be obtained, regardless of dose. A second unusualquality of LSD tolerance is the rapidity with which it developsand dissipates. A reduction in effects may occur after only oneor two consecutive administrations. Furthermore, when LSD is usedintermittently many users report, a 'reverse' tolerance, orincreased sensitivity to the drug and may, after experience, useless to achieve the desired effects. These factors suggest thatthe pharmacological mechanism underlying LSD tolerance may bequite different from those seen with most other psychoactivedrugs. 139. Physical dependence does not develop to LSD, even incases in which the drug has been used more than two hundred timesin a single year.51 Psychological dependence has been reported tooccur in certain individuals who become preoccupied with the drugexperience and feel emotionally depressed and unsatisfied withoutit. Normally, however, LSD use is intermittent and periods ofweeks or months may separate 'trips' in even 'confirmed' users, LSDand Other Drugs 140. It appears that many LSD users will also experiment withother psychedelic drugs. Cross-tolerance occurs among some ofthese substances and an individual who has recently taken LSDwill generally show reduced response to mescaline and psilocybin,but not to cannabis or phencyclidine (PCP). It should be notedthat mescaline and psilocybin are rarely found in Canada and nosuch black market samples have been verified by chemicalanalysis. Other drugs, such as atropine or amphetamines, are reported tobe sometimes added to LSD to intensify, prolong or otherwisealter the experience. Strychnine (a stimulant once commonly usedin medical practice) is rumoured to have also been employed forsuch effects. In spite of such stories, black market productspurported to contain mixtures of LSD and other drugs have rarelybeen found on analysis to be as represented. Such combinationsappear to be infrequent in Canada. Unsuccessful attempts at LSDsynthesis may produce a variety of other ergot alkaloids withpossibly unpleasant or dangerous pharmacological properties inhigh doses. Samples of such concoctions have been obtained fromblack market sources.144 Chlorpromazine (Largactil*), a major tranquillizer, usuallyblocks LSD effects, although in rare instances it paradoxicallypotentiates the original drug response. In addition certainsedatives and niacinamide (nicotinamide) may also reduce some ofthe effects of LSD. - Contents | Feedback | Search DRCNet Library | Schaffer Library | Major Studies Canadian Government Commission ofInquiry WT02-B03-31IA086-000614-B043-174http://206.61.184.43:80/schaffer/Library/studies/ledain/nonmed3.htm 206.61.184.43 19970122020925 text/html 92856HTTP/1.0 200 OKDate: Wednesday, 22-Jan-97 02:09:15 GMTServer: WebSitePro/1.1f (S/N wpo-0deb)Allow-ranges: bytesContent-type: text/htmlLast-modified: Saturday, 28-Dec-96 07:00:07 GMTContent-length: 92638 Canadian Government Commission - Cannabis Contents | Feedback | Search DRCNet Library | Schaffer Library | Major Studies Canadian Government Commission ofInquiry CANNABIS 141. Cannabis sativa is an herbaceous annual plantwhich readily grows untended in temperate climates in many areasof the world, including Canada. Although there are severalvarieties (i.e. indica, americana, and africana) most botanistsconsider these to be members of the same species. Indian hemp, asthis plant is sometimes known, has separate male and female formsand may grow to 10 to 12 feet under favourable conditions. The first detailed description of cannabis available todayappeared in a medicinal book prepared by the Chinese Emperor ShenNung around 2737 B.C. Since then, cannabis has been known in theEast by such descriptions as 'the heavenly guide', 'Poor man'sheaven', 'soother of grief' and, in a more moralistic tone, 'theliberator of sin'.223 A United Nations' report 20 years agoestimated that 200 million people in the world used the drug formedical, religious or recreational purposes. 142. What is commonly referred to as marijuana ('grass','pot', 'weed', 'tea', 'boo' or 'Mary Jane') in North America isusually made up of crushed cannabis leaves, flowers, and oftentwigs, and may vary considerably in potency from one sample toanother. Similar preparations are known as bhang and themore potent ganja in India, kif in Morocco and daggain Africa, while the relatively pure resin is called hashish('hash') in the West and much of the Middle East, and charasin India. Hashish is usually prepared by pressing or scrapingthe sticky amber resin from the plant, and may be more than fivetimes as potent on a weight basis as high quality marijuana. Inaddition to these common forms, concentrated cannabis extract isavailable in some countries in an alcohol solution (tincture ofCannabis) designed for medical purposes (e.g., BritishPharmacopoeia). The various forms of the drug are frequently listed under thegeneral term cannabis since they differ primarily in the degreeof potency. It must be stressed, however; that differences in thepreparation, quantities involved, mode of administration andpatterns of use are also important determinants of effect, and itis often essential that these factors be identified in theexamination of individual reports. 143. In many societies, cannabis sativa has been ahighly valued crop. The trunk fibres of the woody plant are usedin the reduction of hemp rope and twine; the seeds are a sourceof a product similar to linseed oil and, until recently, werealso commonly used as bird food; the pharmacological propertiesof the leaves, flowers and resin have been used for thousands ofyears, for both medical and non-medical purposes. Cannabis was apparently brought to the Western hemisphere inthe sixteenth century by the Spaniards and was an important fibreand seed crop centuries later in the British colonies of NorthAmerica. A portion of George Washington's Mount Vernon plantationwas dedicated to the cultivation of hemp and it was reportedthat, 'Virginia awarded bounties for hemp culture andmanufacture, and imposed penalties on those who did not produceit.'31 Although there are conflicting opinions, it would appearthat the psychotropic properties of cannabis may have been littleknown to the colonial farmers at that time.12,120 Hemp was againcultivated in North America during World War II after the majorsupply lines from the East were cut off. These plants wereapparently selected for high fibre content and lowpharmacological activity. 144. When grown under optimal conditions almost all parts ofboth male and females plants, may be potentially psychoactive.The female has traditionally been considered the more efficientproducer of the resin responsible for the pharmacologicaleffects, although recent studies question this conclusion.235Female flowers, prior to pollination, contain the greatestconcentration of resin and, consequently, the flowering tops arehighly valued and are frequently prepared separately from theremainder of the plant. The potency is further affected by theclimate and soil conditions, certain genetic factors, and thetime and method of harvesting and preparation. 145. In recent years, the chemistry of cannabis has come undercareful investigation. Although numerous cannabinols wereconsidered potential candidates in the search for the activeprinciples of cannabis, it appears that certain forms oftetrahydrocannabinol (THC) are the most potent psychoactiveconstituents. Several of these have recently been isolated andsynthesized.155 It would be incorrect to say, however, that theactive ingredient in cannabis has been established, since muchbasic psychopharmacological work remains to be done in this area.Several related synthetics (Synhexyl* or Pyrahexyl*) have alsobeen investigated. Although there are continual reports of THCbeing sold on the illicit market, samples alleged to be THC haveinvariably been found to be some other drug. 146. Frequent cases of cannabis use first came to the regularattention of government and public health officials in NorthAmerica after World War I, although earlier references to suchuse exist. This increase was correlated with an influx of Mexicanworkers into the Southern United States, and subsequent use wasapparently largely confined to ethnic minority groups, with ahigh proportion of urban-dwelling Afro- and Spanish-Americansamong the known users. In addition, cannabis use was often notedamong musicians and others in the fields of entertainment andcreative arts. In the last decade, however, the use of cannabishas spread to quite a different segment of the population andappears to be most prevalent among, although by no meansrestricted to, middle-class youth of high school and college age.In spite of the risk of severe penalties, estimates based on avariety of sources suggest that eight to 20 million NorthAmericans have at least tried cannabis.260 These figures must beconsidered tenuous however, since there is no satisfactory way toassess their validity. 147. Recently the controversy surrounding this drug hasreached epidemic proportions. Usually reliable authorities havepublicly taken diametrically opposed positions regardingcannabis, not only on moral and social policy issues, but on thesupposedly 'hard' scientific facts as well. Although the currentworld literature on cannabis numbers some 2,000 publications, fewof these papers meet modern standards of scientificinvestigation. They are often ill-documented and ambiguous,emotion-laden and incredibly biased, and can, in general, berelied upon for very little valid information. Scientificexpertise in the area of cannabis is limited by the simple factthat there is little clearly-established scientific informationavailable, and preconceived notions often dominate theinterpretation of ambiguous data. The resulting confusion isexemplified by current legislation in many parts of the world,including Canada and the United States, which classifies cannabiswith the opiate narcotics, even though these drugs arepharmacologically different. This rather sorry state of affairs can be attributed toseveral factors. To begin with, governmental restrictions on themedical and scientific use of cannabis in North America have beenso strict over the past few decades that the majority of would-beresearchers have found it more attractive to work in other areas.Secondly, since the widespread use of cannabis in North Americais a relatively new phenomenon, it has not, in the past, beenconsidered a particularly high priority research area from apublic health standpoint. In addition, until recently, there waslittle possibility of standardizing the cannabis substances beingstudied, since little was known about the relevant aspects ofcannabis chemistry. Consequently, there was little basis forcomparing reports, and generalizations were limited. To date, noauthorized experimental research of cannabis effects on humans isbeing conducted in Canada. The observations collected during centuries of relativelyunrestricted cannabis use in regions of the East have rarely beenscientifically documented because most of what we consider modernscience has been, until recently, basically a Western phenomenon.Furthermore, profound cultural, moral and legal differencescomplicate the problem of extrapolating from reports of Easternusage to the North American scene. While there has been a concerted effort, in the followingdiscussions of cannabis effects, to concentrate attention onfairly well documented topics and to avoid areas where theevidence is especially weak, the scanty nature of our currentscientific knowledge of cannabis necessitates a cautious andtentative approach to this interim review. MedicalUse 148. There is no currently accepted medical use of cannabis inNorth America outside of an experimental context. Althoughcannabis has been reported to produce an array of possibly usefulmedical effects, these have either not been adequatelyinvestigated, or can be replaced by using other more readilyavailable and convenient drugs. The natural product's variabilityin potency and instability over time are among the factors whichhave led to its disfavour in Western 20th century medicine.However, recent advances in isolation and synthesis of certainactive principles of cannabis have prompted a second look at someof the potentially therapeutic aspects of the drug.159 Cannabis has been used in the past, is presently used in somecultures, or is currently under clinical investigation, for itsalleged anxiety-reducing, tranquillizing, mood-elevating,appetite stimulating, analgesic (pain reducing) andanti-bacterial effects. It has also been used to reduce fatigueor insomnia (sleeplessness), to ease opiate narcotic withdrawal,and as an aid to psychotherapy in applications analogous to psycholyticLSD therapy or as a clinical antidepressant. In addition,cannabis has often been employed in the past, and is currentlyused illicitly in North America, to reduce the secondary symptomsand suffering caused by the flu and the common cold. Thesevarious alleged therapeutic properties of cannabis have not beenadequately studied in a scientific context, and their generalmedical potential remains a matter of conjecture. Administration,Absorption, Distribution and Physiological Fate 149. Marijuana is usually smoked in hand-rolled cigarettesknown as 'joints', 'J's', 'sticks' or 'reefers', the butt ofwhich is often called a 'roach'. Normally one or two joints issufficient to produce a mild 'high', although this variesconsiderably according to individual factors and the potency ofthe sample. Hashish may vary in colour from very light todark-brown and ranges from a hard waxy substance to a crumbly,powdery consistency. Small pieces of hashish may be placed on thetip of a burning tobacco cigarette and the smoke inhaled off thetop. Ordinary pipes, water pipes (hookahs) and a variety ofspecially made instruments are also employed in the smoking ofhashish and marijuana. In the Middle East and Far East cannabis is often mixed withsuch substances as datura stramonium (Jimson weed),tobacco, nux vomica, and opium, which further complicatesthe interpretation of reports from these areas.107 Samples ofcannabis obtained in Canada generally do not contain other drugs,although they may be 'cut' with relatively inert substances.143There have been no analytical reports to support rumours thatheroin or other opiate narcotics have been found in cannabis inthis country. 150. Cannabis smoke is usually inhaled deep into the lungs andheld there for an extended time, in order to increase absorption.The onset of psychological effects is almost immediate with thesmoking of more potent forms of cannabis, and the peak effectsusually occur within the first quarter-hour followinginhalations. Major effects usually last several hours whilemilder ones may endure for half a day longer. Absorption by the gastro-intestinal tract is effective,although relatively slow. Since the resin is fairly soluble inhot water, cannabis is often used in making tea or otherbeverages - mild bhang drinks, for example, are common inIndia. In some countries hashish is incorporated into butteredcandies called majoon, or other foods. The effects ofcannabis taken orally usually begin after an hour or so, andgradually reach a peak within several hours, then slowly decline.Very high doses may produce some effects lasting more than a day,although the drug is not ordinarily used in such large quantitiesin North America. The effects of oral administration are oftennoticeably different from those of inhalation. It is uncertainwhether this is due to chemical changes from the heat in thesmoked material, effects of the digestive juices or othermetabolic enzymes after oral administration, or differences inrapidity and efficiency of absorption and distribution in the twomethods. On a weight basis, however, smoking seems to be the mosteffective mode of administration. The speed of acquisition, theduration of effects, and the recovery from the cannabis 'high'depends on the rate, quantity, and mode of administration, inaddition to various psychological and physiologicalcharacteristics of the user. 151. While considerable progress is being made in this area,little is known at the present time regarding the metabolism,excretion, and mechanism of action of cannabis. There is evidencethat some metabolites of THC are psychoactive. Techniques arebeing developed which are designed to measure cannabis productsin the urine, blood and saliva, and substantial breakthroughs areexpected in these areas in the near future. Effectsof Cannabis 152. Although the literature is brimming with impressionisticreports of the effects of cannabis, only a small number of thesemeet even the most rudimentary scientific standards. A review ofthose effects which have been unequivocally established andscientifically documented would be a scant summary indeed. Inspite of strong disagreement among extremists on many points inthe cannabis controversy, major governmental reports byindependent- commissions of various backgrounds overthree-quarters of a century have come to some surprisinglysimilar conclusions regarding the use of cannabis. Such reportsinclude the British Indian Hemp Drugs Commission Report(1893-4),107 Mayor La Guardia's Report on The MarijuanaProblem in The City of New York (1944),149 the United StatesPresident's Commission on Law Enforcement andAdministration of Justice: Task Force on Narcotics and Drug Abuse(1967),220 and the Cannabis report (1968), by theBritish Advisory Committee on Drug Dependence, prepared under thechairmanship of the Baroness Wootton of Abinger.5 In many areas in which formal scientific data are notavailable, we shall have to rely on expert opinion, and in suchinstances reference will be made to some of the observationspresented in these aforementioned governmental reports. A generaloverview of the effects of cannabis will be followed by a moredetailed examination of certain selected scientific studies.Primary concern will be given to recent publications. Overviewof Effects 153. Physiological Effects. The short-termphysiological effects of cannabis are usually slight andapparently have little clinical significance. The followingeffects have been established in adequately controlled studies:increase in heart rate, swelling of the minor conjunctival bloodvessels in the membranes around the eye, and minor unspecificchanges in the electroencephalogram (EEG). Also commonly noted,but less well documented, are: a slight drying of the eyes andnasal passages, initially stimulated salivation followed bydryness of the mouth, throat irritation and coughing duringsmoking, and increased urination. Less commonly, nausea,vomiting, diarrhoea or constipation are reported. Thesegastro-intestinal disturbances rarely occur with smoked cannabis,although nausea is not uncommon when large quantities are takenorally. Changes in blood sugar level and blood pressure have beeninconsistently reported. Appetite is usually stimulated. Contraryto popular belief, there is little evidence of pupil dilation. Insome individuals, incoordination, ataxia and tremors have beenobserved and chest pains, dizziness and fainting haveoccasionally been noted, usually at high doses. Physiologicalhangover effects have been described but are rare, even afterconsiderable intoxication. 154. Cannabis has little acute physiological toxicity - sleepis the usual somatic consequence of over-dose. No deaths duedirectly to smoking or eating of cannabis have been documentedand no reliable information exists regarding the lethal dose inhumans. One fatality, however, was reportedly caused bydistention of the bowel during a prolonged bout of grossover-eating under the acute influence of cannabis.134 155. There is little reliable information on the long-termeffects of cannabis use. There are numerous reports from Easterncountries of chronic ill-health among very heavy long-term usersof hashish. Most commonly reported are minor respiratory andgastro-intestinal ailments. These studies rarely provide acontrol group of comparable non-users for a reference standard,and clinical findings are usually confounded with a variety, ofsocial, economic and cultural factors which are not easilyuntangled. Consequently, much important work remains to be donein this area. The British Cannabis report (1968) states: 5 Having reviewed all the material available to us, we findourselves in agreement with the conclusion reached by the IndianHemp Drugs Commission appointed by the Government of India(1893-1894) and the New York Mayor's Committee on Marihuana(1944), that the long-term consumption of cannabis in moderatedoses has no harmful effects. 156. Some observers have suggested that chronic smoking ofcannabis might produce carcinogenic effects similar to those nowattributed to the smoking of tobacco, although no evidence existsto support this view at this time. A meaningful comparison isdifficult to make since the quantity of leaf consumed by theaverage cigarette smoker in North America is many times theamount of cannabis smoked by even heavy users. The presentpattern of use by regular cannabis smokers in North America ismore analogous to intermittent alcohol use (e.g., once or twice aweek), than to the picture of chronic daily use presented byordinary tobacco dependence. However, the deep inhalationtechnique usually used with cannabis might add respiratorycomplications. 157. Recently, there have been conflicting reports that largequantities of cannabis extract, injected into pregnant females ofcertain strains of rodents, may cause abnormalities in theoffspring.85 These disparate results can not be simplyextrapolated to humans and at this time there is no scientificevidence that cannabis adversely affects human chromosomes orcauses deformed children. 158. Psychological Effects. The psychologicaleffects of cannabis vary greatly with a number of factors and areoften difficult to predict. The dose, type of preparation, andrate and mode of administration can greatly influence theresponse, even if the effective doses and peak responses are madecomparable. Furthermore, the psychological effects depend to aconsiderable degree on the personality of the user, his pastexperience with cannabis or other drugs, his attitudes, and thesetting in which the drug is used. Although 'hash' may be many times more potent than marijuana,the effects of these two forms of cannabis, as usually used inNorth America, are often indistinguishable. It has been reportedthat most experienced individuals smoke to attain a certaineffect or level of 'high', and adjust the dose according to thepotency of the substance used. 'Grass' and 'hash' are generallyused interchangeably and great variations in potency of differentsamples are accommodated by the experienced user through a'titration' of dose - i.e., intake is stopped when the smokerreaches a personally comfortable level of intoxication. Suchprecision is generally not possible with oral use, however, dueto the long delay in action, and a 'non-optimal' effect istherefore much more likely to occur with this practice. In someEastern countries, different social norms have evolved around thedifferent forms of cannabis, and the pattern of drug useassociated with bhang drinks may be quite different from thatseen in regular hashish users. Long-term heavy cannabis usersinvariably prefer the more potent ganja or hashish.45, 107 It is often difficult to find descriptions of thepsychological affects of marijuana that are free from valuejudgements. Many effects seem to take on good or bad connotationsdepending on the circumstances in which they occur, the personalattitudes of the individual undergoing the experience, and theorientation of the observer who is recording them. Moreover,since many of the significant psychological effects are intenselypersonal, the laboratory scientist often has little opportunityto make objective measurements, and must rely on subjective,introspective reports, communicated verbally through a languagesystem which is frequently inadequate. 159. Cannabis is one of the least potent of the psychedelicdrugs, and some might object to its being classified with LSD andsimilar substances. It is often suggested that marijuana is amild intoxicant, more like alcohol.132 There is evidence,however, that high doses of cannabis in some individuals mayproduce effects similar, in some respects, to an attenuated LSDexperience. While such effects are rarely reported, many milderaspects of the psychedelic experience regularly occur with acannabis 'high'. The outline of potential reactions topsychedelic drugs presented in the section on LSD include: psychoticand non-psychotic adverse reactions, psychodynamic, cognitive,aesthetic, and psychedelic-peak (transcendental) or religiousexperiences. While analogous experiences may occur in varyingdegrees with cannabis, the quality of the effects is reportedlydifferent, the intensity considerably lower, and the overallresponse more controllable than with the more powerfulpsychedelic drugs. It would be incorrect to say that cannabis inmoderate dose actually produces a mild LSD experience; theeffects of these two drugs are physiologically, behaviourally andsubjectively quite distinct. Furthermore, since nocross-tolerance occurs between LSD and THC the mechanism ofaction of these two drugs is thought to be different.109 160. A cannabis 'high' typically involves several phases. Theinitial effects are often somewhat stimulating and, in someindividuals, may elicit mild tension or anxiety which usually isreplaced by a pleasant feeling of well-being. The later effectsusually tend to make the user introspective and tranquil. Rapidmood changes often occur. A period of enormous hilarity may befollowed by a contemplative silence. Psychological, effects which are typically reported by usersinclude: happiness, increased conviviality, a feeling of enhancedinterpersonal rapport and communication, heightened sensitivityto humour, free play of the imagination, unusual cognitive andideational associations, a sense of extra-ordinary reality, atendency to notice aspects of the environment of which one isnormally unaware, enhanced visual imagery, an altered sense oftime in which minutes may seem like hours, changes in visuallyperceived spatial relations, enrichment of sensory experiences(subjective aspects of sound and taste perception are oftenparticularly enhanced), increased personal understanding andreligious insight, mild excitement and energy, (or just theopposite), increased or decreased behavioural activity, increasedor decreased verbal fluency and talkativeness, lessening ofinhibitions, and at higher doses, a tendency to lose or digressfrom one's train of thought. Feelings of enhanced spontaneity andcreativity are, often described, although an actual increase increativity is difficult to establish scientifically. While mostexperts agree that cannabis has little specific aphrodisiac (sexstimulating) effect, many users report increased enjoyment of sexand other intimate human contact while under the influence of thedrug.93,161 Less pleasant, experiences may occur in different individuals,or possibly in the same individuals at different times. Some ofthese reactions may include: fear and anxiety, depression,irritability, nausea, headache, backache, dizziness, a dulling ofattention, confusion, lethargy, and a sensation of heaviness,weakness and drowsiness. Disorientation, delusions,suspiciousness and paranoia, and in some cases, panic, loss ofcontrol, and acute psychotic states have been reported.Schwarz196 has compiled an extensive catalogue of reports ofadverse symptoms which have been attributed to cannabis in theworld literature. 161. The possibility of psychiatric disorders associated withcannabis use has received considerable attention. Although thereare some well documented examples of very intense and nightmarishshort-term reactions (usually among inexperienced users inunpleasant situations and with high doses), these cases seem tobe relatively rare and generally show a rapid recovery. Althoughmany regular users have had an experience with cannabis which wasin some way unpleasant, 'freak-outs' are apparently rare.Ungerleider230 has reported 1,887 'adverse reactions' tomarijuana in the Los Angeles area. These data are difficult tointerpret since no clear definition of adverse reaction isprovided and no follow-ups were made. By contrast, Unwin inMontreal reports:233 I have seen only three adverse reactions in the past twoyears; all following the smoking of large amounts of hashish andall occurring in individuals with a previous history ofpsychiatric treatment for psychiatric or borderline conditions. The few cases of prolonged psychosis which have been reportedhave usually been attributed to an earlier personalitypredisposition, although this hypothesis is not always easy tosubstantiate. Earlier notions of a specific 'cannabis psychosis'have generally been abandoned since there is little evidence ofsuch a distinct psychiatric entity. Smith206 in San Francisco,reports that he has never observed 'cannabis psychosis' in over35,000 marijuana users seen at the Haight-Ashbury clinic. But arecent psychiatric report described several psychotic reactionsoccurring in American soldiers in Vietnam, who had usedcannabis.218 The psychiatrist believed that the psychoticepisodes may have been related to cannabis use. This emphasizesthe need for caution before any generalizations about theevidence of psychiatric complication with cannabis use are made -particularly in individuals who have consumed large doses ofpotent material under conditions of increased physical andpsychological stress. Such general conditions are, of course, byno means restricted to military operations. 162. There have been a few reports of 'flash-backs' orspontaneous recurrences of certain cannabis effects some timeafter the last use of the drug, although such events areapparently quite rare. In addition, cannabis has also beenreported to have precipitated LSD recurrences in some heavy usersof LSD.123 Only a few adequate laboratory investigations have been madeof the effects of cannabis on normal psychological functioning.Most of the data indicate little change under the conditionstested, although reports of both impaired and improvedperformance have been made. Because of the perceptual, cognitiveand psycho-motor effects often attributed to cannabis, it seemsreasonable to expect that in high doses the drug would impairautomobile driving. Many regular users feel this is so and avoiddriving, while others content that they are more careful and areprobably better drivers when slightly 'high'.93 There is noavailable evidence that cannabis has been a significant factor intraffic accidents. The one study testing cannabis effects ondriving skills found little impairment to be caused by a 'mildsocial high'.61 Some of the studies pertinent to these topicswill be discussed in more detail at the end of this section. 163. A study by Suchman217 suggests a close associationbetween the use of marijuana in some young people and adherenceto what is termed the 'hang-loose' ethic. Central to this notionis the questioning of such traditional patterns of behaviour andbelief as, conventional religion, marriage, pre-marital chastityand the accumulation of wealth. Subscribers to this ethicapparently do not necessarily reject the mores of theestablished order, but are strongly critical of them. In thisstudy, the stronger the student embraced the ethic the morefavourable he was towards marijuana use. Smoking marijuana washighly associated with 'nonconformist' behaviour such asparticipating in mass protests and was more likely to be reportedby those students who were dissatisfied with the education theywere receiving. The 'hang-loose' ethic, while it may representantagonism to the conventional world, does not appear to createapathy and withdrawal. The investigator suggests that the smokingof marijuana is part of the behaviour associated with this ethicrather than the cause of it. A somewhat different view is suggested by McGlothlin andWest154 on the basis of clinical observation. They have describedan 'amotivational syndrome' in some heavy marijuana users inNorth America. It is suggested that such use of marijuana maycontribute to some characteristic personality changes includingapathy, loss of effectiveness, diminished capacity or willingnessto carry out complex long-term plans, endure frustration, followroutines or successfully master new material. The interpretationof these observations is complicated by the fact that suchindividuals are usually involved with other drugs as well ascannabis. Several Eastern studies have suggested that chronic high-doseuse of the more potent preparations of cannabis may havedetrimental effects on the individual. One of the mostcomprehensive reports was that of the Chopras in 1939.45 Aneight-year study was carried out on a sample of 1,238 cannabisusers. With regard to moderate doses, users of relatively mildbhang reported a general feeling of well-being, relief from worryand sharpened appetite. Heavy users were often found to sufferfrom several adverse symptoms. In some instances, cannabis usewas seen as an attempt at self-medication in response to themedisorders rather than as the cause. The researchers report that among the ganja and charas users,a small percentage suffered from serious psychiatric disorder,and minor emotional problems, including impairment of judgementand memory, were observed in the majority of these subjects.According to the authors, a significant proportion of the grouphad pre-existing neurotic tendencies which may have contributedto their problem of drug use. Heavy users were often observed toshow marked inactivity, apathy and self-neglect. The majority ofthose who took small doses of any of the cannabis preparationsfelt that the overall consequences of their drug habit were nilor beneficial, while the majority of those who chronically tookheavy doses, thought the practice harmful. These subjectivejudgements were generally consistent with the clinicalobservations reported. 165. This and other reports from Eastern countries aredifficult to interpret and apply to the Western situation. Tobegin with, no equivalent data are presented from a comparablecontrol group of non-users of similar social and economicbackground (although some comparisons among users are possible)and there is no means of estimating the representativeness of thesample studied. In addition, there are many social and economicfactors which complicate cross-cultural comparisons. The use ofcannabis has a different meaning in Eastern cultures where a longhistory and tradition surrounds its use - than it does in theWest, where it is a relatively recent phenomenon. Often, conceptsof normalcy and deviancy differ considerably from one culture toanother. In addition, the Eastern cannabis user generallyconsumes larger quantities of more potent forms with greaterfrequency than does the Western user. 166. Although the possession of cannabis is a crime, and inobtaining it an individual must normally come in contact withother individuals committing drug offences, there is noscientific evidence that cannabis itself is responsible for thecommission of other forms of criminal behaviour. Chopra andChopra45 suggest that cannabis use may, in fact, actually reducethe occurrence of crime and aggression by decreasing generalactivity. While criminals may be more likely to use cannabis thanother individuals, few crimes committed under the influence ofmarijuana have been documented, and a casual relationship betweenthe drug use and other illegal behaviour has not beenestablished. It may well be that an individual who is inclined tocommit one illegal act (e.g., a drug offence), may also be morelikely than average to transgress in other areas as well. Someobservers feel that the lessening of inhibitions often reportedwith cannabis use might, in certain delinquent individuals,increase the likelihood of asocial behaviour. In a 1967judgement, rendered by Judge G. Joseph Tauro, Chief Justice ofthe Supreme Court of Massachusetts, in the Boston trial of twomen (Leis and Weiss) accused of trafficking cannabis, thefollowing statement appears:54 In my opinion, a proper inference may be drawn from theevidence, that there is a relationship between the use ofmarijuana and the incidence of crime and anti-social behaviour. The brief presented to the Commission by the Royal CanadianMounted Police dealt at considerable length with the allegedassociation of illegal drug use and criminal behaviour in Canada.This evidence is discussed later in the report. The British Cannabis report (1968) states that:5 In the United Kingdom the taking of cannabis has not so farbeen regarded, even by the severest critics, as a direct cause ofserious crime.... The evidence of a link with violent crime isfar stronger with alcohol than with the smoking of cannabis. 167. Tolerance and Dependence. While gross tolerance tothe major effects of cannabis does not seem to occur in humans,there are many more subtle aspects of this situation which haveyet to be clarified. Although there is little tendency forintermittent users to increase dose, certain cannabis effects maybe modified by repeated experiences with the drug. Manyinvestigators have pointed out that in some individuals thereappears to be a 'reverse' tolerance - i.e., smaller doses mayproduce the desired effects after the user has becomefamiliar with the drug. Many individuals experienced little or noeffect the first time they smoked cannabis. Whether this is dueto initially poor smoking technique, some learning orpsychological adaptation process, or perhaps some more molecularpharmacological sensitization, is uncertain. On the other hand, afew individuals appear to be extremely sensitive to the effectsof cannabis at the beginning and may initially report intense,ornate, and perhaps frightening experiences which are rarely, ifever, equalled in subsequent administrations. 168. Investigators have reported that regular users learn todirect or control some of the psychological and behaviouraleffects while subjectively 'high' and may be able to performcertain functions better than non-users given the same dose. Thiswould suggest that some sort of differential selective adaptationor tolerance may develop to some of the initially'uncontrollable' effects.User4 remain sensitive to the rewardingeffects of the drug since there is generally no markedinclination for them to increase dosage. Some users report thatif they stay 'high' for several days in a row the drug experienceloses much of its freshness and clarity and, consequently, theyprefer intermittent use. There are reports of chronic, heavy users from the East whoconsume what would seem to be rather large quantities by Westernstandards.24,30 Whether this reflects some degree of tolerancewith heavy use in these users or differences in desired effectsor general drug-using norms, is not known. 169. Physical dependence to cannabis has not been demonstratedand it would appear that there are normally no adverse physiologicaleffects or withdrawal symptoms occurring with abstinence from thedrug, even in regular users. On the other hand, there have beenseveral reports from the Far East and Middle East, ofirritability, mild discomfort, and certain behavioural symptomsoccurring after withdrawal of the drug in chronic heavy users.24It must be kept in mind that these cases are not clearlydocumented and that the purity of the substances involved is notcertain. Since hashish is smoked with large quantities of tobaccoand other drugs in many Eastern countries, these mixtures couldbe responsible for the minor withdrawal symptoms reported. 170. No controlled research has been done into the effects ofdiscontinued cannabis administration after unusually high dosesof the unadulterated substance have been given over a prolongedlength of time. While such an extreme situation may appear to beof little social significance, it should be noted that physicaldependence on the sedatives (alcohol, barbiturates andtranquillizers) usually occurs in only a small minority of userswho take abnormally large quantities of the drug for extendedperiods of time. 171. The presence or absence of psychological dependence in agiven situation, of course, depends on one's definition of theterm. While many cannabis users in North America seem to take thedrug once or twice a week, in a social context similar to that inwhich alcohol is normally consumed, and readily abstain for weeksor months with no ill effects, there is a small minority of userswho smoke it daily and whose regular routine and sense ofwell-being is disrupted if they are unable to obtain the drug.Most users apparently find the drug pleasant and desirable, andoften will go out of their way to acquire it - even at the riskof criminal penalty. However, the craving and urgency associatedwith opiate narcotic of sedative (or tobacco) dependence do notseem to occur. There are reports from the East that considerablepsychological dependence has occurred in a minority ofindividuals in whom the use of the drug has become a majorcomponent of their existence.107 Cannabisand other Drugs 172. The minority of cannabis users studied in North Americahave had experience with a variety of other psychoactive drugs,alcohol and tobacco being the most frequently mentioned. As mightbe expected, most of those who smoke cannabis first acquired aregular tobacco habit. A link between tobacco smoking and marijuana use has beensuggested by Rowell, who worked closely with the United StatesBureau of Narcotics in the 1930s:191 Slowly, insidiously, for over three hundred years, LadyNicotine was setting the stage for a grand climax. The long yearsof tobacco using were but an introduction and training formarijuana use. Tobacco, which was first smoked in a pipe, then asa cigar, and at last as a cigarette, demanded more and more ofitself until its supposed pleasures palled, and some of thetobacco victims looked about for something stronger. Tobacco wasno longer potent enough. 173. The relationship between cannabis and alcohol use hasbeen the subject of much controversy. Many marijuana users claimthat they have drastically reduced their consumption of alcohol,or quit it, since using cannabis. They often suggest thatcannabis may be a cure for society's alcohol ills. Theconsiderable hostility towards and rejection of alcohol expressedby many cannabis-using youth, however, is clearly not reflectedin the majority of cannabis users. In general, survey studiesfind that those who use alcohol are more likely than'teetotallers' to use cannabis, and most cannabis users still usealcohol. We have no information as to what effects, cannabis hason an individual's drinking behaviour and overall alcohol intake.It is not clear whether cannabis tends to replace alcohol as anintoxicant in the user population or whether the use of thesedrugs is addictive without significant interaction, or if the useof one of these drugs potentiates the use of the other. Itappears that, if used simultaneously, the alcohol effectsdominate and many of the psychedelic aspects of cannabis aresuppressed. For this reason, many cannabis users refuse to mixthe drugs even if they may enjoy one separately. The question of comparing benefits and ills of alcohol andcannabis has become a popular and engaging endeavour. Due to theprofoundly different social connotations and patterns of use, aswell as scientific knowledge of these drugs, such a comparisonmust be made on limited and tenuous grounds. 174. In the United States, the majority of persons studied whohad been dependent on opiate narcotics, had previous experiencewith cannabis (and were usually heavy users of alcohol). InCanada this has less often been the pattern, and it appears thatheavy use of sedatives (alcohol and barbiturates) rather thancannabis has most frequently preceded heroin use.246,215 It has been suggested that the Canadian pattern is becomingmore similar to the United States experience. On this topic, the United States Task Force Report (1967)concludes:220 The charge that marijuana 'leads to the use of addictingdrugs' need to be critically examined. There is evidence that amajority of the heroin users who come to the attention of publicauthorities have, in fact, had some prior experience withmarijuana. But this does not mean that one leads to the other inthe sense that marijuana has an intrinsic quality that creates aheroin liability. There are too many marijuana users who do notgraduate to heroin, and too many heroin addicts with no knownprior marijuana use, to support such a theory. Moreover there isno scientific basis for such a theory. The most reasonable hypothesis here is that some people whoare predisposed to marijuana are also predisposed to heroin useit may also be the case, that through the use of marijuana aperson forms the personal associations that later expose him toheroin. With a similar orientation, the British Cannabis report(1968) states:5 '. . . we have concluded that a risk ofprogression to heroin from cannabis is not a reason for retainingthe control over this drug (cannabis).' 175. Many heavy users of cannabis reportedly also experimentwith a variety of other drugs, including amphetamines as well aspsychedelic substances. Again, marijuana is often the first drug(other than alcohol and tobacco) taken by youthful multi-drugusers. The role of cannabis in the 'progression' to other drugshas not been adequately studied and it is unclear whether itplays a predisposing role, or is often used earlier simplybecause of its wider availability and social acceptance. 176. While no cross-tolerance occurs between cannabis and theother psychedelic drugs or the stimulants, considerable mentionhas been made of 'multi-drug' psychological dependence in whichindividuals may seem to depend on a variety of drugs in general,rather than on any particular chemical substance. 177. Initiation of Cannabis Use. Cannabis users are usually'turned on' for the first time by friends and associates who havehad previous experience with the drug. There is little evidenceof aggressive 'pushers' being responsible for the initiation ofcannabis smoking, although many individuals have reportedconsiderable peer-group pressure to try it. The distribution ortrafficking of cannabis is largely carried out in the same socialmanners and is usually handed from friend to friend, althoughthere are some individuals whose motivation for trafficking isprimarily commercial. Some of the marijuana in Canada is'home-grown' but most apparently comes from Mexico and thesouthern United States. SomeCannabis Studies of Current Significance 178. I. In 1939, after consulting with the New York Academy ofMedicine, Mayor La Guardia of New York appointed a specialscientific committee to investigate the effects of marijuana,both in the community and under laboratory conditions. The finalreport entitled The Marijuana Problem in the City New York:Sociological, Medical, Psychological and Pharmacological Studies149was published in 1944, and is still one of the most widely quotedand comprehensive studies of cannabis. The report provoked considerable controversy, and although ithas been generally well received by the scientific community,certain other individual were quite vociferous in expressingtheir dismay at the committee's conclusions. O.J. Kalant120 ofthe Addiction Research Foundation, has prepared a carefulcritical analysis of the Mayor's report. She observed that:'Judged from a purely scientific standpoint this study deservesneither the extravagant praise nor the vicious attacks to whichit has been submitted.' 179. The field work for the sociological study was undertakenby six specially trained police officers. The squad 'lived' inthe environment in which marijuana smoking or peddling wassuspected. They frequented poolrooms, bars and grills, dancehalls, subways, public toilets, parks and docks. On the basis oftheir observations, the following conclusions were drawn: Thedistribution and use was centred in Harlem. While the cost ofmarijuana was low and therefore within range of most persons, thesale and distribution was not under the control of any singleorganized group. The consensus among users was that the drugcreated a definite feeling of adequacy. The practice of smokingmarijuana did not lead to addiction in the medical sense of theword, did not lead to morphine or heroin or cocaine addiction,and no effort was made to create a market for opiate narcotics bystimulating the practice of marijuana smoking. Marijuana was notthe determining factor in the commission of major crimes, nor wasit the cause of juvenile delinquency. Finally, 'the publicityconcerning the catastrophic effects of marijuana smoking in NewYork City is unfounded.' 180. The clinical studies were conducted with an experimentalgroup of 77 persons - 72 of whom were inmates of various New YorkPrisons. Forty-eight of these subjects had used marijuanapreviously and some had been heavy users of opiate narcotics.Both orally ingested cannabis concentrate and ordinary marijuanacigarettes were administered in various quantities. A feeling of euphoria, occasionally interrupted by unpleasantsensations, was the usual response to cannabis. Also noted wereother common aspects of a marijuana 'high', such as laughter andrelaxation. No signs of aggression occurred, although someindications of anti-social feelings were expressed. Dizziness, alight floating sensation, dryness of the throat, thirst, anincrease in appetite (particularly for sweets), unsteadiness anda feeling of heaviness of the extremities, were among the commonsomatic symptoms noted. Nausea and vomiting occasionally occurredwith oral ingestion. Most effects seemed to increase with doseand were often more pronounced on those who had not previouslyused cannabis. 181. There were 9 cases of psychotic reaction in the prisonersstudied. In 6 instances, acute or short-term adverse reactionscharacterized by '... mental confusion and excitement ofdelirious nature with periods of laughter and anxiety' occurred.Three cases of 'true' psychosis appeared to be associated withthe experiment. 'The precise role marijuana in the psychoticstates of the three unstable persons is not clear.' In the firstsubject 'the psychotic episode was probably related to epilepsy.'In the case of the second and third subjects, the fact that theywere sent back to prison to complete their sentences must beconsidered an important, if not the main factor in bringing onthe psychosis.' None of the nine individuals had been a regularuser of cannabis. The researchers pointed out, however, thatmarijuana can bring on a true psychotic state under certaincircumstances in predisposed individuals. 182. The most consistent physiological effects reported were:a temporary increase in heart rate, an inconsistent increase inblood pressure, and increase in frequency of urination, dilatedpupils, and a moderate increase in blood sugar level and basalmetabolism. Other organic and systematic functions wereunchanged. It should be pointed out that the tests reported werenot conducted under controlled double-blind conditions, and someof these findings have not been confirmed in later controlledstudies. 183. Simple psychomotor functions were only affected slightlyby large doses, and negligibly or not at all by small doses ofmarijuana. More complex functions, hand steadiness, staticequilibrium, and complex reaction time were impaired by both doselevels. Generally, non-users were more affected by the marijuanathan those with previous marijuana experience. Strength of grip,speed of tapping, auditory acuity, 'musical ability' andestimation of short time intervals and linear distances wereunchanged. Placebos were not generally used in this section andthe details of the statistical analysis were not presented. 184. In the section on Intellectual Functioning, a variety ofpsychological tests designed to measure aspects of intelligence,learning, memory and performance were administered. Two doses oforal concentrate were used in most instances. The authorconcludes that marijuana ingestion ... has a transitory ,adverseeffect on mental functioning', with the greatest impairment athigh dose on tasks involving complex functions. No statisticalanalysis was done to distinguish drug effects from statisticalanalysis was done to distinguish drug effects from randomvariation, however, and again, no controlled double-blind designwas used. Furthermore, the author's conclusions are not alwaysconsistent with the evidence which, for example, suggests someimprovement in verbal abilities and certain other functions aftermarijuana ingestion. These data are not discussed. The authornotes that 'indulgence in marijuana does not appear to result inmental deterioration'. Kalant has noted with respect to this section: 120 In summary, the results seem to bear out the conclusion thatbig enough doses of marijuana impair variety of mental functions,while small doses may improve some of them. These conclusions areonly tentative, because the author presents no statisticaltreatment of the data. 185. The 'Emotional and General Personality Structure' ofvarying numbers of users and non-users were studied before andafter several doses of cannabis. The effects of low dose weregenerally pleasant and favourably received by the subjects, whilethe high dose seemed more likely to produce anxiety, distress,and a sense of insecurity. The committee concluded: Under the influence of marijuana the basic personalitystructure of the individual does not change, but some of the moresuperficial aspects of his behaviour show alteration. The newfeeling of self confidence induced by the drug expresses itselfprimarily through oral rather than through physical activity.There is some indication of a diminution in physical activity.The disinhibition which results from the use of marijuanareleases what is latent in the individual's thoughts andemotions, but does not evoke responses which would be totallyalien to him in his undrugged state. 186. A comparison between users and non-users as regards thepossibility of physical and mental deterioration as a consequenceof marijuana use was made on 48 users, some of whom had beensmoking regularly for two to seventeen years. The investigatorsconcluded that: There is definite evidence in this study that the marijuanausers were not inferior in intelligence to the general populationand that they had suffered no mental or physical deterioration asa result of their use of the drug. 187. The therapeutic use of cannabis in the treatment ofopiate narcotic addicts was explored in 56 patients. Tentativeconclusions suggest improved appetite and mood, less severesymptoms and a generally improved clinical picture duringwithdrawal. Again no control group was studied. The Committee reported: From the study as a whole, it is concluded that marijuana isnot a drug of addiction, comparable to morphine, and that iftolerance is acquired, this is of a very limited degree.... Thehabit depends on the pleasurable effects that the drug produces. These views were based largely on interviews with hundreds ofusers, the sociological studies and the laboratoryinvestigations. Some observers have pointed out that theseconclusions may not apply to the conditions of heavy chronic usesometimes reported in Eastern countries. 188. Some individuals have criticized the research for oftenusing high doses of little social relevance - the authors admitthat users, if left to their own devices, tend to approximate thelower doses used in the experiment. Other investigators feel thatmore chronic users of higher doses should have been studied forthe investigation of long-term effects including tolerance anddependence. 189. In summary, although the La Guardia report remains one ofthe more significant contributions to the cannabis literature,the conclusions must be qualified in accordance with the numerousweaknesses in the experimental methodology: blind and placebocontrols were absent and statistical analyses often lacking,reporting was occasionally biased when the data were ambiguous,sample selection may not have been adequate for certainconclusions in the sociological study, and the almost completeuse of prison inmates as subjects in the clinical studies andhospital ward setting may further restrict generalizations. 190. II. Isbell et al109 investigated the effects of variousdoses of smoked and orally ingested tetrahydrocannabinol (THC)ina group of former opiate narcotic addicts who had also hadexperience with marijuana. The drug was compared to an inactiveplacebo control in a single-blind design (i.e., the researchers,but not the subjects, knew which samples were being tested). 191. Regardless of dose and route of administration, THCcaused no significant change in pupillary size, respiration rate,blood pressure, or knee-jerk reflex threshold. Heart pulse ratewas consistently elevated, and swelling of the conjunctival bloodvessels in the membrane around the eyes occurred after the higherdoses. In both physiological and psychological measures, THC (ata standard dose) was found to be two to three times as potentwhen smoked as when taken orally. 192. Patients identified the drug as being similar tomarijuana and some suggested that it was something like LSD orcocaine as well. Euphoria was consistently noted and no mentionwas made in the report of unpleasant adverse reactions.Psychological changes included '. . - alterations in sense oftime and in visual and auditory perception (usually described askeener).' With higher doses, both smoked and orally ingested, '.. .marked distortion in visual and auditory perception,depersonalization, derealization and hallucinations, bothauditory and optical, occurred in most patients. THC, thereforeis a psychotomimetic drug and its psychotomimetic effects aredependent on dose.' Such occurrences may also appear in someindividuals as 'idiosyncratic' reactions at lower doses. It hadbeen noted that the symptoms which Isbell has labelled'psychotomimetic' might be called 'psychedelic' by scientistswith a different orientation. 193. The application of these findings to marijuana use as itoccurs in North America is unclear. Some observers, in both layand scientific circles, have interpreted this report as anindication of the dangers of marijuana, while other scientistsquestion the relevance of these findings in relation to the 'realworld' of marijuana usage.251 194. III. In 1968, Weil, Zinberg and Nelsen 239,240 reportedthe first adequately controlled experiment on cannabis effects inhumans. The primary section of the study is concerned witheffects on nine subjects who were inexperienced with cannabis.The researchers gave two different doses of marijuana (0.5 and1.0gm of 0.9% THC) and an inactive placebo substance in acontrolled 'double-blind' situation - i.e., neither the subjectsnor the researchers knew at the time of the experiment which doseof cannabis or placebo was administered. This procedure greatlyreduces the influence of expectations and bias on the part ofboth subjects and researchers. In addition to the naive subjects,eight chronic marijuana users (who normally smoked daily or everyother day) were tested with the high dose only. No placebo wasused with these subjects since the authors felt that experiencedmarijuana smokers could readily distinguish the placebo from the'real thing', and consequently a true placebo control was notpossible. Subjects took either the drug or placebo by a standardand uniform inhalation method designed to minimize practiceeffects and individual differences in smoking technique.Subsequently, they were tested on a battery of standardpsychological and psychomotor tasks, and certain physiologicalmeasurements were taken in a neutral laboratory setting. 195. The physiological findings were quite straightforward:heart rate was increased moderately, no significant change inrespiration rate occurred, blood sugar level was unchanged(although the timing of the samples may not have been optimal),no change in pupil size was seen and a slight swelling of theconjunctival blood vessels (producing a reddening of themembranes around the eye) occurred. The researchers suggest thatthe near absence of significant physiological effects '... makesit unlikely that marijuana has any seriously detrimental physicaleffects in either a short-term or long-term usage.' 196. The capacity for sustained attention (ContinuousPerformance Test) was unaffected by cannabis in both the naveand chronic user groups, even when a flickering strobe light waspresented to provide distraction. Muscular coordination andattention performance (Pursuit Rotor Test) declined as dose wasincreased in nave subjects, but improved slightly aftermarijuana use in the chronic users. (This improvement wasconsidered a result of practice rather than a drug effect but cannot be properly evaluated due to the lack of a placebomeasurement in the experienced users.) Performance on the DigitSymbol Substitution Test, (a simple test of cognitive functionoften used in I.Q. tests) was impaired in the nave groups,while the experienced smokers started off at a reasonable baseline and actually improved slightly when they were 'high' - atrend which can not be accounted for solely by practice. Atendency to overestimate time was also noted in these subjects.The researchers caution that the differences between users andnonusers in this study must only be considered a trend since thetesting situations were not strictly comparable for the twogroups. 197. Subjects were given five minutes to talk on 'aninteresting or dramatic experience' and the content of the verbalreport was analysed. Marijuana did not impair theunderstandability of the material as measured by the Clozemethod, although judges could consistently distinguish thetranscripts of pre- and post-drug samples in both the naive andexperienced groups. A 'strange' quality in the post-drug sampleswas noted but not easily quantified. The investigators suggestedthat marijuana may temporarily interfere with short-term memory -i.e., the ability to retrieve or remember events occurring in thepast few seconds. They feel that this may explain why manymarijuana smokers, when very 'high', may have troubleremembering, from moment to moment, the logical thread of what isbeing said. Controlled investigation of this hypothesis iscurrently under way. 198. The experienced subjects were asked to rate themselves ona scale from one to ten, with ten representing the 'highest' theyhad ever been. Ratings given were between seven and ten, withmost subjects at eight or nine. This would suggest that thesample was of reasonable potency and the smoking techniqueeffective. On the other hand, with the same dose and smokingtechnique, only one of the naive subjects had, a definitemarijuana 'high'. (Interestingly, he was the one subject who hadearlier expressed an eagerness to 'turn on'.) The researcherspoint out that the introspective report of an individual is theonly way to determine if he is 'high' on marijuana or not. Thereare, as of yet, no known objective signs which allow one toidentify this state. 199. There was no change in mood in the neutral laboratorysetting in either naive or chronic user subjects, as measured byself-rating scales and a content analysis of the verbal sample.There were no adverse marijuana reactions of any kind in any ofthe subjects, although tobacco cigarettes smoked during apractice session, using the standard technique produced acutenicotine reactions in five subjects which 'were far morespectacular than any effects produced by marijuana'. The authorsconclude: In a neutral setting persons who are naive to marijuana do nothave strong subjective experiences after smoking low or highdoses of the drug, and the effects they do report are not thesame as those described by regular users of marijuana who takethe drug in the same neutral setting. Marijuana naive persons dodemonstrate impaired performance on simple intellectual andpsychomotor tests after smoking marijuana; the impairment isdose-related in some cases. Regular users of marijuana do gethigh after smoking marijuana in a neutral setting but do not showthe same degree of impairment of performance on the test as donaive subjects. In some cases, their performance even appears toimprove slightly after smoking marijuana. 200. The New Republic, in an editorial responding tothis report, wrote: 'While pot heads may legitimately ask,"So what else is new?" the study may have a pacifyinginfluence on parents and officials who fear the drug on the basisof unsubstantiated horror stories.'251 While numerous scientistshave expressed similar views, the study does provide a longoverdue empirically adequate beginning to the scientific study ofmarijuana effects on humans. While this study has implicationsextending beyond the laboratory, there has been a tendency in thepopular press to overgeneralize from the results. It would beimprudent to extrapolate the findings into social and legal areasfor which the study was not designed and is not appropriate. 201. IV. Jones and Stone116 in 1969 reported that smokedmarijuana (equivalent to Weil's low dose) compared to a placeboin ten 'heavy users' resulted in: moderately increased heartrate, altered electroencephalogram (EEG), over-estimation of time(but no change in time interval production), no effect on theability to attend to relevant internal cues to the exclusion ofirrelevant external cues (Rod and Frame test), and no effect onthe Digit Symbol Substitution Test (the same measure of cognitivefunctioning employed in the Weil study). A double dose ofmarijuana (comparable to Weil's high dose) produced a deficit invisual information processing - the only test studied with thisquantity of drug. 202. The subjects were asked to rate the low dose and placeboon a scale from 0-100 as to marijuana quality. The mean ratingwere 66 for the low dose and 57 for the placebo, which was not asignificant difference. While this suggests that the dose ofmarijuana used was probably too low to be very effective and mayreduce the significance of the report, it is interesting that thesupposedly inactive 'placebo' (with only a "trace" ofTHC) was given a rating suggesting moderate potency by ten heavymarijuana users in San Francisco. However, it appears that thesubjective effects of the placebo and low dose marijuana, asmeasured by a self-rating subjective symptom check-list, may havebeen different, although no statistics are presented, and thefigure containing this information does not clearly identify theplacebo. At any rate, these findings suggest that at low doses asimple 'highness' dimension may not be easy to quantify reliably.Unfortunately, Weil did not get ratings on his low dose orplacebo, and Jones did not assess the high dose, so areconciliation is not possible with the present data. 203. The researchers also studied a larger dose of marijuanaextract (equivalent to 20 cigarettes) given orally, compared witha placebo and one dose of alcohol (producing blood alcohol levelsof 0.06 to 0.12%). Several tasks were used with the samesubjects. Certain comparisons among the conditions and drugs arepossible, although the use of a single dose and slight variationsin procedure limits the applicability of the findings. 204. The marijuana smoked in low doses produced an'unimpressive' high with a maximum effect at about 15 minutes andlasting about three hours, while the oral administration had alatency of almost two hours, a peak at three to four hours andmild subjective effects lasting eight to ten hours. The oral doseof marijuana occasionally produced nausea and in one casevomiting, and differed from the smoked material on severalsubjective dimensions. The results of the comparisons between theoral marijuana and the placebo were essentially the same as thosediscussed earlier for the smoked material. As a point of reference,the single alcohol dose did not affect performance on the Rod andFrame Test, produced an underestimation of time intervals,decreased rate of information processing, did not affect heartrate, and produced a slowing of the EEG. Little meaningfulcomparison can be made between alcohol and the other treatmentsat a single dosage level, however. 205. The report is ambiguous and many important details ofmethodology and results are excluded in what appears to be apreliminary investigation. It should be noted that this study hasonly single-blind controls and the investigators knew which drugswere administered at the time of the experiment. 206. V. A third recent experimental study of marijuana effectson humans was published by Clark and Nakashima46 in 1968 and ismentioned here since it is now frequently quoted and, also, todemonstrate some of the problems of interpreting inadequatelycontrolled experiments. Several different doses of marijuanaextract (of unknown THC content) were given to 12 marijuana naivesubjects, and the effects recorded on eight psychological testsin 'one control and two or three subsequent sessions'. 207. The study is unintepretable for a variety of reasons,some of which follow: since the control session and the variousdrug doses were given only once, and on separate days, drug anddose effects are indistinguishably confounded with variousfactors of treatment order (including practice and other learningeffects), and natural variations in performance occurring fromone day to the next; the researchers describe no basis,statistical or otherwise, for distinguishing the 'effects' fromrandom variation; they report only trends in the data in one ortwo subjects selected on an unspecified basis, and give noindication of overall group effects; the numerical basis for thefigures presented is unspecified; apparently no placebos weregiven on the 'control' day which was invariably the firstsession, yet the drug is frequently compared with the 'control'in individual subjects; apparently no 'blind' controls wereprovided in either the experiment or later data analysis; and thereport is presented with a strong negative bias in theintroduction and remainder of the article, which is not supportedempirically. The authors infer marijuana-induced impairment onlyon the reaction time and 'digit code memory' tasks, although theyprovide no reliable evidence for the presence or absence ofpositive or negative marijuana effects on these or the othertests studied. Clark concludes that great individual variation exists amongindividuals in response to the drug. While this would seem areasonable observation, effects have not been identified, muchless the variance of their distribution assessed. The greatvariability in the data cannot be attributed solely to the drugfor reasons outlined above. In summary, this study, conducted,financially supported and published by highly accreditedindividuals and institutions, adds nothing but confusion to theexisting knowledge and should encourage scepticism regarding evenmodern 'scientific' information on marijuana. 208. VI. Last year Crancer and associates,61 from theWashington State Department of Motor Vehicles, published thefirst experimental study of marijuana effects on automobiledriving skills. A laboratory driving simulator was employed whichhad been shown previously to validly predict road accidents andtraffic violations on the basis of speedometer, steering,braking, accelerator and signal errors measured during aprogrammed series of 'emergency' situations. This study hasprovoked considerable controversy, some of which may bedissipated if the different sections of the study are examinedseparately. 209. Using a sophisticated methodological and statisticaldesign, the effects of the single dose of marijuana (2cigarettes) were assessed in 36 experienced marijuana smokers whoused cannabis at least twice a month. In terms of total THCadministered, the dose was about 22% greater than Weil's highdose and almost 2  times the standard dose used by Jones.Crancer reports the effects as a 'normal social marijuana high',although this is not quantified in any way and it is not certainhow this relates to the overall pattern of marijuana use in thepopulation. Simulator scores were obtained at three intervalsover a 4  hour period. Control (no treatment) sessions wererun, although no placebo substance was used since theinvestigators felt that a placebo would not be effective withexperienced marijuana users. 210. Overall performance under the single dose of marijuanawas not different from the control. The main study was followedby two 'cursory' investigations. Four subjects were retested withthree times the original drug dose and none showed a significantchange in performance. Furthermore, four marijuana naive subjectswere tested after smoking enough marijuana to become 'high' (allconsumed at least the amount used in the main experiment anddemonstrated an increase in heart rate in addition to subjectiveeffects). No significant change in scores occurred with the drugin these subjects either. The investigators caution that the study does not necessarilyindicate that marijuana will not impair driving. However, we feel that, because the simulator task is a lesscomplex but related task, deterioration in simulator performanceimplies deterioration in actual driving performance. We are lesswilling to assume that non-deterioration in simulator performanceimplies non-deterioration in actual driving. 211. One weakness of this part of the study is that apparentlyno standard and uniform smoking technique was employed and it isnot certain how much of the active principle was actuallyabsorbed. Although a biochemical method for detecting THC in thebody has recently been developed, quantitative measurements havenot been employed in any experimental marijuana studies. Althoughhigher doses were tested in some subjects, this was not done withthe same thoroughness as the main experiment and little can beasserted regarding a dose-response effect of marijuana ondriving. It seems likely that if the dose were pushed high enoughsome impairment would occur, although this has not beenempirically demonstrated. 212. In order to obtain some standard reference point for thisstudy, the subjects were also tested under a single dose ofalcohol, designed to produce a blood alcohol level correspondingto the legal standard of presumed driving impairment inWashington (i.e., 0.10% blood alcohol level). The average numberof errors under alcohol (97.4) was significantly greater thanthat acquired under either the normal or marijuana condition(each averaging 84.5 errors). While it is clear that a meaningfulcomparison of the two drugs cannot be based on a single dose ofeach, the alcohol data were obtained merely to provide a'recognized standard' of impairment. Kalant118 has pointed out that the blood alcohol level ofthese subjects may have been considerably higher than the desired0.10%, and that comparisons between the drugs must be made withcaution due to the single doses used. He also suggests thatalthough it would not have been easy for the subjects to 'fake'good driving performance under marijuana, an anti-alcohol bias,as often seen in marijuana users, could have resulted in poorerperformance in the alcohol condition. If the limitations of the alcohol-marijuana comparison and theweakness of the marijuana dose-effect generalizations arerealized, the over-all study provides interesting tentativeinformation on the effects of a moderate quantity of marijuana ondriving skills. 213. VII. In general, studies of the long-term history ofmarijuana users have been based either on medical or criminalsamples or on subjects selected because of current use. Each ofthese sources of subjects has considerable intrinsic samplingbias - which greatly complicates the interpretation of results.Recently, however, Robins and associates,187 reported the firststudy of the long-term outcome of marijuana use in a group notselected for deviant behaviour. The subjects were 235 Negro menwho had gone to public elementary school in the black district ofSt. Louis, Missouri, in the early 1940s. While thecharacteristics of such a population may have questionableapplicability to present marijuana use in Canada, this generallythorough study should be carefully considered. The data arelargely based on recent retrospective personal interviews andofficial records. Subjects were classified according toadolescent drug use. 214. Persons in this sample who had used marijuana (and noother drug except alcohol) differed significantly fromnon-marijuana users, in that the users had more often: drunkheavily enough to create social or medical problems, failed tograduate from high school, reported their own infidelity orfathering of illegitimate children, received financial aid, hadadult police records for non-drug offences, and reported violentbehaviour. While these findings indicate an association betweenmarijuana use and these other behavioural characteristics in thispopulation, causal variables have not been identified. 215. The heavy use of alcohol in these subjects complicatesthe interpretation considerably. Every marijuana user also usedalcohol, and drinking usually preceded marijuana use. Among thesubjects who used only marijuana and alcohol, 47% had medical orsocial problems attributable to drinking ('the"shakes", liver trouble, family complaints, arrests,etc.') after the age of 25, and 38% of the users met the criteriafor alcoholism. When those subjects who were classified asalcoholics were eliminated from the data (and the remainder ofthe problem drinkers left in) the only statistically significantdifference between the marijuana users and the non-users was withrespect to financial aid received in the past five years.Non-significant trends remained, however, which were generallysimilar to the earlier differences. Subjects who used 'harder'drugs (e.g., heroin, amphetamines and barbiturates) in additionto marijuana were significantly more deviant than the non-users,even after the alcoholics had been eliminated from the sample.Almost one-half of the subjects who had used marijuana also hadused other drugs illegally. The alcoholics, in addition to having a history of earlydrinking, were also more likely to have used marijuana asadolescents. Unfortunately, no record of intensity of earlydrinking or marijuana use was obtained. A possible causalrelationship between marijuana use and problem drinking, orvice-versa, or a possible third set of factors predisposingcertain individuals to both alcoholism and marijuana use cannotbe established or denied on the basis of the present data. Therelationship between marijuana use and the use of harder drugs isalso troublesome. The authors conclude: One small study of the effects of drug use in 76 Negroadolescents can hardly serve to determine the laws of the land.But it may at least make us cautious in too readily supportingthe view that marijuana is harmless, until some better evidenceis available. 216. VIII. The Addiction Research Foundation of Ontario hasrecently conducted a study of 232 confirmed marijuana users inToronto.173 Prisons and court referrals provided about half ofthe subjects and the remainder were volunteers not contactedthrough criminal-legal channels. The majority came frommiddle-class or upper middle-class homes and 16% were students.The average age was 22 (range: 15-42) and males outnumberedfemales 4 to 1. The average duration of marijuana use was 2.7years (range: 1-20). 217. Preliminary observations suggest the followingcharacteristics in this sample: the subjects tended to bemultiple drug users (tobacco and alcohol were used by almost allof the subjects, more than half had tried LSD and speed, andone-third had tried opiate narcotics); most had 'trafficked' inmarijuana, but usually just to friends; cannabis was generallyused about twice a week in the company of friends, accompanied bypassive rather than active behaviour; purported reasons for usewere increased perception and awareness, other psychedeliceffects, improved mood, and conviviality. Almost all subjectsfound the usual effects favourable although about a third had hadat least one unpleasant experience (physiological orpsychological) with the drug; about half had driven a car whileunder the influence of cannabis, and of these subjects, more thanhalf felt that their driving ability was unimpaired by the drug;about half felt that cannabis had improved their lives, whilesome thought it had worsened things; the subjects 'tended to beunderactive physically, engaging in passive pursuits'; aboutone-third subscribed to the belief in the 'protestant workethic', while almost as many rejected it; almost one-third hadcommitted non-drug criminal offences; one-half showed a swellingof the fine conjunctival blood vessels around the eye;nonspecific deviant EEGs were frequently seen; more than halfwere thought by a psychiatrist to be psychologically unstable ordisturbed; and the group as a whole tended to be more imaginativeand creative than what would be expected in the generalpopulation. 218. The researchers stress that their findings demonstrate anassociation, and not necessarily a causal relationship, betweenthe regular use of cannabis and other characteristics in thissample. While some of these results may be attributable to theselection or bias of the sample (e.g., half were contactedthrough criminal correction channels), much of the informationmay have general application. On-going analysis of the datashould further clarify the results, although the lack of acomparable matched control group will undoubtedly precludecertain generalizations since we have little informationregarding the incidence of many of the aforementionedcharacteristics in non-marijuana using individuals of similarsocial, economic and educational backgrounds. Furthermore, thefrequent use of other drugs by these subjects may limitconclusions specific to cannabis use. 219. IX. In response to questions raised in the British Houseof Commons, the Government of India, in 1893, appointed acommission to investigate and report on the cannabis ('hempdrugs') situation in India. The commission was instructed toinquire into the extent to which the hemp plant was cultivated,the preparation of drugs from it, the trade in those drugs, theextent of their use, and the effects of their consumption uponthe social, physical, mental, and moral conditions of the people.The different forms of the drug, especially bhang, ganja, andcharas (hashish), were to be studied separately. The Commission'should ascertain whether, and in what form, theconsumption of the drugs is either harmless or even beneficial ashas occasionally been maintained'. In addition, they were askedto investigate certain economic aspects of the use of hemp (e.g.,tax arrangements and import and export patterns), and also thepotential political, social or religious results of prohibition. TheReport of the Indian Hemp Drugs Commission (1894),107including appendices, comprised seven volumes and totalled 3,281pages. 220. In 1968, Mikuriya,158 in the first thorough discussion ofthis report to appear in the Western scientific literature,suggested that this investigation . . . is by far the most complete, and systematic study ofmarijuana undertaken to date.... It is both surprising andgratifying to note the timeless and lucid quality of the writingsof these British colonial bureaucrats. It would be fortunate ifstudies undertaken by contemporary commissions, task forcecommittees, and study groups could measure up to the standard ofthoroughness and general objectivity embodied in this report ...many of the issues concerning marijuana being argued in theUnited States today were dealt with in the Indian Hemp DrugsCommission Report. Until recently only about a half dozen copies of this reportwere available in North America. In the introduction to a newprinting of the primary volume in 1969, Kaplan121 observed: That this report, which remains today by far the most completecollection of information on marijuana in existence, should havebeen so completely forgotten in an era when controversy over theeffects of the drug and, the wisdom of its criminalization hasincreased to such fervor is almost inexplicable. 221. The Indian Hemp Drugs Commission received testimony from1,193 witnesses of a total of 80 meeting in 30 cities. Over 300medical practitioners were consulted and inquiries were made ofCommanding Officers of all regiments of the Army, Thecommissioners investigated the records of every mental hospitalin British India and evaluated separately each of the 222 casesadmitted during the year 1892, in which some connection betweenhemp drugs and insanity had been suggested (these made up about10 per cent of all admissions) Furthermore, all 81 cases ofcrimes of violence in India purported to have been caused bycannabis over the previous 20 years were investigated andre-examined. In addition, three laboratory experiments wereconducted with monkeys to study the effects of cannabis on thenervous system. 222. In the short time during which the full report has beenavailable to us, we have not been able to prepare, at thisinterim stage, a thorough critical analysis of the document.However, the following quotations, taken from the summary ofconclusions regarding the effects of hemp drugs, provide anoverview of the findings: It has been clearly established that the occasional use ofhemp in moderate doses may be beneficial. In regard to thephysical effects, the Commission have come to the conclusion thatthe moderate use of hemp drugs, is practically attended by noevil results at all. There may be exceptional cases in which,owing to idiosyncrasies of constitution, the drugs in evenmoderate use of hemp drugs in even moderate use may be injurious,excessive use does cause injury. As in the case of otherintoxicants, excessive use tends to weaken the constitution andto render the consumer more susceptible to disease  theexcessive use of these drugs does not cause asthma. . . it mayindirectly cause dysentery ... (and) it may cause bronchitis. In respect to the alleged mental effects of the drugs, theCommission have come to the conclusion that the moderate use ofhemp drugs produces no injurious effects on the mind.... It isotherwise with the excessive use. Excessive use indicates andintensifies mental instability... It appears that the excessiveuse of hemp drugs may, especially in cases where there is anyweakness or hereditary predisposition, induce insanity. It hasbeen shown that the effect of hemp drugs in this respect hashitherto been greatly exaggerated, but that they do sometimesproduce insanity seems beyond question. In regard to the moral effects of the drugs, the Commissionare of opinion that their moderate use produces no moral injurywhatever. There is no adequate ground for believing that itinjuriously affects the character of the consumer. Excessiveconsumption, on the other hand, both indicates and intensifiesmoral weakness or depravity. . . . In respect to his relationswith society, however, even the excessive consumer of hemp drugsis ordinarily inoffensive. His excesses may indeed bring him todegraded poverty which may lead him to dishonest practices; andoccasionally, but apparently very rarely indeed, excessiveindulgence in hemp drugs may lead to violent crime. But for allpractical purposes it may be laid down that there is little or noconnection between the use of hemp drugs and crime. Viewing the subject generally, it may be added that themoderate use of these drugs is the rule, and that the excessiveuse is comparatively exceptional. The moderate use practicallyproduces no ill effects. In all but the most exceptional cases,the injury from habitual moderate use is not appreciable. Theexcessive use may certainly be accepted as very injurious, thoughit must be admitted that in many excessive consumers the injuryis not clearly marked. The injury done by the excessive use is,however, confined almost exclusively to the consumer himself; theeffect on society is rarely appreciable. It has been the moststriking feature in this inquiry to find how little the effectsof hemp drugs have obtruded themselves on observation. As noted earlier in this chapter, any generalizations from oneculture to another must be made with great caution. In thisinstance, extrapolation to the present Canadian situation wouldhave to span three-quarters of a century as well. In spite ofthese clear limitations, the thoroughness of this criticalinquiry commands respect and the report deserves carefulconsideration. Contents | Feedback | Search DRCNet Library | Schaffer Library | Major Studies Canadian Government Commission ofInquiryWT02-B03-32IA086-000614-B043-197http://206.61.184.43:80/schaffer/Library/studies/ledain/nonmed4.htm 206.61.184.43 19970122020938 text/html 29298HTTP/1.0 200 OKDate: Wednesday, 22-Jan-97 02:09:31 GMTServer: WebSitePro/1.1f (S/N wpo-0deb)Allow-ranges: bytesContent-type: text/htmlLast-modified: Saturday, 28-Dec-96 06:59:47 GMTContent-length: 29080 Canadian Government Commission - Opiate Narcotics Contents | Feedback | Search DRCNet Library | Schaffer Library | Major Studies Canadian Government Commission ofInquiry OPIATE NARCOTICS 223. The term narcotic has had wide and inconsistent usage inlay, legal and scientific circles. Some use the word tocharacterize any drug which produces stupor, insensibility orsleep; many apply it only to derivatives of the opium plant('opiates'); others consider the term equivalent toaddiction-producing; and in legal matters, 'narcotics' may referto almost any allegedly dangerous drugs (for example marijuanaand cocaine are often considered with opiate compounds innarcotics regulations in spite of the fact that they have littlein common with them). To reduce some of this ambiguity, thespecific phrase opiate narcotic will be used in this report, andwill be restricted to drugs which are derivatives of, or arepharmacologically similar to products of the opium plant papaversomniferum. 224. The earliest unambiguous description of opium to which wehave access was written in the third century B.C., although somescholars have cited references to opiate-like drugs dated morethan 5,000 years ago.29 Many believe that Homer's 'Nepenthe' wasopium. These drugs are obtained from the juice of the unripenedseed pod of the opium poppy plant soon after the flower petalsbegin to fall - no other part of the plant produces psychoactivesubstances. Although 'opium eating' has been known in Asia for thousandsof years, widespread use of the drug did not occur until thedevelopment of the British East India Company's wholesale opiumempire in the eighteenth century. The practice of smoking opiumdeveloped in China soon after American tobacco was introduced tothe Orient. Chinese prohibition of the British opium precipitatedthe 'opium war' in which the world's greatest naval power forcedChina to open its door to the British (opium) trade. 223 225. In 1805, the major active constituent in opium wasisolated - an alkaloid given the name morphine, after the GreekGod of Dreams, Morpheus. In the next half century, various otheralkaloids were discovered, such as codeine and papaverine, bothif which are in general use today. Since then, a variety ofsemisynthetic (e.g., heroin, in 1874) and synthetic (e.g.,methadone, Demerol* and Alvodine*), opiate-like drugs have beendeveloped. These compounds have the potential of producingqualitatively similar actions (at different doses), althoughthere is considerable variability among them in the potency ofthe different opiate effects. Heroin, more potent on a weightbasis than morphine, is usually the choice of the chronic opiatenarcotic user. This drug was originally considered'non-addictive' when put on the market. Those members of themedical and related profession who use these drugs non-medically,as well as others who have become dependent as a result ofmedical use, tend, to use morphine or the synthetics. Because ofthe similarities among these drugs, they will, with a fewexceptions be dealt with as a group. Heroin (and sometimes otheropiate narcotics) is often referred to as 'H', 'horse', 'junk','scrag' or 'smack'. 226. Until the nineteenth century, 'raw' opium was eithersmoked or taken orally. There is a decidedly lower dependenceliability -with these techniques than: with 'practices' whichfollowed and it was not until the isolation of morphine and theinvention of the hypodermic needle that the opiate narcoticsbecame a serious problem in the Western World. Morphine waswidely acclaimed among medical practitioners and was used freely,to treat pain during the American Civil War, sometimes producinga dependency called 'soldiers' disease'. General use of tinctureof opium in many patent medicines (e.g. Paregoric) made the quasi-medical use of opiates a common practice in North America atthat time. On the West Coast, the influx of Chinese labourers,some of whom smoked opium, apparently stimulated non-medical useto some degree. The extent of opiate narcotic problems in thenineteenth century is difficult to ascertain, however, it wouldappear that the use of these drugs was not a major moral issue.In the early part of the twentieth century, some of the problemsof morphine and heroin dependence became apparent, and mostopiate products were removed from the open market in NorthAmerica and non-medical possession was prohibited. 227. Because characteristics fluctuate with social change, adescription of drug users is necessarily tied to a givenpopulation at a given point and time and may have little generalapplication. There is little information on opiate narcotic usersin North America prior to this century, but many researcherscontend that far more women than men made use of these drugs atthat time. Since the general opiate prohibition in the early partof this century, men have become the predominant users. WhileChinese opium smokers were not uncommon a half century ago, thereappear to be very few Orientals in North America using opiatenarcotics today. In recent decades, the use of these drugs inCanada has tended to centre on a few urban areas. Medical andrelated professions represent a frequently noted high-risk groupwith respect to the development of drug dependency. For variousreasons, statistics on the incidence of dependency in this groupare quite inadequate. Many researchers contend that healthprofession dependents constitute a significant proportion of thetotal chronic opiate narcotic using population.28 For many years,the known opiate narcotic users have made up about 0.02 per centof the overall Canadian population. 228. Although many observers do not feel that the non-medicaluse of opiate narcotics is currently a major public healthproblem in Canada, there are numerous reasons for directingattention to this group of drugs. Historically, the popularconception of the 'narcotics addict dope fiend' has establishedan image of the non-medical drug user which persists and intrudesinto almost every examination or investigation of drug use today.Furthermore, the opiate narcotics have played an important roleas a model in much of the past and present drug legislation, andin general crimino-legal approach to the control of sociallycensured drug use. Although many important questions about theopiate narcotics are still unanswered, it is clear that much ofwhat has commonly passed for fact, is fiction, and often bearslittle resemblance to scientific information. MedicalUse 229. Most of the current medical uses for the opiate narcoticswere fairly well understood and established in Europe by themiddle of the sixteenth century, and were probably well known incertain areas long before that time. These drugs are primarilyused in the relief of suffering from pain, in the treatment ofdiarrhoea and dysentery, and to reduce cough. Hundreds of relatedcompounds have been synthesized in attempts to retain theclinical benefits but reduce the dependence liabilities of theopiate narcotics. These efforts have not been very successful,and thus morphine and related drugs are still considered byphysicians to be among the most valuable drugs available to thepractitioner today. Heroin is no longer used medically in NorthAmerica. Administration,Absorption, Distribution and Physiological Fate 230. Opiate narcotics are produced in a variety of tablets andcapsules, elixirs, cough syrups (with codeine), injections,rectal suppositories and, on the illegal market, are alsoavailable in a gummy solid or powdered form. Codeine is oftenmixed with other non-opiate analgesics (e.g. APC & C*;222's*). While the opiate narcotics are well absorbed from thegastrointestinal tract, this route is often erratic andunpredictable compared to injections. Among non-medical users,subcutaneous ('skin popping') and intravenous ('mainlining')injections are commonly used with heroin and morphine. Raw opiumis usually eaten or smoked and the powder is sometimes sniffed('snorted'). Only a minute fraction of the drug absorbed actuallyenters the central nervous system. The duration and intensity ofthe effects vary considerably with the different drugs in thisclass (and as a function of dose), although the major actionmight typically last from three to six hours. These drugs areusually inactivated in the liver and excreted in the urine, oftenalong with small quantities of free morphine. PhysiologicalEffects 231. Pure opiate narcotics produce few significantnon-psychological effects in therapeutic doses. The immediate orshort-term physiological response usually includes a generalreduction in respiratory and cardiovascular activity, adepression of the cough reflex, a constriction of the pupil ofthe eye, and minor reduction in visual acuity, slight itching,dilation of cutaneous blood vessels, warming of the skin, adecrease in intestinal activity (often causing constipation),and, in some individuals, nausea and vomiting. In higher doses,however, insensibility and unconsciousness result. The primarytoxic overdose symptoms are coma, shock and, ultimately,respiratory arrest and death. 232. There appears to be little direct permanent physiologicaldamage from chronic use of pure opiate narcotics. Numerouscomplications are observed, however, if the overall drug usepattern involves adulterated street samples, unsterileadministrations, unhygienic living standards, poor eating habitsand inadequate general medical care - all of which are commonlypart of the criminal-addict behaviour syndrome. Commonly reporteddisorders in street users are hepatitis, tetanus, heart and lungabnormalities, scarred veins ('track marks'), local skininfections and abscesses, and obstetrical problems in pregnantfemales. At one time, malaria was also commonly seen in thispopulation. 233. The general mortality rate among heroin dependents isconsiderably higher than normally expected for their age group.Sudden collapse and death following intravenous injection hasbeen reported in a number of these individuals. Such fatalitieshave often been attributed to overdose resulting from erratic andunexpected variations in the purity of drugs obtained from theblack market. However, there is considerable evidence that manyof these deaths are not merely due to overdose but are aconsequence of partly soluble contaminant substances in thesample and, perhaps, some drug hypersensitivity phenomenon.43 234. The subjective effects of narcotics may vary considerablyamong different individuals and situations. Most personsreportedly do not enjoy the experience and may actively avoid itsrepetition in a controlled or experimental situation, whileothers describe feelings of warmth, well-being, peacefulness andcontentment. Euphoria or dysphoria, nausea, drowsiness,dizziness, inability to concentrate, apathy and lethargy arecommonly noted. Certain individuals, especially when fatigued maybe stimulated into feelings of energy and strength. Higher dosesproduce a turning inward and sleep. Often a pleasant dreamlikestate occurs. Some regular users describe their drug experiencesin near ecstatic, and, often sexual terms (especially the 'rush'of intravenous injection). The potential of the opiate narcotics to relieve sufferingfrom pain depends upon several mechanisms. The major effect isnot on the sensation directly, but on the psychological reactionto it. Often individuals can still feel the pain sensation, andrate its intensity reliably, in spite of the fact that much orall of the negative or unpleasant aspects are absent. In otherwords, they may still feel the pain, but it does not bother themto the same extent. Morphine has little effect on the othersenses and unlike non-narcotic analgesics and sedatives, it canoften control pain at doses which do not necessarily producemarked sedation, gross intoxication or major impairment of motorcoordination, intellectual functions, emotional control orjudgement.110 In addition to reducing the anxiety of pain andtherefore the motivation to avoid it, the opiate narcotics alsotend to decrease other primary motivation associated with sex,food, and aggression. 235. The psychological effects of chronic opiate narcotic useare often rather straightforward extensions of the short-termresponse. In regular users, much of the variability andunpredictability of the immediate response is lessened, partlybecause individuals who find the experience unpleasant tend toavoid additional exposure, and also because many who wereinitially upset by the unusual physiological and psychologicalsensations caused by the drugs learn to tolerate and even seekthem and may no longer be distressed in the situation. While someindividuals who become dependent on the opiate narcotics withdrawfrom regular social activities, and live what might appear to bean immoral, criminal and slovenly existence, others are able tolead an otherwise normal life with little change in work habitsor responsibilities. Possible factors underlying thesedifferences will be discussed later. Toleranceand Dependence 236. Tolerance to the different actions of opiate narcoticsvaries with the magnitude and frequency of administration, andthe response being measured. In chronic use, a considerabledegree of tolerance occurs to the sedative, analgesic, euphoricand respiratory depressant (and, therefore; potentially lethal)effects; less tolerance develops to the constipating andpupil-constricting activity. Consequently, persons who aremotivated by the chronic avoidance of pain or other unpleasantsubjective conditions, or perhaps simply by the positive euphoriceffects of the drug, are likely to increase dose and mayeventually tolerate several times the quantity which would belethal to a normal individual. Occasional use does not producetolerance, however. 237. The degree of physical dependence acquired to these drugsis closely related to the tolerance developed. With low dose orinfrequent use, little dependency occurs and withdrawal symptomsmay be nonexistent, or merely resemble the symptoms of a mildflu. Withdrawal of the drug after chronic high-dose use resultsin a severe and painful pattern of responses which are similar tothose associated with alcohol and barbiturate dependence(although it is not as physically dangerous). Usually less thanhalf a day after the last administration, the dependent begins tofeel irritable, anxious and weak; he sweats and, shivers and hiseyes and nose become watery. A few hours of uneasy sleep mayintervene before he begins the 'cold turkey' phase. The skinbecomes clammy, the pupils dilate, chills, nausea, vomiting, andsevere abdominal cramps occur with uncontrollable defecation;tremors and, rarely, convulsions may develop. While death hasbeen reported, fatalities are much rarer than with sedativewithdrawal. The major symptoms of the abstinence syndromegenerally last several days, and gross recovery usually occurswithin about a week, although complete recuperation may take upto six months .145 Tolerance is eliminated or greatly reducedwith withdrawal. Babies born of dependent mothers are alsophysically dependent on the drug, and may die if withdrawalsymptoms are not recognized and treated soon after birth. Itshould be noted that the different opiate narcotic drugs havevarying dependence-producing potentials, and physical dependenceis rarely seen in opium smokers or users of codeine (althoughstrong psychological dependence may occur). 238. Considerable cross-tolerance and cross-dependence existsamong the opiate narcotics. An intravenous injection of any ofthese drugs, in sufficient dose, can completely eliminate thewithdrawal syndrome in a matter of minutes. Methadone can preventwithdrawal symptoms at doses which provide little psychologicaleffect, and is frequently used in chronic 'maintenance'programmes designed to rehabilitate dependents. Although thesedatives and opiate narcotics do not usually show significantcross-tolerance and dependence, barbiturates can ease the pain ofopiate withdrawal. Nalorphine (Nalline*) antagonizes the effectsof the other opiate narcotics and precipitates the withdrawalsyndrome in dependent individuals. This drug has been used to'test' for dependence in suspected users. 219. ' The role of physical dependence in the overall pictureof chronic opiate narcotic use has been the subject of muchcontroversy and many observers feel that the psychologicalcomponents are the most important. Some investigators argue thatthe fear of withdrawal is often the primary motivating factorbehind continued use, while others emphasize the profound cravingseen in some individuals, or the drug's positive reinforcing orreward potential. Many dependent persons return to the drug atsome time after withdrawal, and some have occasionally been knownto voluntarily undergo withdrawal in order to lose tolerance (foreconomic reasons), and immediately initiate chronic use again, ata less expensive level. This practice suggests that, with someindividuals, psychological factors other than mere avoidance ofthe abstinence syndrome can be dominant in the drug dependence.Whether this motivation is related to the desire to escape oravoid a life that is unpleasant, or emotionally painful ordepressing, or perhaps a more directly hedonistic demand forpleasure or 'kicks', or even a disguised attempt atself-destruction is not clear - no simple answer could beexpected to have much generality or validity. It has frequentlybeen observed that some individuals become dependent on thehypodermic syringe (or 'point') in a way which is, in somerespects, independent of the pharmacological properties of thedrug. Persons showing such conditioning are often called 'needlefreaks'. 240. It is interesting to note that there are only a fewmiddle-aged persons who are dependent on opiate narcotics. Mostindividuals spontaneously lose interest in the drugs before theyturn 45 years of age (barbiturate and alcohol dependents show nosuch decline in use). Whether this is due to psychological orphysiological factors is uncertain. OpiateNarcotics and Crime 241. A consensus exists among medical, law enforcement andresearch authorities, as well as drug users themselves, that fewcrimes of violence are directly produced by the use of the opiatenarcotics. On the other hand, there is a considerablerelationship between crime and opiate narcotic dependence inNorth America and many drug dependent persons have non-drugcriminal records. This apparent paradox can be explained by twoimportant factors. To begin with, both in Canada and in theUnited States, many individuals who become dependent on opiatenarcotics have a prior history of behavioural problems anddelinquency and have continued these practices. The second factoris economical, and is associated with the high cost of heroin onthe black market and the demands made by extended tolerance. Because of the illegal nature of the drug, the cost of a heavyheroin habit may run anywhere from $15.00 to $50.00 a day andhigher, in spite of the fact that the medical-cost of the drugsinvolved would just be a few cents. There are very few legitimateways in which most individuals can afford to meet that kind of anexpense. Consequently, when tolerance pushes the cost of drug useabove what the user can afford legitimately, he is forced into adecision - either quit the drug and go through withdrawal, orturn to easier, criminal, methods of acquiring the necessarymoney. While many users refuse to become involved in suchactivities and stop using the drug, at least temporarily, manyturn to petty crime, small robberies, shoplifting andprostitution. These are the individuals who regularly come to theattention of the law enforcement officials. More affluent personsmay be able to support the habit and continue indefinitelywithout running afoul of the law. Medical profession dependents,for example, apparently have less tendency to commit non-drugoffences - perhaps (in addition to predisposing psychological andsociological factors) because they can often steal with littlerisk or purchase the necessary drugs at low cost. As Jaffe has stated:111 The popular notions that the morphine addict is necessarily acunning, cringing, malicious and degenerate criminal who isshabbily dressed, physically ill and devoid of the socialamenities, could not be farther from the truth. The addict who isable to obtain an adequate supply of drugs through legitimatechannels and has adequate funds, usually dresses properly,maintains his nutrition and is able to discharge his social andoccupational obligations with reasonable efficiency. He usuallyremains in good health, suffers little inconvenience and is, ingeneral, difficult to distinguish from other persons. Good healthand productive work are thus not incompatible with addiction toopiates. However. ... such continued productivity is theexception rather than the rule. TheDevelopment of Dependence 242. There have been a number of popular misconceptions aboutthe pattern of development of opiate narcotic dependence. Rumourshave frequently been heard that marijuana and hashish had beenspiked with heroin to produce opiate addiction in theunsuspecting user. Similar rumours have been heard about 'spiked'LSD. In fact, there are no known documented cases in Canada ofopiate narcotic adulteration of other drugs alleged to be pure.The high price of illicit heroin renders such a hypothesisextremely improbable. Furthermore, it would be highly unlikely,if not impossible, for tolerance and dependence to developwithout the user knowing it. The majority of users, both here andin the United States, were apparently first 'turned-on' by theirfriends and peers. Blum (in the United States Task Force Report)points out:28 There is no evidence from any study, of initiation as aconsequence of aggressive peddling to innocents who are 'hooked'against their will or knowledge. . . The popular image of thefiendish pedlar seducing the innocent child is wholly false. 243. The once popular notion that the opiate narcoticexperience is intrinsically so pleasurable, or that physiologicaldependence develops so rapidly, that most who are subjected to itare promptly addicted is without support. In one experiment,injections of morphine were given to 150 healthy male volunteers.Only three were willing to allow repeated administration and noneindicated that he would have actively sought more. Theinvestigators42 conclude: . . .opiates are not inherently attractive, euphoric orstimulant. The danger of addiction to opiates resides in theperson and not the drug. Lasagna et al 126 also report that the majority of normalpain-free individuals found effects of opiates quite unpleasant.Beecher22 reports that only ten per cent of a normal populationliked the morphine experience. Furthermore, many individuals whodeveloped tolerance and physical dependence in a medicalsituation show little interest in the drug experience itself andtend not to resume use after withdrawal. Even in non-medicalcases, there is evidence that only a small proportion of drugusers who have experimented with opiate narcotics in the streetsbecome physically dependent on them.42 244. Many observers contend that certain, social andpersonality factors predispose some individuals to drugdependence and that otherwise normal individuals rarely, if ever,become chronically dependent. There is considerable evidence thatboth the ready availability of the drug and a social milieutolerating or encouraging drug use (either medical ornon-medical) are also important factors. Although there arenumerous individuals who have gradually worked up from occasional'skin popping' to chronic 'mainline' dependence, there is atpresent, little evidence that a large proportion of the Canadianpopulation is running this particular risk. However, there iscause for apprehension because of the rapidly growing incidenceof heroin use among the young in the United States. Althoughthere are no known methods of predicting the likelihood ofdependence for any individual at this time, the use of opiatenarcotics involves a risk of considerable proportions for anyone. OpiateNarcotics and Other Drugs 245. In the United States, the opiate narcotic offender comingto the attention of the law enforcement officials was oftenreported to have previously and concurrently been a heavy user ofalcohol, barbiturates, tobacco, and marijuana. In Canada, thepattern appears to be much more variable and heterogeneous.Alcohol and barbiturates (and probably tobacco) have apparentlybeen the drugs most often associated with opiate narcotic usehere246, 215, although recent indications suggest that many newheroin users may have experience with marijuana and otherpsychedelic drugs as well. 170a There are reports that LSD isgenerally not popular with regular heroin users, however.41 Someopiate narcotic users also make use of stimulants such asamphetamine and cocaine. Much attention has been and is now being given to the 'stepping-stone' or 'progression' theory of opiate narcotic dependence. Although there is no pharmacological basis for the hypothesis that one drug creates a 'need' for, or necessarily leads to another, there are numerous social factors which might link together the use of various drugs. It may well be that the questions of 'progression' or predisposing experiences can never be definitively answered. Like other characteristics associated with deviant behaviour, they must be continually evaluated anew as the social context changes. Some observations on the possible relationship between marijuana and opiate narcotic use were presented in the previous section on cannabis. Contents | Feedback | Search DRCNet Library | Schaffer Library | Major Studies Canadian Government Commission ofInquiry WT02-B03-33IA086-000614-B043-243http://206.61.184.43:80/schaffer/Library/studies/ledain/nonmed7.htm 206.61.184.43 19970122021026 text/html 52958HTTP/1.0 200 OKDate: Wednesday, 22-Jan-97 02:09:52 GMTServer: WebSitePro/1.1f (S/N wpo-0deb)Allow-ranges: bytesContent-type: text/htmlLast-modified: Saturday, 28-Dec-96 06:59:39 GMTContent-length: 52740 Canadian Government Commission - Some Causes of NonmedicalDrug Use Contents | Feedback | Search DRCNet Library | Schaffer Library | Major Studies Canadian Government Commission ofInquiry CHAPTER FOUR SOME CAUSES OF NON-MEDICAL DRUG USE 316. The recommendations of the Minister of National Healthand Welfare which gave rise to the appointment of the Commission,and the Commission's terms of reference, place particular stresson the desire to understand the causes of the non-medical use ofdrugs. We regard our inquiry into these aspects of the phenomenonto be one of our most important functions. The terms of referencespeak of motivation, and they speak of the social, economic,educational and philosophical factors that have led to such use. 317. By cause we understand not merely the immediate, directmotivation for a particular drug experience, but the largersocial significance of the phenomenon - how it relates to variousaspects of life today - family relations, education, work,institutions, and conditions of life generally. In what way is ita response to the problems of modern living? What are itsphilosophical or spiritual implications? What does it say aboutour value structure? How does it reflect the way people thinkabout the future? At this time it is clearly impossible to provide a full andcomprehensive statement of cause in these terms. At best we canhope to convey some of the interpretive themes and to describesome of the characteristics that have struck us as significantthat seem to have the merit of illuminating from one perspectiveor another this complex phenomenon. We seek to do this for avariety of reasons: to report in general some of our reactionsand impressions; to assist in a preliminary way to add to thecommon understanding of a phenomenon that has aroused greatinterest, but that has also caused concern and anxiety, and hasbrought anguish to many parents; to suggest to citizens,especially parents and guardians; avenues of approach that may behelpful to them in understanding with sympathy and perhapsempathy a social fact that is to them strange and bewildering. But we must emphasize the to tentative nature of thesecomments. They are not to be taken as a conceptual framework foran understanding of the changes or responses about which we areconcerned. They do not constitute such a framework for theCommission. They are impressions. We intend to test them asrigorously as possible by intensive investigation. We invitecritical comment from all quarters. In this way the interimreport may serve a useful dialectical function, assisting us inconsultation with our fellow citizens, to arrive at a full andsound understanding of this phenomenon. 318. The first problem we face is how to get at the facts ofmotivation and other related factors. What are we to accept asevidence of these facts? These are very subjective matters. Canwe ever be sure that we know the truth? Whether we can or not, itseems to us that we must rely primarily on what drug usersthemselves say about their personal motivation and other factorspredisposing them to use drugs. These statements must be weighedfor credibility and carefully considered for properinterpretation but they are the primary and best source of anunderstanding of motivation. This was the approach followed byWilliam James in his Varieties of Religious Experience, aphenomenon which has certain affinities with the subject-matterof our inquiry. The best evidence of the experience, thesubjective effects of which may be presumed to be the primarymotivation of cause, comes from the words of those who haveundergone it. This is not to say that insight cannot be gainedfrom the observations and interpretations of psychologists,social philosophers, sociologists and other informed andqualified students of our society. Thus we shall have recourse,in trying to explain this phenomenon, to both the words of drugusers and the interpretations of observers. Finally, we shalloffer our own interpretation, although this can only be atentative one at this time - one that is offered as a basis forfurther consideration and discussion by the people of Canada. 319. Our inquiry has taken several forms: the public hearingof the traditional kind in which briefs have been submitted butin which there has been a full opportunity for questioning anddiscussion by everyone present; private hearings with groups andindividuals; numerous discussions with drug users and variousexperts having not only theoretical insight into the problem butactive points of contact with it through some professionalinvolvement; presentation of evidence regarding law enforcementand correction; and we have heard from experts in the areas ofeducation; medical services; family life and social welfare.Although we intend to inquire further into motivation (as well asextent of use, perception of the problem, and general attitudes)in the surveys to be carried out this year, we do not necessarilyrely on the answers to survey questionnaires as the most reliableevidence of motivation. Motivation is too subtle, complex, andfull of nuance to be adequately elicited through questionnaires.We place as much or more reliance on the impressions derived fromhearing individual drug users speak at length in public andprivate meetings about their experience and what they think to bethe causes. In many ways we are closer here to the art of thenovelist than that of the social scientist. We can only offerhypotheses - the validity and acceptance of which will depend ontheir ability to make sense of this phenomenon - to provide ameaning which is satisfactory to Canadians. It is like theultimate test of any philosophy or religion. But it is importantto emphasize once again that what is recorded here is merely ourfirst impression gleaned from initial contacts during the firstsix months or so of our inquiry. 320. The explanations of motivation and the other relatedfactors vary considerably. They vary between the differentdrug-using populations and they vary within a particularpopulation. It is idle to seek a single, unifying explanation ortheory. This whole area is characterized by bewildering diversityand conflicting impressions, but certain dominant themes do seemto emerge. 321. The motivational patterns underlying drug use also varyto some extent from drug to drug. In the case of cannabis, amajor factor appears to be the simple pleasure of the experience.Time after time witnesses have said to us in effect: 'We do itfor fun. Do not try to find a complicated explanation for it. Wedo it for pleasure.' This is the explanation frequently offeredfor the use of cannabis, particularly by college students andadults in the working world. A mother of four and a teacher said:'When I smoke grass I do it in the same social way that I take aglass of wine at dinner or have a drink at a party. I do not feelthat it is one of the great and beautiful experiences of my life,I simply feel that it is pleasant and I think it ought to belegalized.' A person involved in work with drug users expressed it thisway: 'I think maybe it is time we stopped all the sociologicalnonsense about social milieux, and how your daddy fell off ahorse, and how your mommy burnt the pablum or whatever it is - orwhat kind of sociological trip you want to blast off on, and justsay in front what you mean which is "I get loaded because Ilove to do it".' 322. Many of us think of human behaviour in general as aconsequence of needs that are either inherited or learned. Thereis some tendency to think of behaviour such as drug use as aconsequence of pathological need patterns. However, we feel itwould be a serious error, at least as far as cannabis use isconcerned, to think of use as symbolic of or manifesting apathological, psychological or even sociological state. Simplepleasure, similar to that claimed for the moderate use ofalcohol, or food, or sex, is frequently offered as the generalexplanation for most current drug use. This is particularly trueof the growing number of adult users (who share perhaps littleelse but their taste for cannabis with the members of the 'hip'culture). It is no doubt true that for some the use of drugs is areflection of personal and social problem. But the desire forcertain kinds of psychological gratification or release is notpeculiar to the drug user or to our generations. It is an old anduniversal theme of human history. Man has always soughtgratifications of the kind afforded by the psychotropic drugs. 323. They will vary with the particular drug used and, to someextent, with the personality of the user. In the case of cannabis,the positive points which are claimed for it include thefollowing: it is a relaxant, it is disinhibiting; it increasesself-confidence and the feeling of creativity (whether justifiedby objective results or not); it increases sensual awareness andappreciation; it facilities concentration and gives one a greatersense of control over time; it facilitates this way makes iteasier to accept others; it serves a sacramental function inpromoting a sense of spiritual community among users; it is ashared pleasure; because it is illicit and the object of strongdisapproval from those who are, by and large, opposed tosocial change, it is a symbol of protest and a means ofstrengthening the sense of identity among those who are stronglycritical of certain aspects of our society and value structuretoday. 324. Those who have used cannabis are not unanimous in itspraise, although clearly the vast majority am to regard it aseither a harmless pastime or the source of real advantages andgain. Those who have used the drug and then criticize it tendmost often to say it can dominate a weak personality; it can taketoo much time; it can become an excuse for procrastination; itlessens the ability to persevere with unpleasant, boring orroutine tasks. 325. Often a cannabis user has said, 'We can't explain it toyou. Why don't you try it?' It has been implied that there issomething ineffable about the experience, although this is moreoften the case when speaking of the effects of LSD. Sometimes onewonders if what is being conveyed is not a certain sense ofexclusiveness, a smugness of the initiated. But we prefer tobelieve that it is the subtle and multifaceted aspect of itspsychological and social significance for the average user thatmakes words seem inadequate to convey the whole of its meaning.Indeed, many users have insisted that the makers of cannabis areable to communicate without the use of words; that they recognizeand understand one another and share important assumptions andattitudes. Whether this silent communication is more than theknowledge of a common experience is not clear. But users speak ofa sense of affinity, a larger consciousness, of which they aremade to feel a party by the drug experience. 326. Thus there is unquestionably a strong suggestion ofcommunity, of cultural solidarity, among cannabis users. Andthere is a definite tendency to proselytize, to encourage othersto take up the practice. It may be partly due to the illicitstatus of the practice which makes users want to increase thenumbers involved and thus the concern of society about itspresent policy. But there is also a definite impression that thecannabis user seeks to convert others to what he sincerelybelieves to be a superior outlook and life style. The smoking ofcannabis becomes a rite of initiation to a new society and valuesystem. These are aspects of cannabis use, particularly among theyounger, more idealistic members of our society, which meritserious consideration in any attempt to measure its potential forgrowth. 327. We gather from the statements of cannabis users that thedrug is predominantly used in groups to enhance, enrich and easesocial intercourse. However, the statements of LSD users implythat their experience is much more. LSD is spoken of as a veryprofound experience, not to be lightly entered into. With some itis never to be repeated; with others, its profound character, thesense of venture into the unknown, the very real risks of adverseeffect, make it a practice which seems likely to remain fairlyrestricted. It is cheaper than psychoanalysis but appears tocarry with it some of the same implications- the promise ofgreater, self-knowledge and self-acceptance but at the same timeuncertainty as to the personality that will emerge. Except for arelatively few devotees, LSD is not a regular experience havingsocial or communal significance. It is rather a venture intoself-discovery which sometimes takes on turning pointsignificance for the subject. The self-revelation experienced mayor may not become a basis for attitudinal change. It is thus afoundational experience rather than a casual one, as is the caseof cannabis. 328. It is with reference to LSD that the most serious claimsfor spiritual significance are made, Timothy Leary has spoken interms of a new quest for religious truth and experience. 'It'sthe same old pursuit. The aims of our religion are those of everyreligion of the past: we work to find the God within, thedivinity which lies within each person's body.'1 Users frequentlyspeak of the LSD experience in mystical terms. There is repeatedtestimony to a feeling of oneness with others - of a loss of thesense of personal identity in a sense of being a part ofeverything that is around one. There is a pantheistic sense ofaffinity and identification. 329. While pleasure, curiosity, the desire to experiment, andeven the sense of adventure, are dominant motivations in druguse, there is no doubt that a search for self-knowledge andself-integration and for spiritual meanings are strongmotivations with many. We have been profoundly impressed by thenatural and unaffected manner in which drug users have respondedto the question of religious significance. They are notembarrassed by the mention of God. Indeed, as Paul Goodman hasobserved, their reactions are in interesting contrast to those ofthe 'God is dead' theologian. It may be an exaggeration to saythat we are witnessing the manifestations of a genuine religiousrevival, but there does appear to be a definite revival ofinterest in the religious or spiritual attitude towards life. Asone drug user put it: 'The whole culture is saying, "Whereis God?" I don't believe in your institutions, but now Iknow it's there someplace.' Another witness said, 'I just findthat a lot of people are becoming a lot more aware of what'shappening and joining in on a universal cause, a cosmic sort ofjoyousness and people are getting interested in spiritual thingsas well, because this is what our generation and the previousgenerations have lacked.' 330. Drug use is by no means indispensable to the new outlook.Some people are fortunate enough to be what users call a natural'turn on'. It is conceded that you can be 'turned on' withoutdrugs - vital, human, and aware of all your senses, enjoyingauthentic, non-exploitative human relations, and alive to beautyand the possibilities of the moment. Indeed, there is an activedoctrine of transcendence which sees drug use as a catalytic ortransitional thing to be abandoned as soon as it has enabled youto glimpse another way of looking at things and of relating tolife and people. The doctrine of transcendence carries much hopefor the future. One witness said.- 'I don't do too many drugsanymore because I have gone beyond them. They have taught me thelesson and there isn't so much need for them any more. I meanit's still fun to get stoned but there's a lot more to it. Thereis more to it than just fun. After you have learned the lesson,you have fun in virtually anything.' 331. Many users have stated that the insights gained throughdrug use have carried over and remained with them, continuing toshape their attitudes and outlook and style of relating when theywere not using drugs. In other words the drug has been a means ofdiscovering a new way to be more relaxed and self-accepting, moreaccepting and indeed loving, more appreciative of the intensityand value of being human in the moment, less anxious about timeand specific goals. In listening to these statements one can nothelp feeling that this discovery was often made in other ways inthe past - through traditional religious experience, forinstance. Modern drug use would definitely seem to be related in somemeasure to the collapse of religious values - the ability to finda religious meaning of fife. The positive values that youngpeople claim to find in the drug experience bear a strikingsimilarity to traditional religious values, including the concernwith the soul, or inner self. The spirit of renunciation, theemphasis on openness and the closely knit community, are part ofit, but there is definitely the sense of identification withsomething larger, something to which one belongs as part of thehuman race. 332. Young drug users are highly critical of many aspects ofour modern life. In this they are perhaps not much different,than the critical minority that one finds in each generation. Butone has its own unique history and has lived through a formativeperiod unlike any other. What are the distinguishing features ofthat background? In what way is it truly different from the onewhich shaped the outlook of previous generations of young people?The distinguishing marks would seem to be: a generalizedmiddle-class affluence, a very rapid rate of technologicalchange; the oppressive, almost foreboding character of certainproblems or menaces which cast a serious doubt about man'sability to survive - nuclear power, overpopulation, environmentalpollution, racial hostility and the widening gap between wealthand poverty. All these and other aspects of the human predicamenttoday impart a distinctive character to the outlook and responseof our youth. An example of the criticism of the economic systemis the following statement by a university student: I think it is essential that there should be some manner bywhich we could break down the economic system. We still needproductivity. But you can get away from the economic basis, fromthe competitive basis on which people, once they have gone intosomething, have to beat you down. You have this aspect of wantingto share which we should develop. You should be willing to sharetogether. But you can still have productivity withoutcompetition. 333. To this point we have been concerned largely with thestatements and interpretations of drug users themselves. We turnnow to interpretation - our own and that of other commentators.Present-day affluence plays a curious role. Without it therecould not be the freedom for speculation and experiment - theluxury of cultivating the inner self. At the same time it repels.It is both taken for granted and repudiated. There is a love-haterelationship. The drug-taking minority of this generation cannotbe inspired by the goals of their fathers. They do not feel thesame urgency to achieve material success and do not seekself-fulfilment that way. It may be that they see no way ofachieving their own sense of personal identity in attempting torepeat, probably with less success, what their fathers havealready done. There is reason to believe that young people fromless comfortable circumstances are more strongly motivatedtowards traditional career patterns and material success. Butthere would seem to be more than merely trying to find a roledifferent from that of one's father. The materially moresophisticated young people, those more familiar with materialwell-being and less anxious about their ability to maintain it,think they see a future in which it will be impossible to avoid.They envisage a society which will be obliged to assure asufficient amount of material security to everyone in order tomaintain itself politically and economically. They thereforeconclude that it is a goal for which it is now unnecessary toplan or to which it is futile to devote a significant amount ofones time and energy. 334. There is also a strong impression that young people are,as it were, unconsciously adapting time when there will be muchless work to go around. The rapid rate of technological changeand the pervading threat of work obsolescence makes them veryuncertain about their own occupational future. They seem tosuspect that a high proportion of them may have to learn to livehappily with relatively little work. Those of us who arewell-established in work tend to talk glibly of a future in whichthere will be increasing leisure. Little thought or practicaleffort has been devoted to the problem of how to fill thatleisure in constructive and satisfying ways. The exploration ofthe inner self, the expansion of consciousness, the developmentof spiritual potential, may well be purposes to which youngpeople are turning in anticipation of a life in which they willhave to find sustaining interest in the absence of externaldemands and challenges. 335. Young people speak often of a desire to overcome thedivision of life into work and play, to achieve a way of lifethat is less divided, less seemingly schizophrenic, and moreunified, They seem to be talking about the increasingly rareprivilege of work that one can fully enjoy - of work that is likeone's play. They claim to he prepared to make considerablerenunciations or sacrifice of traditional satisfactions likestatus and material success for work in which they can takepleasure. Indeed, one of their frequent commentaries on the oldergeneration is that it does not seem to enjoy its work, that itdoes not seem to be happy. This is said sadly, evensympathetically. It is not said contemptuously. The young say, ineffect, 'Why should we repeat this pattern?' The use of drugs formany is part of a largely hedonistic life style in whichhappiness and pleasure are taken as self-evidently valid goals ofhuman life. 336. Role rejection is an important theme of the culturalreaction that is associated with much of contemporary drug use.One young person suggested that letting one's hair grow was inpart at least a rejection of the manhood role. Young people donot deny the historic validity or necessity of these roles forthe older generation nor the positive achievements which must becredited to them; they simply say that they are no longerrelevant or desirable. The role which many reject is that of theachievement-oriented male, committed, body and soul to the bigcorporation, and feeling increasingly the need to give proofs ofhis masculinity. Some have spoken of drugs as dehabituating,desophisticating, and deconceptualizing - as helping thepersonality to break out of old moulds. They speak of a releaseor recovery of child-like innocence - the essential perspectiveof the artist. 337. There can be no doubt that there is a search forauthenticity in thought, in stance, in personal relations. Thedrug becomes a means of dissolving the mask, of escaping frompretence, affectation and stereotyped reaction and attitude,although their place may be taken by other stereotypes - acultist enthusiasm which expresses itself in knowing smiles and aprivate language. What happens under LSD is far from clear, butusers speak of blowing holes in the conscious mind through whichbits of the subconscious emerge, to be always accessible in thefuture. It is the language of self-discovery - the eternal searchfor the main-springs of one's personality - the attempt to findliberation from psychological burdens, from 'hang ups', as theyare popularly called. These human desires, these goals, are not new: they may besummed up as the attempt to become a 'real person'. This has beena goal of religious or spiritual concern down through thecenturies; the attempt to pull together the dispersed orfragmented pieces of the self. It is often expressed as thesearch for an identity. 338. There is in man a powerful and long-term tendency toattempt to weave the experience and perceptions of the individualinto a logically consistent whole, centred when possible on asingle cosmological principle or theme. In such a whole, manseeks for a meaning to life in the broad sense, for goals towardswhich to direct himself and the means by which he can reasonablyhope to attain these goals. Through such a structure man hopes tofind the nature of his own relationship to existence in generaland to his fellows. When such a synthesis of experience isavailable, not only to an individual but in a form that can beshared and accepted by some large numbers of people, it canbecome the ideological basis for social life and, as such, serveas a unifying principle for a society. Such syntheses ofexperiences were achieved by minds such as those of Saint ThomasAquinas, John Calvin and Karl Marx. In the absence of suchsyntheses, man and society suffer. The responses that are made byman in periods of ideological vacuum often appear strikinglysimilar. For instance, there seem to be striking parallelsbetween the orientation of the stoics and cynics at the time ofthe collapse of the Greek world, and the response of the 'BeatGeneration' and the 'Hippies'. In both instances the individualseems to withdraw from his society and to seek reality withinhimself. 339. Are there special elements in the present human situationthat impose particular stresses and burdens that would accountfor the increasing dependence of old and young on drugs? In thiscontext we repeatedly encounter the term 'alienation'. The use ofthis term has been discussed by Kenneth Keniston in these words:2 Although formal discussions of alienation itself are largelylimited to the last 150 years, the theme of alienation - ofestrangement, outcastness and loss - is an archetypal theme inhuman life and history.... The ambiguous concept of alienationhas in recent years become increasingly fashionable and, partlyas result, increasingly devoid of any specific meaning. More andmore the term is used to characterize whatever the authorconsiders the dominant maladies of the twentieth century; andsince views differ as to what these maladies are, the meaning ofalienation fluctuates with each writer. . . . Writers like Fromm,Kahler and Pappenheim use 'alienation' to describe a variety ofconditions ranging from separation of man from nature to the lossof pre-capitalist work relationships, from man's defensive use oflanguage to his estrangement from his own creative potential, andfrom the worker's loss of control over the productive process tothe individual's feeling of social or political powerlessness. Ofcourse, the purpose of such writers is to suggest that all ofthese different phenomena are connected, that all result fromsome characteristic of modern society. In the testimony we have heard, the term 'alienation' is mostoften used to refer to the estrangement of many young people andadults from the institutions, processes and dominant economic,social and political values of our society; to this inability tothink of a good and meaningful life being available to them inthe society; to their sense of inability to affect or influencethe course that society will follow or the great issues of peaceand war, poverty, pollution and others. 340. Many of our modern youth are undoubtedly suffering fromtoo great self-expectation. This is partly the result ofexaggerated paternal expectation - parents confusing their ownaffluence (which may be as often the product of an aggressiveacquisitiveness as innate intelligence) with the inheritedcharacteristics which they are capable of passing on. It is alsopartly the result of a sense of wider opportunity reflected inuniversal education. More is possible; more is expected. Theredevelops a disquieting gap between expectation and ability. DrVivian Rakoff said: 'We use drugs to find out how far we can go,rather than as a device for passivity. Drugs can be a spuriousway to fill the gap between aspiration and capacity.' 341. Witnesses appearing before the Commission have sometimesreferred to the word 'anomie' to express one of thepossible 'causes' of the non-medical use of drugs. Whether thesespeakers referred to the literal 'Anomie' or to some other stateof confusion or estrangement closer to 'alienation' is not easyto determine. But, in fact, and in any case, the Commission wastold that a certain anomie in which the Canadian society livesdoes call for a response, a reaction: self-search, integration,new values, evasion, etc. Literally, anomie means 'normlessness'.This state, well described by the French sociologist, EmileDurkheim (especially in relation to suicide), does not oftenresult from the total absence of norms but emerges from theco-existence of conflicting norms, rendering the aiming towardsprecise goals very difficult; contradicting values are expressingthemselves through co-existing norms. The Commission thinks that the concept of anomie and theexistence of anomie situations may be part of the explanationthat it will be trying to discern, in the course of its mandate.However, anomie and alienation are used all encompassingly as twoof the 'causes' of nearly all social problems, theseconcepts will have to be treated carefully, and critically. Theterm 'anomie' is neither specific nor very useful operationally(it cannot account for a specific problem. e.g., How is it thatall people living under anomic conditions do not resort todrugs?) 342. Contemporary drug use is also associated with a loss offaith in reason and a new emphasis on emotion. As one young highschool student put it, 'Young people today want to learn feelingsmore than facts.' Paul Goodman has described the loss of faiththus:3 There is a lapse of faith in science. Science has not producedthe general happiness that people expected, and now it has comeunder the sway of greed and power; whatever its beneficent past,people fear that its further progress will do more harm thangood. And rationality itself is discredited. Probably it is moresignificant than we like to think that intelligent young peopledabble in astrology, witchcraft, psychedelic dreams, and whateverelse is despised by science; in some sense they are not kidding.They need to control their fate, but they hate scientificexplanations. Keniston has spoken of a 'cult of experience' and declares:4 Central to this cult is a focus on the present - on today, onthe here-and-now. Thus, rather than to defer gratification andenjoyment for a distant future, immediate pleasure andsatisfaction are emphasized. Rather than reverence for thetraditions of the past, experience in the present is stressed.Psychologically, then, such human qualities as control, planning,waiting, saving, and postponing on the one hand, and revering,recalling, remembering and respecting on the other, are equallyde-emphasized. In contrast, activity, adventure, responsiveness,genuineness, spontaneity and sentience are the new experimentalvalues. Since neither the future nor the past can be assumed tohold life's meaning, the meaning of life must be sought withinpresent experience, within the self, within its activity andresponsiveness in the here-and-now. 343. This emphasis on feeling, and immediate experiencereflects itself in an interest in the arts and in nature. Manyyoung people speak of a heightened appreciation of the beautiesof nature. This is related to the aesthetic repugnance they feeltowards many of the physical aspects of modern urban life. Onestudent said that he did not feel any desire for drugs fortwo weeks when he was on a canoe trip in the Canadian north. Thedrugs may often be an attempt to escape from a pervading urbanugliness into a world of interior beauty. 344. We suspect that much contemporary drug use simply servesthe purpose of relieving the stress and tension which mostpeople, young and old, experience in modern living. Certainlythis is a dominant function of alcohol and nicotine which arestill the most prevalent drugs in all age groups, (see ChapterThree). It is also true of the large quantities of barbituratesconsumed by adults. In the vast majority of cases it is idle tolook beyond the relief of tension for an explanation. This is thepleasure or gratification most generally sought by the druguser.5 Chemical comforts are extremely varied in their chemicalnature, but what they do have in common is their ability toproduce pleasure. In this it can be noted that people only becomedependent on substances which they report produce pleasure andthe dependency potential of any substance, drug or food, may bepredicted by seeing how much pleasure it gives to the patient.The pleasure they produce is reduction of tension, in addition toany other social or physical effects they might have. 345. Some commentators have identified a degree of strain thatis peculiar to the impact of communications in our age. Kenistonhas referred to it as 'stimulus flooding and psychologicalnumbing'. Dr Paul Christie, the superintendent of the QueenStreet Mental Health Centre in Toronto has spoken of 'chronicconfusion'. As Keniston puts it: 6 One of the conditions of life in any modern technologicalsociety is continual sensory, intellectual, and emotionalstimulation which produces or requires a high tendencytowards psychological numbing the quantity, intensity andvariety of inputs to which the average American is subjected inan average day probably has no precedent in any other historicalsociety.... The problem arises, however, because the shells weerect to protect ourselves from the clamours of the inner andouter world often prove harder and less permeable than we hadoriginally wanted.... Thus, in at least a minority of Americans,the normal capacity to defend oneself against undue stimulationand inner excitation is exaggerated and automatized, so that itnot only protects but walls off the individual from inner andouter experience ... the feeling and fear of psychologicalnumbing leads to a pursuit, even a cult, of experiences for itsown sake. 346. Many observers tend to characterize the psychologicalpredisposition to the use of methamphetamines ('speed') asone of deep depression. Wilfrid Clement, who has had extensiveclinical experience with 'speed freaks', has expressed theopinion that 'we are faced with major generalized socialdepression as a reaction to our technological society'. Both MrHerb Tookey and Mr Barry Luger, who have had a great deal ofcontact with the 'speed' community through their work with TheTrailer in Toronto (see Chapter Six), have emphasized thisdepression. Tookey says, 'The methedrine user is usuallychronically depressed with a passive-dependent personality.'7 Thedepression seems to come from the feeling of powerlessness andinability to cope with various environmental problems and thedemands of modern life. Luger puts it this way: 'Most potentialspeed freaks are depressed because of their past environmentaland institutional problems and see no positive experiences in theforeseeable future. They were not able to cope with the problemsat home, at school or with their middle-class group.'8 Thedepression, Tookey says, is 'often manifested behaviourally by alack of goal orientated behaviour. The methedrine user hasconsiderable difficulty in constructing and carrying out longrange plans (i.e. getting and maintaining a job, going to school,etc.)' The feeling of being able to cope is very important.'Coupled with chronic depression', says Tookey, 'is episodicangry agitation which appears to result from, feelings ofimpotency, rejection, inferiority, and lack of control over theenvironment.'9 The 'speed freak' can be seen as a casualty of the increasingcomplexity of the demands for adaptation and survival in atechnological society. Says Tookey, 'The "speed freak"usually hits poor interpersonal skills and invariably is unableto make the discriminations necessary to deal with a complextechnological society.'10 Clement sees the problem as one ofadaptation in a time of rapid change and contrasts the 'speedfreak' with what he calls the 'super-adaptive' youth. Clementexpresses the view that the 'speed freak's' depression relates tohis perception of his peers and their relative ability to copewith the demands on them - not only the demands of theeducational system but also the demands of social adaptation.They experience anxiety about their function and identity in thefuture. They can see peers able to tolerate the speed andbewildering demands of modern life. The sight of the'super-adaptive' peer fills the average young person with a senseof inadequacy. The contrast in abilities is shown most clearly inafter-school activity - in response to the demands ofsociability. The desire for a supportive, reinforcing community is a strongmotivation for the use of speed. 'For the vast majority', saysTookey, 'the speed community provides a very strong, thoughanonymous identity. Paradoxically, identity is found by losingpersonal identity to the group. "I'm a speed freak".'11The speed freak community has few moral standards but it shows arough loyalty to its members. John Bradford, President ofRochdale College, said, 'One reason why kids use speed is thatthey are trying to imitate a life style they're not part of anddon't understand.' He was referring to the life style of the'heads' - the users of psychedelics. 347. Many young people profess to have little belief in thefuture - to find it difficult to visualize a future forthemselves. In one small group we met with during our hearingsone of the women said, 'Very few in our generation believe we aregoing to live to be forty.' There was general agreement in thegroup, with this statement. Paul Goodman in his article, 'TheNew Reformation', has emphasized this point: 'Again and againstudents have told me that they take it for granted they will notsurvive the next ten years. '12 348. There is also a suggestion that this emphasis onexperience in the present reflects a reaction against theconstraints on the personality produced by the habit-forming,role-imposing, conformity of modern society. It is a reactionagainst role and rule - an attempt to find spontaneity, variety,and unstructured expression in personality and experience. Thisreflects again the importance of the dehabituating effect of thedrugs - their capacity to break down moulds into which behaviourand personality are threatened with confinement by the variouspressures towards conformity. Benjamin DeMott has written veryperceptively of this reaction in an article entitled 'TheSixties: A Cultural Revolution'. He emphasizes that it iscommon to all age groups. DeMott sums up this new longing andreaching out which cuts across all age groups as: 13 The will to possess one's experience rather than be possessedby it, the longing to live one's own life rather than be lived byit, the drive for a more various selfhood than men have knownbefore. ... Young, old, black, white, rich and poor are pursuingthe dream of a more vital experience ... at the root of ouryearning stand the twin convictions: that we can be more, as men,than we're permitted to be by the rule of role and profession,and that the life of dailiness and habit, the life that lives us,precedes us, directs us to the point of suppressing moralconscience and imagination, is in truth no life at all. One witness reflected something of the same emphasis in hisexplanation of the effects of drugs: Marijuana makes a person child-like. LSD and mescaline are aticket to childhood. They are desophisticators, they break downthe conceptual structure through which the person interprets orviews the world. Categories which were always perfectlyacceptable are now of questionable value, things which were nevernoticed or were always taken for granted now jump out to theperson presenting unsolvable metaphysical problems. Every eventhas deep meaning, every thought is profound. 349. This phenomenon can also be viewed from the perspectivesof psychiatry and abnormal psychology. There are many in thepublic who tend to view the non-medical use of drugs assymptomatic of a pathological psychological state. There is nodoubt but that some of those who use drugs such as cannabis orLSD are mentally ill; this is also true of some proportion ofthose who use alcohol and the mental illness is causative to somedegree of their use. However, it is the view of the Commissionthat the majority of drug users do not take drugs as a result ofpathological motivation. Nevertheless it is desirable to drawattention to some of the psychological and psychiatric problemsthat are suggested to be contributing factors underlyingnon-medical drug use. 350. From the psychological point of view, overstimulation andexposure to an overwhelming stressful and complex environment,which requires the individual to perform too many and toodifficult differentiations and to solve problems which surpasshis coping ability, are likely to lead to a disturbance ('ajamming') of his capacity to deal effectively with the excessivein-put to his central nervous system. In animals, such situationsproduce pathological states of maladaptive behaviour which areoften referred to as 'experimental neuroses'. In man, it islikely that similar mechanisms prevail, and pathological statesof neurosis or personality disorder, even psychosis, may developunder these conditions. Looking once more at the experimental animal model, it isinteresting that animals whose behaviour has become severelydisturbed through environmentally-produced stress can betemporarily 'normalized' by the administration of tranquillizingdrugs. Animals under these conditions prefer, in fact, water withadded alcohol or tranquillizing drugs to plain water. This suggests that severely disturbed humans, too, may oftenresort to drugs which produce relaxation of 'instant rest' asa temporary escape from intolerable tensions in a world whichoffers less and less natural opportunities to do so. It isnoteworthy and apparently paradoxical, that amphetamines - thestimulating 'speed' drugs - are among the most effective medicalmeans of alleviating states of pathological nervous over-activityin children, and that these drugs can often help such children toregain increased self-confidence and greater powers ofconcentration. Claims for similar effects of 'speed' are oftenmade by the teenager who is plagued by the awareness of his owninadequacy. This may be interpreted as the choice of a different'chemical defence' against the threat of an overwhelmingenvironment - instead of 'instant rest', the young person chooses'instant efficiency'. Thus, the non-medical use of psychotropicdrugs may frequently be an abortive and poorly directed attemptby an emotionally sick person to treat his own condition. Butbecause he does not know precisely how, when and in what dosageto apply these drugs, he not only usually fails in his attemptsbut more often than not makes things worse. 351. In the language of ego psychology, a person's ability tocope with external demands depends on his ego structure; that is,that part of the personality which mediates between inner needsand outer reality. Ego strength, in turn, depends on undisturbedprocesses of growth, development and maturation throughoutchildhood. Since a child is an extremely vulnerable organism,disruptive early experiences may lead to imbalanced developmentand result in a poorly adjusted personality structure. Such amaladjusted person would then be inadequately equipped to dealwith the complex demands of today's world. 352. The Commission has very often been told by young peoplethat they reject all that is traditional conventional andstereotyped, because they consider it to be hypocritical, phony,dehumanizing, threatening, and ugly. As a result, they may,become alienated and some may be plunged into a frantic searchfor an identity which may be acceptable to them by their ownstandards. This search for identity may go in two directions, oneleading to a pathological adjustment - the other simply to anon-pathological parting from conformity. In the pathological outcome, the individual may substitute aspurious identity for an authentic one, for instance, byaccepting his belonging to a drug community as his new identity.Also, by displacing his inner needs, projecting his aspirationsand denying his limitations, the person might settle for adrug-induced illusion of false power, rather than realachievement, and for chemically induced comfort rather than trueresolution of conflicts and tensions. By contrast, in the non-pathological choice, the drug user mayopt exclusively for the inner world of personal experience andgenuine emotional awareness instead of the despised externalhall-marks of success in the world of our present-day society, aswe have often been told by young people. In making this choice,the young individual apparently replaces the prevailing social,technological and scientific values which require consensualverification, with the immanent and immutable values ofemotional, interpersonal, spiritual, creative - but notnecessarily productive - achievement. It might well be reassuringto him that personal experience, emotional awareness,spirituality and creativeness are forever free from the danger ofbeing usurped by dehumanizing automation (the one power theneo-nonconformist hates and fears perhaps more than anythingelse, as we have repeatedly been told). However, this choice ofdeliberate withdrawal and restructuring of his value system isprobably only open to a highly differentiated, sensitive andintrospective person. 353. Many others who reject today's society probably do so formore personal and less philosophical reasons - for instance,because of unresolved conflicts with their parents and withauthority in general. Many also adopt more pathological defences,rather than an orderly withdrawal, as their way of rejecting the'establishment'. Such defences - when induced and sustained bypsychotropic drugs - may consist in the vicarious building of anillusionary world with LSD or in frenzied and aggressiveoverstimulation with the help of 'speed', or in a passive wallingoff and isolation of the self from all contacts, with cannabis. 354. Even more pathological responses may occur as disguisedself-destructive behaviour. For instance, some 'speed' users whoinject almost suicidal doses of methamphetamine into their veinswithout any regard for their safety and health, may actually betrying to test the truth of the youth slogan 'Speed Kills'. Therole of the doomed person who is at once a martyr sacrificinghimself, a hero braving the confrontation with certaindestruction and a gambler playing dice with death, is a rolewhich seems to have a strong seductive pull for some young peoplewho are morbidly hungry for compassion, admiration andexcitement. For these individuals the slogan 'Speed Kills', may,paradoxically, carry more attractive than deterrent power - andthus may not serve the purpose for which it is being promoted. 355. The sick individual who relies on cannabis, speed orother psychotropic drugs, almost as his only means of escape, whouses them always as a crutch, and structures his whole existencearound them as the only providers of pleasure (the 'pothead', the'speed-freak, and the 'acidhead'), is in need of medical andpsychiatric, or psychological treatment. Prolonged counselling,psychotherapy and comprehensive social follow-up care are usuallyrequired. Medically prescribed and supervised drug treatment mayalso be indicated in many cases. On the other hand, the neo-noncomformist who is using drugsbut is not sick in the medical or psychiatric sense, may not needtreatment. If it seems desirable to bring about a change in hisbehaviour, only a philosophical and spiritual reorientation,which would have to touch the cultural roots of his values andexistential attitudes, could achieve this goal. REFERENCES 1. Leary, T. Statement prepared for a Canadian audience in1967. 2. Keniston, K. The Uncommitted Alienated youth in Americansociety. New York: Delta, 1965. 3. Goodman, P. The new reformation. New York Times Magazine,September 14,1969. 4. See reference 2. 5. Holmes, S. J. Keeping perspective re: Chemical comforts.Paper delivered to the College of Family Physicians of Canada,October 2, 1969. 6. See reference 2. 7. Tookey, H. The increasing use of methamphetamine ('speed')among young people. 1969. Mimeo. 8. Luger, D. Basic facts on speed. 1969. Mimeo. 9. See reference 7. 10. Ibid. 11. Ibid. 12. See reference 3. 13. De Mott, B. The Sixties: A cultural revolution. NewYork Times Magazine, December 14,1969. Contents | Feedback | Search DRCNet Library | Schaffer Library | Major Studies Canadian Government Commission ofInquiryWT02-B03-34IA086-000614-B042-307http://206.61.184.43:80/schaffer/Library/studies/ledain/NONMED1.HTM 206.61.184.43 19970122020649 text/html 8025HTTP/1.0 200 OKDate: Wednesday, 22-Jan-97 02:06:38 GMTServer: WebSitePro/1.1f (S/N wpo-0deb)Allow-ranges: bytesContent-type: text/htmlLast-modified: Saturday, 28-Dec-96 07:01:12 GMTContent-length: 7808 Canadian Government Commission of Inquiry - Table ofContents Contents | Feedback | Search DRCNet Library | Schaffer Library | Major Studies THE NON-MEDICAL USE OF DRUGS Interim Report of the Canadian Government Commission ofInquiry CONTENTS Chapter 1. THE COMMISSION'SINTERPRETATION OF ITS TASK The Commission's Terms of References The Implications of the Terms of Reference Methods of Inquiry The Role of the Interim Report Staff and Research Chapter 2. THE DRUGS AND THEIREFFECTS 29 Introduction The Role of Science The Classification of Drugs Psychological Considerations Pharmacological Considerations Tolerance and Dependence Scientific Methods A Review of Selected Drugs Barbiturates Medical Use Administration, Absorption, Distribution and PhysiologicalFate Psychological Effects Physiological Effects Tolerance and Dependence Barbiturates and Other Drugs Alcohol Medical Use Administration, Absorption, Distribution and PhysiologicalFate Short-Term Effects Long-Term Effects Tolerance and Dependence Alcohol and Other Drugs Minor Tranquillizers Medical Use Administration, Absorption, Distribution, and PhysiologicalFate Psychological Effects Physiological Effects Tolerance and Dependence Minor Tranquillizers and Other Drugs Amphetamines Medical Use Administration, Absorption, Distribution and PhysiologicalFate Effects Moderate-Dose Effects Tolerance and Dependence with Moderate Doses High-Dose Effects High-Dose Dependency 'Speed Kills' Amphetamines and Other Drugs LSD Medical Use Administration, Absorption, Distribution and PhysiologicalFate Psychological Effects Physiological Effects Tolerance and Dependence LSD and Other Drugs Cannabis Medical Use Administration, Absorption, Distribution and PhysiologicalFate Effects of Cannabis Overview of Effects Physiological Effects Psychological Effects Tolerance and Dependence Cannabis and Other Drugs Initiation of Cannabis Use Some Cannabis Studies of Current Significance I. The 'La Guardia Report' (1944) II. Isbell et al (1967) III. Weil, Zinberg and Nelsen (1969) IV. Jones and Stone (1969) V. Clark and Nakashima (1968) VI. Crancer et al (1969) VII. Robins et al (1969) VIII. ARF's Marijuana Users Study (1970) IX. Report of the Indian Hemp Drugs Commission (1894) Opiate Narcotics Medical Use Administration, Absorption, Distribution and PhysiologicalFate Physiological Effects Psychological Effects Tolerance and Dependence Opiate Narcotics and Crime The Development of Dependence Opiate Narcotics and Other Drugs Volatile Solvents Medical Use Administration, Absorption, Distribution and PhysiologicalFate Effects Tolerance and Dependence Solvents and Other Drugs References and Selected Bibliography Chapter 3. THE EXTENT AND PATTERNS OF NON-MEDICAL DRUG USE INCANADA Introduction Alcohol Barbiturates and Tranquillizers The Barbiturates The Minor Tranquillizers The Amphetamines The 'Speed' Phenomenon LSD and Other Strong Hallucinogens Cannabis Opiate Narcotics Solvents References Chapter 4. SOME CAUSES OFNON-MEDICAL DRUG USE References Chapter 5. PRESENT CANADIAN POLICY - THE LAW Introduction Law and Law Enforcement Some Historical Background International Framework Constitutional Framework Federal Legislation and its Enforcement The Statutes and Administrative Regulations The Role of Possession and Possessional Offences Burden of Proof The Definition of Trafficking Methods of Enforcement Sentencing Policy Empirical Study of Law Enforcement and Correctional System References Chapter 6. THE ISSUES - SOME INTERIM RECOMMENDATIONS Introduction The Effects of the Drugs General Cannabis LSD Amphetamines Multiple Drug Use Drugs and Crime Extent and Patterns of Non-Medical Drug Use Causes of Non-Medical Drug Use Social Response Research, Information and Education The Law Treatment and Supportive Services Prescribing Practices and Controls Disagreement by M.-A. Bertrand References Appendices: APPENDIX A. Submissions to the Commission APPENDIX B. Letters from Private Citizens APPENDIX C. Commissioners and Staff APPENDIX D. Some Surveys of Drug Use Among CanadianHigh School and University Students APPENDIX E. Current Research on Cannabis and OtherDrugs APPENDIX F. Innovative Services GLOSSARY OF SCIENTIFIC AND TECHNICAL TERMS Contents | Feedback | Search DRCNet Library | Schaffer Library | Major Studies WT02-B03-35IA086-000614-B048-127http://206.61.184.43:80/schaffer/Library/studies/fada/fadamenu.htm 206.61.184.43 19970122023122 text/html 3249HTTP/1.0 200 OKDate: Wednesday, 22-Jan-97 02:31:17 GMTServer: WebSitePro/1.1f (S/N wpo-0deb)Allow-ranges: bytesContent-type: text/htmlLast-modified: Saturday, 28-Dec-96 07:07:19 GMTContent-length: 3032 The Facts About Drug Abuse Contents | Feedback | Search DRCNet Library | Schaffer Library | Major Studies | TheFacts About Drug Abuse The Facts About Drug Abuse The Drug Abuse Council, 1980 Contents Foreword by Bethuel M. Webster Board of Directors of the Drug AbuseCouncil Acknowledgments The Contributors Final Report of the Drug Abuse Council Staff Chapters: 1. The Federal Government's Response toIllicit Drugs, 1969-1978 by Peter Goldberg 2. Drug-Law Enforcement Efforts byJohn R.Pekkanen 3. Heroin Treatment: Development, Status, Outlook by David C.Lewis and John Sessler 4. The Influence of Public Attitudes and Understanding on DrugEducation and Prevention by Peter Goldberg and Erik J. Meyers 5. Marijuana and Cocaine: The Process of Change in Drug Policyby Robert R. Carr and Erik J. Meyers 6. American Heroin Policy: Some Alternatives by Erik J. Meyers Appendix: Activities of the Drug Abuse Council Notes Contents | Feedback | Search DRCNet Library | Schaffer Library | Major Studies | TheFacts About Drug Abuse WT02-B03-36IA087-000632-B015-280http://206.61.184.43:80/schaffer/Library/studies/Inhemp/ihmenu.htm 206.61.184.43 19970122091344 text/html 2923HTTP/1.0 200 OKDate: Wednesday, 22-Jan-97 09:13:34 GMTServer: WebSitePro/1.1f (S/N wpo-0deb)Allow-ranges: bytesContent-type: text/htmlLast-modified: Saturday, 28-Dec-96 07:03:42 GMTContent-length: 2706 Indian Hemp Drugs Commission Report - Table of Contents Contents | Feedback | Search DRCNet Library | Schaffer Library | Major Studies The Indian Hemp Drugs Commission Report Summary of the Indian Hemp DrugsCommission Report by Tod Mikuriya Introduction, by Tod Mikuriya Centennial Thoughts on the IndianHemp Drugs Commission, by Tod Mikuriya Indian Hemp and the Dope Fiends of OldEngland - A sociopolitical history of cannabis and theBritish Empire 1840-1928, by Sean Blanchard & Matthew J. AthaMSc Chapter IX. Social and Religious Customs Chapter XIV. The Policy of Hemp DrugAdministration Note by Mr. G. A. Grierson, C.I.E.,Magistrate and Collector, Howrah, on references to the hemp plantoccurring in Sanskrit and Hindi literature. Note by Mr. J. M. Campbell, C.I.E.,Collector of Land Revenue and Customs and Opium, Bombay, on thereligion of hemp. Contents | Feedback | Search DRCNet Library | Schaffer Library | Major StudiesWT02-B03-37IA087-000632-B015-102http://206.61.184.43:80/schaffer/Library/studies/inhemp/1intro.htm 206.61.184.43 19970122091144 text/html 11598HTTP/1.0 200 OKDate: Wednesday, 22-Jan-97 09:11:38 GMTServer: WebSitePro/1.1f (S/N wpo-0deb)Allow-ranges: bytesContent-type: text/htmlLast-modified: Saturday, 28-Dec-96 07:04:48 GMTContent-length: 11380 Indian Hemp Drugs Commission Report -- Introduction Contents | Feedback | Search DRCNet Library | Schaffer Library | Major Studies | IndianHemp Drugs Commission Indian Hemp Drugs Commission Report Introduction by Tod Mikuriya, M.D. The Indian Hemp Drugs Commission Report*, comprising some ninevolumes and 3,698 pages, is by far the most completed andsystematic study of marijuana undertaken to date. Because of therarity and, perhaps, the formidable size of this document, thewealth of information contained in it has not found its way intocontemporary writings on this subject. This is indeedunfortunate, as many of the issues concerning marijuana beingargued in the United States today were dealt with in the IndianHemp Drugs Commission Report. It is both surprising and gratifying to note the timeless andlucid quality of the writings of these British bureaucrats. Itwould be fortunate if studies undertaken by contemporarycommissions, task force committees and study groups could measureup to the standards of thoroughness and general objectivityembodied in this report. In the current context of violentlypolarized attitudes toward marijuana, the prospect of a study ofsimilar stature would be improbably if not impossible. History of British Involvement The British government in India had substantial knowledge ofintoxicants other than alcohol because of their activeinvolvement in regulation, taxation and actual trafficking inthese substances for over a hundred years prior to the Hemp DrugsCommission investigation and report. In 1790 duties on alcohol and other intoxicant drugs werefirst levied by the British on Landlords in India. The regulationof cannabis preparations was further specified in 1793 inregulation XXXIV of that year: "No personal shallmanufacture or vend any such drugs (bhang* ganja**, charas*** andother intoxicating drugs) without a license from the collector ofthe zillah_." This system of regulation was instituted "with a view tocheck immoderation consumption, and at the same time to augmentthe public revenue." In 1800 in a further modification of regulation, themanufacture and sale of charas was prohibited as "being of amost noxious quality," while daily rates of duty weredeclared as the basis for taxing procedures. Curiously, in 1824the restriction on charas was rescinded "as this drug wasfound on examination to be not more prejudicial to health thanganja or other intoxicating drugs." In 1849 limits on retail sale of cannabis drugs were fixed"for better securing the abkari__ revenue of Calcutta,"and later extended to the__________________________________________________________ * Leaves and flowers of wild growing or inferior cultivatedcannabis plants. ** Flowering tops of the cannabis plant *** Resin from the mature cannabis plant _ A county-sized district or administrative division (India) __ Manufacture or sale of intoxicating Liquors or drugs;hence, an excise or internal revenue tax on such manufacture ofsale (India) [Abkar: A wine seller; distiller. Also, one whose trade issubject to abkari tax] whole of Bengal. Four years later the daily tax method wasabandoned and a fee charged on a per weight basis, and in 1860 anadditional set of dealers' fees imposed. It should be noted, however, that the system of the state ofBengal was only one of several schemes among the many provinces.Variations on this approach existed in the other states, afunction of the differing local administrations, reflecting thedegree of administrative and fiscal controls exerted by theImperial government. There had apparently been controversies as to the possiblenoxious effects of cannabis drugs, at least from the time of theinception of British controls on these products, unless we assumethat the initial stated reasons for regulation were merelycynical rationalizations for obtaining additional sources ofrevenue. Within a country of several hundred millions ofinhabitants, divided into hundreds of regions, and with onlyrudimentary "homogenizing" forces of effectivetransportation and mass media, it is perhaps reasonable to inferthat wide variations in opinions and beliefs would beencountered. Formation of the Commission On 2 March 1893 a question was raised in the British House ofCommons concerning the effects of the production and consumptionof hemp drugs in the province of Bengal, India. In response, theGovernment of India convened a seven-member commission to lookinto these questions, 3 July 1893. Upon the suggestion of LordKimberley the scope of the investigation was expanded to includeall of India. Procedures The Commission actually met for the first time in Calcutta 3August 1893. Between this date and 6 August of the followingyear, when the study was finished, the Commission receivedevidence from 1,455 witness. Field trips were made to thirtycities in eight provinces and Burma from the end of October 1893through the latter part of April 1894. Eighty-six meetings forexamination of witnesses transpired during the inquiry. Actualparticipation of the members of the Commission was duly noted andreported -- a custom that it might be worthwhile to revive: The following statement shows the attendance of the members ofthe Commission during the period occupied in inquiry (3rd August1893 to April 1894): Period of Attendance with the commission Number of meetings (a) During the (b) during the for examination of Name first tour second tour witnesses attended President 83 days 183 days 86 Mr. Ommaney Ditto Ditto 85 Mr. Fraser Ditto Ditto 85 Dr. Warden Ditto Ditto 86 Raja Soshi From 3rd August From 30th October 44 Sikhareswar to 15th September to 24th January, Roy 44 days from 14th to 16th February, from 22nd to 24th February, and from 7th to 25th March, 112 days Kanwar Harnam Singh 83 days From 13th November 48 to 5th January, 22nd February to 2nd April, and from 12th to 25th April, 78 days Lala Nihal Chand 3rd August to From 30th October to 18th 5 20th September, November and from 17th to 49 days 25th April 29 days The attendance of Raja Soshi Sikhareswar Roy was broken byoccasional absence caused by ill-health and other reasons. The absence of Kanwar Harnam Singh during two short periodswas due to ill-health. The prolonged absence of Lala Nihal Chandwas due to the fact that he suffered from continued ill-health,and was able to be with the Commission only at Calcutta at thefirst; then for some part of their preliminary tour, and at a fewmeetings for the examination of witnesses during the second tour.All the members were present at Simla during the preparation ofthe report. Witnesses whose evidence was received by the Commission weredivided into three categories: (1) Official witnesses able to give information regarding hempdrugs, based on their official and local experience. (2) Non-official witnesses of all ranks able to giveinformation regarding the drugs generally or in connection withcertain classes of the people. (3) Other persons or associations having facts or holdingopinions which they desired to communicated to the Commission. Civil Officers 467 Medical Officers 214 Private Practitioners (European methods) 34 Private Practitioners (Native methods) 87 Cultivators 144 Professional men 55 Missionaries 34 Associations 24 Persons Engaged in Trade 75 Others 59 1,455 228* Native states 189* Native states * Supplementary Volume - 1895 To facilitate collection of information, seventy questionsframed by the Commission were given to witnesses. The writtenanswers to these questions constituted the bulk of the evidencebefore the Commission. Where appropriate, witnesses were examinedorally for further clarification or explanation. In addition,witnesses who had not submitted written statements were examinedorally. It was duly noted in the record which forms of testimonyhad been provided by the individual witnesses. The following excerpts discusses evidence received intestimony and from other sources. Philosophic premises concerningroles and responsibilities of the individual are outlined as aprelude to discussing the practical issues of taxation, politicalpolicy, public safety and health. In applying the principles ofEnglish Common Law to peoples in a subcontinent whose beliefs andcustoms varied greatly from those of Great Britain, the issues offeasibility and the common good were of prime concern. If schemesof regulation of intoxicants followed this rationalistic modeltoday, the mistakes made then might not require repeating in eachgeneration. Current technologic advances do not produce progressin the area of human behavior; they only help to magnify defectsand frailties. Contents | Feedback | Search DRCNet Library | Schaffer Library | Major Studies | IndianHemp Drugs CommissionWT02-B03-38IA086-000614-B042-234http://206.61.184.43:80/schaffer/Library/studies/wootton/soma1.htm 206.61.184.43 19970122020516 text/html 98658HTTP/1.0 200 OKDate: Wednesday, 22-Jan-97 02:04:39 GMTServer: WebSitePro/1.1f (S/N wpo-0deb)Allow-ranges: bytesContent-type: text/htmlLast-modified: Saturday, 28-Dec-96 06:45:56 GMTContent-length: 98440 Hashish Fudge - The Times Advertisement and the WoottonReport Contents | Feedback | Search DRCNet Library | Schaffer Library | Major Studies | WoottonReport Hashish Fudge THE TIMES ADVERTISEMENT AND THE WOOTTON REPORT by Steve Abrams 7 April 1993 revised May 10th draft HASHISH FUDGE Soma and the Wootton Report by Steve Abrams In 1967 my organization Soma published afull paged advertisement in The Times which called for reform ofthe law on cannabis. Sixty-five people were persuaded to signthis document, including leading figures in the arts and sciencesand eminent medical men. our proposals for reform stopped shortof outright legalization. However, legalization was clearly along term prospect if they were implemented. The advertisementdeclared the existing law "immoral in principle andunworkable in practice." The advertisement was immediately debated inthe House of Commons, where the Minister of State, Alice Bacon,announced an expert inquiry headed by Baroness Wootton ofAbinger. In January 1969 the so-called "Wootton Report"on Cannabis endorsed the position taken in the advertisement,that "the long asserted dangers of cannabis wereexaggerated, and that the related law was socially damaging, ifnot unworkable."* The Home Secretary of the day, JamesCallaghan (now Lord Callaghan) put up a smokescreen. He denouncedthe Report, claiming its authors had been"overinfluenced" by the "lobby" responsiblefor "that notorious advertisement." However, afterwaiting for a year, he quietly introduced legislation toimplement the recommendations of the Wootton Report. The legislation expired with the 1970 generalelection, but it was immediately reintroduced by the Torygovernment and became law as the Misuse of Drugs Act 1971. Thelaw implemented the unanimous view of the Advisory Committee onDrug Dependence that end users of cannabis should no longer facethe prospect of imprisonment. This was spelled out by the LordChancellor, Lord Hailsham, in his advice to magistrates onsentencing. After a prolonged debate Britain had decided tocondone the use of cannabis. Today the law is scarcely enforcedagainst end users, and the majority of arrests are dealt with bythe procedure of cautioning, without a conviction beingrecorded.** *Home Office Advisory Committee on DrugDependence - Report on Cannabis, 1968, p. 1 ** "The law banning cannabis saleand use is all but unenforced." Times leader, "Overduefor Repeal", 24 July 1992 This interpretation of the history of cannabislaw reform has been consistently denied in the media.* A fullpaged article in The Independent on July 22, 1992("Twenty-five years gone up in smoke") was summarised:"On the 24th July 1967 sixty-five of the famous liberalgreat and good signed an advertisement in The Times calling forcannabis to be legalized and ... nothing happened." LordDeedes, writing in The Telegraph on December 15, 1992 said thesame thing about the Wootton Report. The last public debate on the subject took place in 1969, when Baroness Wootton, then chairman of a sub-committee of the Government's advisory body, recommended a lightening of penalties for possession of cannabis. As a member of the same body, I remember that I thought her arguments persuasive but politically unattainable. We discussed this amicably until Jim Callaghan, the Home Secretary, denounced her proposals in the House of Commons, and that was that. Lord Deedes is at least willing to admit theexistence of the Wootton Report. However, when Lady Wootton diedin 1988, at the age of 91, the work for which she was best knownwas not considered worthy of mention in obituaries, notably inThe Independent and the Guardian.** The Telegraph was the onlynewspaper which got it right: In 1967 her Report on soft drugs caused a considerable furore by its recommendation of more lenient sentences for offences involving cannabis, and was dismissed patronizingly by James Callaghan as "overinfluenced by a lobby in favour of legalizing pot." In 1970, however, Callaghan introduced legislation broadly in line with the Wootton proposals. The press celebrated the twentieth anniversaryof many trivial events of the 'sixties, but there does not seemto have been a single reference in 1989 to the controversy whichdominated the news in January and February 1969. When a longtelevision interview with Lady Wootton was shown posthumously,the subject of drugs was not raised, but a voice-over made theastonishing claim that "in the 'sixties she campaigned forthe legalization of cannabis." *The Times did, finally, print a letter from meon 24 July 1992. It is interesting to compare this letter withanother which Rees-Mogg refused to print in February 1969. Thatletter in included in my article. "Cannabis Law Reform inBritain" in The Marijuana Papers by David Soloman, PenguinBooks, 1970, pp. 69-79 (UK edition only). ** So far as I know, the Wootton Reporthas never been mentioned in The Independent. The authors of thepage published on July 22, 1992, Dina Rabinovich, Emily Greeneand Andrew Brown, listed forty events following on after theadvertisement but pointedly ignored the existence of the Reportand the reduction in penalties under the Misuse of Drugs Act. In a letter to the Times on February 5th,1969 in the aftermath of the Parliamentary debate on the WoottonReport, Lady Wootton and the Chairman of the Advisory Committee,Sir Edward Wayne, noted that none of the members of thesub-committee supported the legalization of cannabis. On theSunday following publication of the Report, Lady Wootton said inan article in The Sunday Times : "Even those who wanted tolegalize (cannabis), even the people who signed the Timesadvertisement, admit that immediate legalization is notpractical."* The Wootton Report did contemplate the eventuallegalization of cannabis, but the so-called "cannabislobby" refused to jump the gun. The 1969 Prospectus of theSoma Research Association, Ltd. said: A Soma delegation gave oral evidence to the sub-committee. We took the view that prohibition appeared to be an ineffective and socially damaging method of controlling the misuse of cannabis. However, we argued that realistic decisions about the long term control and possible legalization of cannabis could not be made on the basis of existing knowledge. Additional research was required, but could not be undertaken because the law prohibited research in which cannabis was smoked. The advertisement said, "The Governmentought to welcome and encourage research into all aspects ofcannabis smoking, but according to the law as it stands, no oneis permitted to smoke cannabis under any circumstances, andexceptions cannot be made for scientific or medicalresearch." Lady Wootton made the same point in her SundayTimes article: "People have not been able to undertakeserious research because smoking is forbidden on allpremises." Research was prohibited because it was anoffence to have charge of premises where cannabis was smoked. Theliability was absolute; guilty knowledge was not required. Noexceptions were judged possible. Cannabis could not even besmoked by a machine on government premises. The law contained aterm which made it impossible to challenge its own premisses ofthe harmfulness of cannabis smoking. The advertisement asserted that cannabis was"the least dangerous of pleasure-giving drugs." Theargument was rehearsed at some length, and those persuaded by itmight well have been inclined to experiment. It came close tosaying that the main danger of cannabis smoking was the prospectof being arrested. But any criticism of an unjust law is likelyto breed disrespect for the law. The text said, "Theprohibition of cannabis has brought the law into disrepute andhas demoralized police officers faced with the necessity ofenforcing an unjust law." * Barbara Wootton, "Time and theDrug Scene," Sunday Times, 12 January 1969. At the 1967 Tory party conference, the ShadowHome Secretary, Quintin Hogg (now Lord Hailsham), denounced theorganizers and signatories of the Soma advertisement. He saidthat the editor of The Times, William Rees-Mogg (now LordRees-Mogg), would never live down the scandal caused by itspublication. Hogg was "profoundly shocked by theirresponsibility of those who wanted to change the law. Theirarguments were "casuistic, confused, sophistical andimmature:" There is no half-way house in this matter. There can be no encouraging the drug up to a point. You either sell it over the counter or in the shops or you prohibit it altogether. Rees-Mogg replied in a Times leader, "TheRight to Dissent," on October 23rd: We believe that people who want to change the law have a right to put their case to the public. We do not accept advertisements from people who want to break the law. But there is a vital difference between wanting the law to be broken and wanting it to be changed. ... Mr. Hogg thinks that the subject of drugs is so dangerous that free discussion cannot be allowed, that those who disagree with him have no right to be heard. Our view would be that his rhetorical approach is more likely to repel than to persuade. In January 1969, following publication of theWootton Report, Hogg wrote in the Daily Express that it wasnecessary to "pursue the addicts of hashish and marijuanawith the utmost severity the law allows." When the reportwas debated in Parliament, on the 27th of January, Hogg insistedthat cannabis was a dangerous addictive drug, the cause ofmadness and mayhem. He opposed any reduction in the maximumpenalty of ten years' imprisonment because, in this event,"the conclusion drawn by the public, by traffickers in thedrug and by potential victims of it would be that the governmentwere on their way to legalizing its use. The penalties under the Dangerous Drugs Act didnot distinguish between supply and use. The maximum penaltieswere one year on summary conviction and ten years on inditement.Reducing the penalties for possession of cannabis would involveputting down the maximum penalty on summary conviction to sixmonths or less. This would mean, in practice, that users ofcannabis would no longer face the prospect of imprisonment. Themain deterrent to consumption would thus be removed and use wouldincrease. The stigma of a criminal conviction would soon belessened. The police would no longer have much incentive toenforce the law and in due course they would be unable to enforceit. Finally, legalization would come, after a generation. The issue of cannabis law reform was raised ata crucial time. In 1967 the drug laws were in disarray. TheDangerous Drugs Act applied to drugs controlled under the UNSingle Convention on Narcotic Drugs, namely heroin, cocaine andcannabis, including their derivatives and analogues. Amphetamineand LSD were subject to more moderate penalties under the Drugs(Prevention of Misuse) Act 1964. LSD had only just become illegaland barbiturates were not controlled at all. Meanwhile somecannabis users were punished more severely than heroin users.Cannabis smoking was regarded as a crime but heroin addiction wastreated as an illness. Doctors had the right to prescribe heroin.The Court might send a cannabis smoker to prison and send aheroin user to a doctor. The formation of Soma was announced in anarticle published in Cherwell, the Oxford student newspaper, onFebruary 1st, 1967. The national press became involved in acontroversy about the prevalence of cannabis at Oxford, arisingout of an article by myself in an anthology, The Book 21 Grass,edited by George Andrews and Simon Vinkenoog.* The publisher soldthe "story" to The People, who brought it out intwo inch headlines on January 29th. This article was quoted atlength by President Clinton's drugs adviser, Professor NormanGrinspoon in his book, Marihuana Reconsidered (Harvard UniversityPress, 1971; pp. 311-312. It was also described in the TimesLiterary Supplement (June 15th, 1967) as "a sane andbalanced piece of writing that does much to implement the ...view that harm rather than good is done by the existing state ofthe law." * "The Oxford Scene and theLaw", The Book of Grass, Peter Owen 1967, pp. 235-42 Following a press conference on February 2nd tolaunch the Book of Grass, an article by Peter Fiddick appeared inThe Guardian, prophetically entitled, "Pot lobby moves intogear." (February 3rd) Follow up articles, debating theprevalence of cannabis smoking at Oxford, appeared The Times, TheTelegraph and the Guardian. There were also several articles inThe Oxford Mail, and the story dominated Cherwell (then edited byJulian Norridge) for the remainder of the term. The page one lead in Cherwell was accompaniedby a double paged spread, "The Pot Plot", a kind of dryrun for the Times advertisement which served as a fact sheet forthe media. "The Pot Plot" was noticed by the popularpress. "Smoke more pot. It's safer than beer," wroteArthur Smith in the Daily Mirror on January 31st. "Make itlegal to take marihuana urges Oxford student" was theheading for an article in the Mail the following day by NicholasLloyd (former Cherwell editor, now Sir Nicholas, editor of theDaily Express). On the 6th of February I took part in atelevision discussion with the Chief Constable of Oxford C. G.Burroughs and a psychiatrist from the Littlemore Hospital, Dr.O'Gorman, on the television program "Today", fromBirmingham. On the same day, The Telegraph printed thefollowing letter from me: May I make myself clear? Drug addiction is extremely rare within the University of Oxford. I do not know of any resident member of the University who is addicted to narcotics such as heroin and cocaine. There are probably a number of addicts to amphetamines and barbiturates, drugs which are widely and indiscriminately prescribed under the National Health Service. There is no reason to believe that the widespread use of cannabis (marijuana or hashish or hemp) constitutes a problem at the University. Cannabis is nonaddictive and there have been no cases at Oxford of disorderly behaviour attributable to its influence. The consensus of informed medical opinion is that cannabis is probably less harmful than alcohol. The civil authorities and the press have indiscriminately confused the non-addictive and relatively harmless herb cannabis with addictive and harmful drugs such as amphetamines and heroin. When challenged on this point they argue that cannabis is indirectly harmful because its use leads to heroin addiction. There is little or no evidence in support of this view. One might as well argue that sex leads to prostitution. The effects of cannabis and heroin are opposite in character. Heroin users are disturbed individuals who need to escape from reality; cannabis has the effect of enhancing reality. My qualified estimate that five per cent of Oxford students use cannabis when it is available has been challenged by authorities who have a strong vested interest in minimising the extent of the situation. Students go out of their way to conceal information from these authorities, but they go out of their way to reveal information to me. My estimate was based on four years direct observation, in the course of which I observed hundreds of people smoking and conducted and cross-checked many careful interviews. Perhaps I have sources of information which are unavailable to the Chief Constable, the proctors and various anonymous university officials. * According to press reports, "moneychanged hands for The People article." Cf. "Our Man inFleet Street", Drugs and Society, vol. 1, no. 3 (December1971, pp. 34-35) and the response, a letter from me, in vol. 1,no. 4, January 1972, p. 37 I was not paid. I had no contract withthe publisher, who sold the story without my permission andagainst my protests, which are documented. I had been playing the numbers game. Five percent of junior members of the university translates to fivehundred Oxford students. I felt no compunction about using theimage of the University to challenge the traditional stereotypeof the anti-social drug taker. Following publication of thePeople lead, an article in The Times said that my claim that"at least 500 undergraduates and a few dozen dons"smoke pot "has been rejected by police, proctors anddons." The Times quoted the view of the SeniorProctor, Dr. Robin Fletcher, that my figures were "grosslyexaggerated." : "The article could create a very badimage of the University. It is unfortunate for a number ofreasons." A similar article in The Telegraph quoted the viewof "a senior member of the university who is concerned withinvestigations into student health problems" : "I wouldbe surprised if the number of people using drugs habitually inthe University is more than about twenty." This official waspresumably D. C. M. Yardley, (now Local Ombudsman) who was Dr.Fletcher's predecessor. The Telegraph stated that Dr. Yardley hadled an investigation of undergraduate drug use the preceding yearand concluded that no more than fifty students were involved. Nomore than thirty took drugs with any degree of regularity. In theCherwell lead on February 1st, Dr. Yardley's view of the dangerof cannabis is quoted: "The nervous system of regular potsmokers is shot to bits. They are mental wrecks." In ThePeople he is quoted: "All but those with the strongest mindswill end up seeking bigger and better 'kicks' from heroin andlike drugs. Within the university and nationally, any move tobring about the acceptance of hemp must be fought." The matter was resolved by the UniversityCommittee on Student Health, which included several heads ofcolleges. I was invited to give evidence to the Committee onFebruary 15th. They accepted my claim that as many as fivehundred undergraduates had used cannabis. I made the point thatthe problem was hardly confined to Oxford and asked the Committeeto press the Home Secretary to institute a government inquiryinto the status of cannabis and LSD. The Chairman of theCommittee was the Head of my college, St. Catherine's, AlanBullock (now Lord Bullock, formerly Vice Chancellor of theUniversity). He told me that my suggestion that the Universitypress for a Home Office inquiry had been accepted and invited meto assist him in drafting the letter to this effect, which wassent to the then Vice Chancellor, Kenenth Turpin on February28th. The first account of the Student Health Reportappeared in a Cherwell exclusive on the 1st of March. On the sameday things looked as if they might be getting out of hand.Cherwell had announced a "happening" in WellingtonSquare, sponsored by International Times. It was to be filmed forGerman television. John Hopkins, the organizer, promised toprovide Suzie Creamcheese of the "Mothers of Invention"pop group on a white horse. The front page of the Oxford Mail forMarch 2nd has a photo of hundreds of students pouring out ofBalliol College and another of them marching along the High.There were signs and banners with legends such as "Deathpenalty for pot" and "God moves in a mysteriousway." The Deputy Chief Constable stated that "more than500 students disorganized the city centre for over twohours."* The Oxford Mail account says that the policetried to clear Wellington Square, whereupon the"happening" reformed as a procession down St. John'sStreet. They moved straight across Beaumont Street and St. Giles,without pausing for traffic, in through Balliol College backentrance (where the police could not follow) and out againthrough the front entrance in Broad Street. The processioncontinued on through the Turl and the High to Carfax. The"happening" was also covered in the national press. TheSun called attention to six undergraduates tied together with aplastic rope crawling along the High Street, insisting they wereclimbing a mountain. The Sun also remarked on the presence of agirl on horseback carrying a sign which said, "Free SuzieCreamcheese!" The Report of the Committee on Student Healthwas published on April 3rd and reviewed in The Times thefollowing day. The Times article says, "At the HealthCommittee's suggestion, the Vice Chancellor of Oxford University,Mr. K. C. Turpin, is to ask the Home Secretary for an urgentnational enquiry into the dangers of drug taking." It saidthe university was concerned at the numbers which might beexperimenting with cannabis. The following article by NicholasLloyd appeared in the Daily Mail: The pot takers. 500 Oxford students use marijuana About 500 Oxford undergraduates smoke marijuana,, says a committee of dons. The Committee was set up to report on the health of students at the university. In a letter to Kenneth Turpin, the Vice Chancellor, it say that an independent claim that about five per cent of the 10,000 students take drugs is probably correct. But it maintains that the situation at Oxford is not exceptional and that a similar proportion of students at other universities take drugs. The committee, headed by Mr. Alan Bullock, Master of St. Catherine's College, says that drug taking is a national problem. It calls for a full investigation into the effects of different drugs and says that public policy could then be based on scientific fact instead of prejudice. On Tuesday students at St. Catherine's College passed a motion by 24 votes to 4 in favour of making marijuana - known as 'pot' - legally available. * In fact the numbers were swelledbecause students from the Oxford Polytechnic, in their "ragweek", joined the proceedings. On the 7th of April, the Home secretary, RoyJenkins, announced the appointment of an investigation led byBaroness Wootton. She was to head a "sub-committee onhallucinogens" of the Advisory Council on Drug Dependence,appointed in December 1966, enacting a recommendation of theSecond Brain Report the previous year. We hoped for something earth shaking from theWootton Committee. We hoped for a published report on cannabisthat would bear comparison with the New York Mayor's Report onMarihuana (the La Guardia Report) of 1944 and the East IndianHemp Drugs Report of 1893-94. The first stage of the campaign hadbeen concluded. The chain of events leading to the appearanceof the advertisement involved an interaction with the affairs ofthe Rolling Stones, the Beatles and the so-called"underground." One of the reasons for raising thesubject of cannabis with urgency in the favourable context of itsuse at Oxford was the need to combat what a Times leader ("ADangerous Press Camapign") soon called "the deliberatesensationalism that underlines the present campaign against"drugs." The Soma advertisement said "The crime atissue is not drug abuse but heresy." Traditionally, the use of cannabis had beenlargely confined to Blacks, Indians and Arabs.* Muslims broadlytolerated the use of cannabis but prohibited alcohol, which is,literally, sacred to Christians, and also to Jews. The new rockmusic could be represented as a fusion of black rhythms andEastern spirituality. The gentle undulations of the music werealso explicitly sexual. For decades the Americans, in particular,had portrayed the use of cannabis as degenerate. The News of the World replied to the article inthe People by accusing the Rolling Stones of abusing drugs.(February 3rd) The same night Mick Jagger appeared with Hogg onthe Eamon Andrews talk show. Jagger told Hogg that he too hadbeen to university, and seemed to get he better of him. Then, Ithought, he got above himself and announced, impulsively, that hewould sue the News of the World for libel. The newspaper panickedand went to the Scotland Yard Drug Squad. The head of the DrugSquad, Chief Inspector Lynch later told me that he refused toact. He said that he was not expected to stamp out cannabis, butto keep its use under control. If he arrested Mick Jagger everylad in the country would want to try some pot. He was, after all,head of the drug squad, not head of the Lynch mob. * The statistics published with the WoottonReport show that 1964, the first year in which white offendersoutnumbered blacks, was also the first year in which a minority(48 per cent) of cannabis offenders were sent to prison. As is well known, the News of the World hadmore success with the local police in West Wittering, where KeithRichards lived. In the subsequent trial, Jagger's counsel,Michael Havers (later Lord Havers, also Mrs. Thatcher's attorneygeneral in the "Spycatcher" case) alleged that thenewspaper used an agent provocateur. The arrests were made onFebruary 12th, but the story did not break until the 19th. Onlythe Telegraph named those arrested, Keith Richards, charged withthe absolute offence of permitting premises to be used forsmoking cannabis, and Mick Jagger, charged with possession ofamphetamine. George Harrison has said that the Beatles were atthe party that was raided, but the police waited until theyleft. Perhaps the beginning of the entire sequence ofevents was the arrest on cannabis charges on December 30th 1966of the aforementioned John Hopkins (Hoppy), a member of theeditorial board of the underground newspaper "InternationalTimes."* The "underground" was a literary andartistic avant garde with a large contingent from Oxford andCambridge. Hoppy, for example, was trained as a physicist atCambridge. The underground had found an enemy in Lord Goodman,Chairman of the Arts Council, who went over the head of the HomeSecretary, Roy Jenkins, and appealed directly to the Director ofPublic Prosecutions to mount a police raid on the Indica bookshopwhere International Times was edited.** Goodman had an animusagainst (Barry) Miles, co-proprietor of the bookshop with PeterAsher, and also a member of the Editorial Board of IT. InDecember 1966 Eric Whitte nominated Miles to serve on the ArtsCouncil Literary Advisory Panel. Goodman had been infuriated whenhis appointment was announced to the press on January 30th, andhad him thrown off.*** Hoppy, who was on bail, organized the greatestof the underground events, the "24 Hour TechnicolourDream" at Alexandra Palace on April 29th, to raise funds forthe defence of the paper. When his trial came up, he insisted onpleading not guilty though he had no defence. He had a previousconviction for possession of cannabis but insisted on a jurytrial, which meant going before a judge of the Crown Court andrisking a longer sentence than one year. Hoppy completed aclassical recipe for self-imprisonment by lecturing the court onthe need to legalize cannabis. Sentencing him to nine monthsimprisonment on June 1st, the Deputy Chairman of Inner LondonSessions, A. Gordon Friend, said: I have just heard what your views are on the possession of cannabis and the smoking of it. This is not a matter I can overlook - You are a pest to society. * Lord Thompson, proprietor of The Times,obtained an injunction to stop the use of the word"Times" in the title. The paper then became"IT" until Max Handley restored its correct name in themid seventies. Incidently the girl in the logo is not Clara Bow.Its Theda Bara. ** According to Tom Driberg. *** Peter Fryer - "A Map of theUnderground", Encounter, October 1967, pp. 9-10 A sympathetic account of the casewas published by Clive Goodwin in Tribune and Christopher Loguecontributed a poem "For John Hopkins, imprisoned inWandsworth Jail", which appeared in the New Statesman onJuly 7th. The next day, June 2nd, Hoppy's friends met atIndica. I raised my idea of advertising in The Times.* Miles saidhe thought he knew where the money might be found. He had been toschool with his partner, Peter Asher, who was half of the pop duo"Peter and Gordon", a "one-hit wonder." PeterAsher's sister, Jane, was Paul McCartney's girlfriend. McCartneyhad several times contributed small sums to keep IT going. By theend of the day he had offered to guarantee the cost of theadvertisement, which was #1800. I was not as surprised as I might have been atthis turn of events. I had gone to the meeting thinking about theplight of the Beatles and their record company, EMI. "SgtPepper" had been officially released the preceding day. Ihad purchased a copy from the HMV Shop in Notting Hill on the27th of May and had been listening to it continuously. Earlier inthe year the single Strawberry Fields/Penny Lane suggested thatthe Beatles had become enthusiastic proponents of LSD. "SgtPepper" reinforced this impression. McCartney had also givenan ill-advised interview to Life magazine. The Beatles had"pissed" on their clean image as explicitly as theRolling Stones had "pissed" on a garage forecourt inJune 1965. The establishment was ready to send the RollingStones to prison. Now it looked as if the Beatles would be next.Something had to be done to get them off the hook. Nobody wantedthem arrested, but it was difficult to see an alternative. Iproposed, in effect, to change the issue from LSD to pot and toassociate the Beatles with leading figures in the arts andsciences in a legitimate protest from 'within the system.' It isnot in any way surprising that McCartney was willing to back theadvertisement or that Rees-Mogg was willing to publish it. I went along with Miles to discuss theproject with McCartney. Unless my memory is playing tricks on me,McCartney thrust a copy of Sergent Pepper into my hands and said,"Listen to it through headphones on acid." Theconversation that followed was, however, sedate. McCartney waswell aware of the power of public statements coming from theBeatles. He realized that if they spoke out on too many issues,their influence would be diluted. But pot was going to be anexception. McCartney said that the Beatles and their managerBrian Epstein would all put their names to the advertisement andhe agreed that the project would be left entirely in my hands. Hehoped that his participation in the funding could be kept quiet.It came to the attention of the Evening Standard the next day. Ireceived a call from the Diary, from Max Hastings or JulianNorridge translated from Cherwell. "How could you possiblyknow?" I asked. The source, I was immediately told, was theeditor, Charles Wintour. Later I spoke to McCartney on the phone. Weagreed that Phillip Oates could say in his first"Atticus" in the Sunday Times (eventually published onJuly 9th) that all four Beatles would be among those contributingto the cost of the advertisement. Then, on the eve ofpublication, when I attended The Times to inspect the proofs, theadvertising manager, R. Grant Davidson, got cold feet.Publication had been delayed for a week whilst he checked all thenames. Now he asked for payment in advance. I rang the onlyperson I had met in the Beatles organization, Peter Brown of themusic publishing company, Northern Music (NEMS). He sent roundhis personal cheque for #1800. Someone later told me that he hadbeen reimbursed from a Beatles advertising account. Probably noneof the Beatles was out of pocket. As the advertising manager's caution indicates,the publication of the advertisement was a near thing. Thedeciding factor in persuading the Times to publish and theBeatles to meet the cost was probably the sensational case of theRolling Stones, which began on the 27th of June. The verdictscame on Thursday the 30th. Richards was sentenced to a year inprison on the premises charge and Jagger was given three monthsfor possession of four amphetamine tablets known as 'blackbombers.' Both were first offenders. They were released on bailthe following day. That night there was a spontaneousdemonstration outside the News of the World building in Fleetstreet. No one had cared enough to demonstrate in Fleet Streetsince the first world war, and no one would ever care enough todo so again. The police turned dogs on the demonstrators and sixpeople were arrested. The demonstrations continued into the earlyhours of the morning. The next day, Richards and Jagger werereleased on bail. It being Friday, the members of the undergroundclub, UFO, over a thousand persons in extravagant dress, marchedat midnight from Tottenham, Court Road to the statue of Eros atPiccadilly Circus, where they were joined by several hundredmembers of other West End clubs. I remember Pat Arrowsmith of CNDwringing her hands in anguish, being quite unable to comprehendour tactics. We then formed up and marched to Fleet Street.Again the police turned dogs against us, and one demonstrator wasbitten. On Saturday the News of the World demonstrationscontinued for the third night running. A picture of part of thecrowd, myself among them, appeared on the front page of the Newsof the World. Mick Farren, a future editor of IT and lead singerof the Social Deviants, was beaten by the police and a number ofothers were arrested, including Suzie Creamcheese. Rees-Mogg's celebrated leading article,"Who breaks a butterfly on a wheel?" appeared in TheTimes on the same day, Saturday the 1st of July. My admirationfor it is subject to qualification. The editor did not addressthe issue squarely. He was moved by the spectacle of Jagger inhandcuffs, but said nothing at all about the twelve monthssentence meted out to Keith Richards, who was convicted of beingin control of premises used for the purpose of cannabis smoking.The leader did not question the justice of this charge, which wasan "absolute" offence that did not require guiltyknowledge on the part of the offender. Rees-Mogg did not mentioncannabis at all. The last "event" precedingpublication of the Times advertisement was the famous"Legalize Pot Rally" at Speakers Corner in Hyde Park onSunday the 16th of July. This was one of a series of"be-ins" which had been taking place at monthlyintervals at Primrose Hill and Hampstead Heath. "Vastpublicity for legalize pot rally. Steve Abrams appears ontelevision with amazing regularity," wrote InternationalTimes. In the event, several thousand people turned up, manywearing flowers and bells and many smoking pot openly. Most ofthe national newspapers gave "flower power" a doublepaged spread the next day. I presided at the meeting and introduced AlanGinsberg. When a policeman asked him to stop playing hisharmonium, which went against the by-laws, he was filmed givingthe policeman a flower. I decided to break up the meeting intosmall groups. I remember Stokely Carmichael, Alexis Korner,Carolyn Coon, Spike Hawkins, Clive Goodwin and Adrian Mitchellspeaking simultaneously, each mounted on a soap-box andsurrounded by a few hundred people. I was surprised to findmyremarks used in a schools program on "The Right toProtest" that seemed to be repeated on television mostafternoons. Everyone had a good time in Hyde Park. No one wasarrested. We had struck another blow against the image of theunkempt and violent drug addict. The aim of the advertisement was to influencethe Wootton subcommittee on hallucinogens. They had restrictedthemselves to pharmacological and medical studies on bothcannabis and LSD. We wanted them to report on cannabis alone, toemphasize the social aspect of its use and to make specificrecommendations for law reform. Crude attempts were made to discredit theprofessional competence of the sub-committee. Followingpublication of the Report on Cannabis, Quintin Hogg was quoted inThe Times, on January 9th, 1969: "A less suitable committeeis impossible to imagine. Half the subcommittee are doctors andthere is not a judge, or anybody practising at the criminal bar,among them." The eleven members of the sub-committee were K.J. Barraclough, a stipendiary magistrate and Chairman of thePoisons Board; Dr. Thomas Bewley, a psychiatrist in charge of theaddiction clinic at Tooting Bec Hospital, the Secretary and laterPresident of the Society for the Study of Addiction; PeterBrodie, Assistant Commissioner of Scotland Yard in charge of theC.I.D., also Vice President of Interpol; Dr. P. H. Connell, apsychiatrist at the Maudsley Hospital; Dr. J. D. P. Graham,professor of pharmacology; Dr. C. R. B. Joyce, Head of theDepartment of Pharmacology at London Hospital Medical College,later Director of Research at Ciba, Switzerland; Sir AubreyLewis, Emeritus Professor of Psychiatry at the Maudsley; Dr.Nicholas Malleson, a psychiatrist, Reader in Student Problems andHead of Student Health at London University, also the mostexperienced LSD therapist in Britain; H. W. Palmer of the GlaxoPharmaceuticals Company; Timothy Raison, Editor of New Society,later Tory MP, Minister of State for Home Affairs; MichaelSchofield, a sociologist who had conducted several studies forthe Home Office; and Baroness Wootton, a distinguished socialscientist, a serving magistrate, Governor of the BBC, veteran ofseveral Royal Commissions. I decided that Dr. Malleson was the key memberof the subcommittee. Had it been a jury, he would probably havebeen the foreman. I approached him and offered to rewrite thetext of the advertisemnt until it satisfied him. In return, Iasked to use his name privately in soliciting signatures. I hadmet Michael Schofield as a fellow member of the committeepreparing a Report on Drugs and Civil Liberties for the NationalCouncil on Civil Liberties (NCCL). I asked him to sign theadvertisement. The sub-committee met 17 times between April1967 and July 1968. At the first meeting the plan was to reportto the main committee in October. The report was to be restrictedin scope and to treat both cannabis and LSD. Before theadvertisement appeared, the committee limited its enquiries topharmacological and medical questions. According to Michael Schofield, thesub-committee were not favourably disposed to begin with. At thefirst meeting one member said that research was not necessary andthat all the sub-committee had to do was to work out ways to"stop the spread of this filthy habit." During theearly meetings, six members wanted to take a hard line, four wereundecided and two felt that the penalties for possession were toosevere.* The two liberals were probably Schofield and Malleson.It follows that Lady Wootton took some persuading. If there was a consensus of informed medicalopinion on cannabis, the sub-committee would have to recognizeit. The important thing was to do what could be done to persuadethem to report on cannabis alone and to broaden the scope oftheir enquiry, to give proper consideration to the social aspectsof cannabis use and to make specific recommendations for lawreform. My endeavour in the text of the advertisement was todefine the issues for a public debate. The debate began immediately. The advertisementwas mentioned in Parliament on the day of its appearance. Fourdays later, the headlines were about the savage sentence of fiveyears' imprisonment and a 10,000 fine or an extra year whichJudge Argyle passed on a black man charged with"possession" of cannabis. He did this, he said toexpress his disapproval of the Soma advertisement.** He alsoclaimed that 69 of 70 heroin addicts in Birmingham had"started on cannabis." On the same day, Friday the 28th, the Somaadvertisement was the subject of an adjournment debate in theHouse of Commons proposed by Paul Channon. The Minister of State,Alice Bacon (Later Baroness Bacon), claimed that 97 per cent ofheroin addicts known to the Home Office had "started oncannabis." She seems to have invented this figure. Herspeech was racist in tone and credited cannabis and LSD with theimportation of negro music and Indian spirituality. She comparedMcCartney unfavourably with a now forgotten singer called"Lulu." However, she said that the issues raised in theadvertisement would be considered by the Wootton sub-committee,and she committed the Government to taking their Report intoconsideration in framing new legislation. * Michael Schofield - The Strange Case of Pot,Pelican Books, 1971. Schofield has a chapter about"Reactions to the Wootton Report" but he ignoresCallaghan's assertion that the sub-committee had been"overinfluenced" by the "lobby" responsiblefor the Soma advertisement. He also fails to mention the factthat he was a signatory to the advertisement. ** The man was regarded by the Court as a majorsupplier. Press reports did not specify the quantity of cannabisfound in his possession. The sentence was reduced onappeal. In this debate William Deedes outdid himself.He was under the illusion that hashish is far more dangerous thanmarijuana. Does anyone believe that if we were to end the black market in cannabis leaf by legalizing it, a black market in resin would not begin. That could undermine the nation. That is why I believe that those who sign public announcements assume very grave responsibilities unless they can back what they say with more knowledge than most of us,believe we have. Tom Driberg, who signed the Soma advertisement,read from his father's evidence to the East Indian Hemp DrugsCommission in 1892. I briefed Driberg and Channon and got to sitin the strangers box on the floor of the house during the debate. On Monday the 31st of July, a week followingthe publication of the advertisement, the conviction of KeithRichards was quashed and Jagger's prison sentence (for possessionof amphetamine tablets) was reduced to a conditional discharge.The Soma advertisement had asked for the abolition of thepremises offence and included a plea for the release of all thoseimprisoned for possession of cannabis. Soma was an informal organization when theadvertisement appeared. Later, it was incorporated as the SomaResearch Association, Ltd. There was a very distinguished Boardof Directors, including the most eminent living scientist,Francis Crick, F.R.S., who won a Nobel prize for his discoverywith James Watson of the structure of DNA. The Board includedfour psychiatrists: Professor Norman Zinberg of Harvard, whoseexperiment published in 1968 was the first authorised by the USgovernment and became the strongest affirmation of the relativelyharmless character of cannabis smoking; Dr. Anthony Storr, aleading establishment figure and author; Dr. R. D. Laing, theleading radical analyst of the day; and his colleague at thePhiladelphia Association, Dr. David Cooper. The other directorswere The Revd. Kenneth Leech, the leading authority on drug abusewithin the Church of England, an early advocate of the"legalization" of cannabis; Francis Huxley, the Oxfordanthropologist, and myself. Cooper, Crick, Huxley, Laing andStorr were signatories to the advertisement. Soma had five employees, including Don Aitken,the Secretary and Archivist; Derek Blackburn, Psychologist; andAdam Parker-Rhodes, Pharmacologist. Premises were at 438, FulhamRoad, SW6 and 4, Camden High Street, NW1. Soma had activeresearch and medical programs, the latter in collaboration withthe doctors at an affiliated NHS surgery in Notting Hill. Dr. IanDunbar was Medical Director of Soma and Dr. Sam Hutt was MedicalCorrespondent. Aitken and Blackburn prepared a bibliography ofcannabis. We did the first human experiments with the activeprinciple of cannabis, tetrahydracannabinol (THC), synthesized inour laboratory. We compared the action of the isomers of THC andtried to distinguish euphoria from intoxication by measuring theapparent tridimensionality of visual perception, the extent towhich the world appeared, as it were,"spaced-out." We could work with THC because its structurehad not been determined when the Dangerous Drugs Act was lastrevised. It had not been placed under UN control. Before we madeTHC, we obtained supplies of a purified form of cannabis, thealcoholic extract, which was made available on prescription.Extracts and tinctures of cannabis had been removed from thePharmacopoeia but were still listed in theExtrapharmacopoeia. Dr. Dunbar wrote a prescription for me on the18th of August 1967. I finally encashed it at an obscure branchof Boots in the East End. The prescription came with a letterthat said: "This is an historical document. I suggest youframe it." Later a pop group, the Aynesley DunbarRetaliation brought out a famous LP called "Dr. Dunbar'sPrescription." I put it to the Home Office Drugs Branch thatmost of the distinguished signatories to the advertisement andmany of those who commented on it had openly declared their useof cannabis. For example, the following paragraph ended a letterto The Guardian published on July 8th and shown on television in"What the Papers Say" : ... If anyone remains unconvinced by this mass of expert advice then I can only offer them the evidence of my own experience having smoked marijuana for many years without ill effects whatsoever. Yours faithfully Clive Goodwin 79 Cromwell Road London SW7 The Home Office obtained a legal opinionthat the part of the law which made it an absolute offence tokeep premises for the purposes of cannabis smoking did not applyto the smoking of purified cannabis; that is to say, smokingpreparations based on "extract of cannabis," BPC. Anapproach was then made to the UN drugs control apparatus, whoincreased the nominal UK quota of cannabis imports from 15 kilosper annum to 254 kilos. (Five hundredweight) Ganja was importedfrom India and made up by the botanical firm, Ransoms of Hitchen. One of the early debates was a seventy minutetelevision special on September 1st, 1967, a mock trial in theseries "Your Witness" in which Sir John Foster, Q.C.was to argue the case for cannabis against Leon Brittan. Sir Johndropped out and was replaced by Jonathan Aitken, a signatory tothe advertisement (now a minister in the Government).* Aitkenproposed to call me as a witness. I had in mind smoking pot as Igave evidence and presented myself for cross examination. The BBCresearcher, Esther Rantzen, agreed that this would be goodtelevision, and so I approached Dr. Dunbar for the firstprescription. * Sir John was at a meeting at the House ofCommons in June at which he, Jonathan Aitken, Humphry Berkeley,Tom Driberg and Brian Walden all agreed to sign theadvertisement. He later atoned for withdrawing from theadvertisement and the debate by joining Soma. Indeed, he sentalong his friend Princess Feuzy, who was a subject in ourresearch program. Leon Brittan was fully aware thatextracts and tinctures were controlled separately from cannabisand cannabis resin and that the prohibition on the use ofpremises for smoking cannabis did not apply to these purifiedforms. However, he was also aware that my live appearance wouldundermine his case. He therefore fudged the issue and insistedthat if I appeared the BBC would be liable to prosecution. It wascompromise in the end. I was not permitted to appear live, butthe BBC filmed me smoking at home, passing any risk onto mylandlord. The corporation thus obtained some stock film that wasreused a number of times. On the 10th of October, 1967 Jonathan Aitkenand I successfully argued a cannabis law reform motion againstProfessor Francis Camps and Robert Pitman at the London HospitalMedical College. The next day The Telegraph reported the warningthat Professor Camps had given about the alleged dangers ofcannabis, without noting the fact that his opinion had beenrejected by a large audience of doctors and medical students. I came up against Professor Camps again at aconference on drugs of the Student Humanist Federation atNottingham University on January 5th to 7th, 1968. The problemwas to get in the way of the newspapers reporting his remarks. Mysolution was to announce at the beginning of my talk that I wouldbe speaking under the influence of a prescribed form of cannabis.The Times, The Telegraph and The Guardian reported this event asif it had been a high wire act. On the 21st of November 1967, I had spokenagainst Leon Brittan at a Teach In at Guys Hospital. I did notlike his arrogance or his willingness to pontificate on a subjectof which he knew nothing. Fate was kind to me. After thepublication of the Wootton Report in 1969, I had a uniqueopportunity to flatten him. We debated the Report at BristolUniversity. Leon Brittan recalled the "Your Witness"television program. He told the Bristol Union I had insisted onbeing filmed at home because I knew I could not speak in publicunder the influence of cannabis. I rose to my feet, Leon Brittangave way. I turned to the president of the Union, and beingadvised that smoking was permitted, I resumed my seat, removed anenormous joint from my pocket and lit up. I went through anelaborate pantomime to distract the audience during his speech. Ipretended to be "zonked." Then it was my turn to speak.I was in my best form, and I think the Union voted unanimouslyfor the motion. Afterward, Brittan refused to believe I had beensmoking. He said I had pretended to inhale. Inevitably, the debate that gave me thegreatest satisfaction was at the Oxford Union on October 19th,1967. In my article in "The Book of Grass" I had saidthat the one place in Oxford where cannabis was not smoked wasthe Union society. Now, just months later, the Union voted infavour of changing the law. Dr. Laing and I were opposed by AnnMallalieu and the Revd. John McNicoll. William Paton, theProfessor of Pharmacology, spoke against cannabis from the floor,Earlier in the evening a motion of censure was passed against theProctors, who had suspended Cherwell because of its coverage ofdrugs. Dr. Yardley spoke from the floor in this debate. He and Ihad threshed out this matter on the television program "24Hours" on the 11th. During the Thatcher period, every attempt wasmade to blame the permissive society" of the 1960s on thepolitical left. In fact, the left was left out, at least in 1967.Cannabis was a libertarian issue which became very popular withthe Young Conservatives. When I spoke at a teach-in organized bythe Young Communists League, I faced a hostile audience for thefirst time. Speaker after speaker rose to say that cannabis was acapitalist plot. I was "intent on distracting the workers from their revolutionaryduties." John McNicoll, who also spoke in this debate, hadaccused me, in the Evening Standard diary, of being acrypto-communist. He said I had taken up drugs when lecturing atLeningrad University. Now, with a delicious political instinct,he accused me of being an American. In a long interview withPenthouse magazine, published in December 1968, I said thatthough Tariq Ali and Clive Goodman had signed the Somaadvertisement, "We want nothing to do with theirrevolution." I added: "You can't smokeMarxism." I think the decisive event in the debate aboutcannabis may have been a meeting of the Society for the Study ofAddiction at the premises of the British Medical Association onNovember 7th 1967. The press were barred from this meeting, whichwas attended by officials from the Home Office, senior policeofficers, most of the Advisory Committee and many of the leadingmedical authorities. Dr. Storr and I spoke on behalf of Soma. Wewere opposed by Dr. Cedric Wilson of Liverpool University, whomade a great fool of himself by including gangrene among thesymptoms of chronic abuse of cannabis. He also repeated the claimmade by William Deedes in the House of Commons on 28 July, thatthere were seven million hashish addicts in Egypt and that theGovernment there was at its wits end to know what to do about it.I quoted an article published the preceding year in the U.N.Bulletin on Narcotics, a study sponsored by the Egyptiangovernment, which said there were 180,000 "habitues" ofcannabis in Egypt and that a study of matched groups of users andnon-users did not reveal any significant differences between thegroups. The discussion from the floor was the importantpart of the meeting. One expert after another rose to affirm theinnocuous status of cannabis. They seemed to vie with one anotherin devising new arguments. It may not have reached the height ofa religious revival, but I was left with the feeling that aconsensus had been realized, that the Djinn was well out of thebottle. In November 1967 the reforming Home Secretary,Roy Jenkins, exchanged places with James Callaghan, the disgracedChancellor of the Exchequer, who had devalued the pound. Inopposition, Callaghan had been the paid Parliamentary lobbyistfor the police federation. He was "Sunny Jim, thepoliceman's friend." His agenda was not that of the Labourparty; indeed, it is difficult to find a more destructiveinfluence in the history of that party. Through his opposition tovital trade union reforms, his failure at the Treasury and hispointing up what he called the "permissive society" asthe legacy of his predecessor at the Home Office, he probablycost Labour the 1970 general election. Later his incompetence asprime minister cost Labour the 1979 election, and in 1983 and1987 he intervened against his own party because of hisopposition to nuclear disarmament. Jenkins defended the non-partisan socialreforms of the decade and insisted that Britain was a"civilized society," rather than a permissive one.* Irecall taking part in a Third Program discussion of perhapsunprecedented length (from 8:45 pm until past midnight)on November 9th, 1969, in which Warden Sparrow of All Souls,Michael Foot, Professor Alasdair MacIntyre (a signatory to theadvertisement) and I discussed the question, "Is BritainCivilized." Bernard Levin was in the Chair. I am nowinclined to the view that Britain has over the past quartercentury become intolerant of dissent and especially ofdissenters, that it has many and various means of denying themthe "oxygen of publicity", so that the question mightseem to be not whether Britain is a "civilized"society, but whether, as a prime minister seemed to imply, itaspires to be a "society" at all. * Transport House distributed the text ofJenkins' remarks to the Abingdon Constituency Labour Party onJuly 19th, 1969 At the Home Office, Callaghan was intent onsalvaging his popular reputation, and happy to take the low road.He made known his opposition to the Wootton Report. He made anumber of public interventions which could be interpreted asattempts to sabotage the Report, or to dictate terms to theCommittee. He was not obliged to publish the Report, formallysubmitted to him on November 1st, 1968 and he must have realizedthat the publication of an expert report which exoneratedcannabis would do everything to undermine the existinglegislation, since it virtually said that the only reason torefrain from smoking cannabis was the fact that it remained,"for the time being," illegal. There were reports inthe papers that some members of the Committee were prepared toresign if the Report was not published. I was myselfcontemplating a pirated edition of the Report. Printed copies of the Wootton Report weredelivered before Christmas and distributed on January 7th, 1969.The press were advised that Callaghan intended to denounce thefindings and recommendations of the Report. The Wootton Report went further than the Somaadvertisement in affirming the relative harmlessness of cannabis.An often quoted summary (paragraph 29) allied the conclusions ofthe Wootton Report with those of the great reports of 1893 and1944: Having reviewed all the material available to us we find ourselves in agreement with the conclusions reached by the Indian Hemp Drugs Commission appointed by the Government of India (1893-4) and the New York Mayor's Committee on Marihuana (1944) that "the long term consumption of cannabis in moderate doses has no harmful effects." Paragraph 67, introducing the Section onGeneral Conclusion and Recommendations states: The evidence before us shows that: An increasing number of people, mainly young, in all classes of society are experimenting with this drug, and substantial numbers use it regularly for social pleasure. There is no evidence that this activity is causing violent crime or aggressive anti-social behaviour, or is producing in otherwise normal people conditions of dependence or psychosis, requiring medical treatment. The experience of many other countries is that once it is established cannabis-smoking tends to spread. In some parts of Western society where interest in mood-altering drugs is growing, there are indications that it may become a functional equivalent of alcohol. In spite of the threat of severe penalties and considerable effort at enforcement the use of cannabis in the United Kingdom does not appear to be diminishing. There is a body of opinion that criticises the present legislative treatment of cannabis on the ground that it exaggerates the dangers of the drug and needlessly interferes with civil liberty. The Committee proposed that new legislation bedrafted that would distinguish between hard and soft drugs andbetween drug trafficking and drug taking. It proposed that thepenalties for cannabis be reduced to the point where minoroffences would not merit imprisonment. The key recommendation wasto reduce the maximum penalty on summary conviction forpossession to four months imprisonment. The committee alsoproposed to abolish absolute offences (i.e., the liability inrespect to the use of premises) and called for a legal frameworkfor cannabis research and medical treatment using cannabis andits variants. The Government's expert advisors had confirmedthe apparently surreal assertions of the cannabis lobby. Thiscompletely knocked the pins from under any attempt to enforce orjustify the law. It discharged the burden of proof that the"cannabis lobby" had assumed. Whatever was said againstus could also be said against the Advisory Council and againstCallaghan, who had not been bound to publish the Report. Theterms of the debate were now changed. If the Government wanted tosend people to prison for smoking cannabis, they had to show thatits use was harmful and socially damaging. But the further stepof legalizing cannabis depended on amassing proof, over a periodof time, that cannabis was not a social menace. The Report went out of its way to credit theinfluence of the Times advertisement. I quote from an article inthe Guardian diary which was planted with a view to facilitatingCallaghan's denunciation of the Report. It was a set up,illustrated by a photograph. Soft Sell LOBBYISTS are the great unseen, the great unhonoured, not least by Government enquiries. But Steve Abrams' pot-boilers have never been that kind of lobby, and the Wootton Committee isn't that kind of enquiry. The Cannabis report out this morning delivers a rare and specific testimonial: "Our first enquiries were proceeding - without publicity - into the pharmacological and medical aspects when other developments gave our study new and much increased significance. An advertisement in the Times on the 24th of July 1967 represented that the long asserted dangers of cannabis were exaggerated and that the related law was socially damaging, if not unworkable. This was followed by a wave of debate about these issues in Parliament, the Press and elsewhere, and reports of enquiries e.g. by the National Council for Civil Liberties. This publicity made more explicit the nature of some current "protest" about official policy on drugs; defined more clearly some of the main issues in our study; and led us to give greater attention to the legal aspects of the problem. Government spokesmen made it clear that any future development of policy on cannabis would have to take account of the Advisory Committee's report. Accordingly, we decided to give first priority to presenting our views on cannabis." Publication of the Wootton Report provoked anorganized campaign of vilification in the popular press. A famousheadline in The Daily Express described the Report as a"junkies charter." Some people in high places and somevested interests were getting worried. Until then, the issue oflegalizing cannabis had seemed to be a joke. In the Parliamentary debate on the WoottonReport on January 29th, 1969, Callaghan gave his reasons forrejecting, or ostensibly rejecting, the Wootton Report: I think it came as a surprise, if not a shock, to most people when that notorious advertisement appeared in the Times in 1967 to find that there is a lobby for legalizing cannabis. The House should recognize that this lobby exists, and my reading of the Report is that the Wootton sub-committee was overinfluenced by this lobby. I had the same impression as the Rt. Hon. and learned gentleman (Quintin Hogg) that it was compromise at the end; that those who were in favour of legalizing 'pot' were all the time pushing the other members back, so that eventually these remarkable conclusions emerged, that it would be wrong to legalize it but that the penalties should be reduced. The existence of this lobby is something that the House and public opinion should take into account and be ready to combat, as I am. It is another aspect of the so-called permissive society, and I am glad that my decision has enabled the house to call a halt in the advancing tide of so-called permissiveness. Articles in the Evening Standard(February 3rd) and other newspapers said that the Chairman of theAdvisory Council, Sir Edward Wayne and Lady Wootton were bothcontemplating resignation to mark their protest against the HomeSecretary's insulting remarks in Parliament. On February 5th theTimes published a joint letter from them, which said, inpart: We regard this statement as offensive to our distinguished colleagues and to ourselves, and particularly to the eminent medical men who signed our Report, and we particularly deprecate the implication of the emotive word 'lobby' in this context. We would also point out that after hearing the evidence no member of the sub-committee recommended legalization. In October I wrote in the Soma Newsletter (np.3, pp. 4-5) that Callaghan, for all his blustering, had littleoption other than to change the law: The Government is now drafting comprehensive new legislation on psychotropic drugs, including cannabis. The legislation aims at introducing more flexible control of drugs and consolidating the control presently exercised in respect of the Dangerous Drugs Act and the Drugs (Prevention of Misuse) Act. Apparently the new legislation will distinguish between drugs by introducing a two tiered system of penalties for what may, for convenience, be termed "hard" and "soft" drugs. Our understanding is that the problem of whether to classify cannabis as a hard or soft drug has not yet been faced. It is felt, however, that because the Home Secretary has asked the Wootton Committee to continue in its advisory capacity, it will be very difficult to justify the continued classification of cannabis as a hard drug in the context of new legislation. ... It should be recalled that despite his posturing the Home Secretary did not refuse to implement the Wootton Report. He merely refused to legislate unilaterally and immediately on cannabis at a time when new comprehensive legislation was already being planned. The story of implementing the Wootton Report istold in a little noticed passage in the Crossman diaries.(pp.836-7) After the legislation had been through the Home AffairsCommittee, there was an "absolutely outrageous pressleak." This presumably refers to a page one lead in theSunday Mirror on February 1st, 1970 : DRUG LAW SHOCK Jim Changes his Mind. Penalties for 'pot' smokers to be cut. Home Secretary James Callaghan has has had a dramatic change of mind on drugs. He has decided that people who smoke 'pot' should no longer be punished as severely as those using heroin. He has gone further by deciding that the penalties for possessing both hard and soft drugs should be cut. ... Mr. Callaghan only a year ago championed the cause of holding the line against drug permissiveness. ...Last year Mr. Callaghan denounced what he called "a notorious advertisement" in the Times - signed by many public figures including the Beatles - which urged that possessing cannabis should either be legalized, or at most punishable by a fine of not more than #25. Crossman's diary entry for Thursday February26th says that Callaghan had come back to the cabinet to say that"he now proposed not to have any reduction at all in anypenalties on cannabis." Crossman notes that this wasunusual. "One usually only brings things to Cabinet whenthere is disagreement at a Cabinet Committee." As thediscussion continued "it became absolutely clear that theissue was whether to kowtow to public opinion or not." TheCabinet divided. "Every member of the cabinet who had beento university voted one way and everyone else voted theother." Wilson voted with the antis. Having been outvoted bya clear majority, Callaghan published his Misuse of Drugs Bill onMarch 11th. The myth that Callaghan refused to implementthe proposals of the Wootton Report owes its survival to the factthat the labour government was defeated in the general electionof 1970. However, the legislation was bipartisan and it wasreintroduced by Reginald Maudling for the tories. It became lawas the Misuse of Drugs Act 1971. The maximum penalty forpossession of cannabis on summary conviction was reduced by halfto six months. When the Act received the Royal Assent in 1973 theLord Chancellor, Lord Hailsham (formerly Quintin Hogg), advisedthe conference of the Magistrates Association on sentencing.(Times, 12 October 1973) He reasserted the insistence of theAdvisory Council that minor offences did not merit imprisonment.Lord Hailsham told magistrates to treat cannabis users with"becoming moderation." He said: "Set aside yourprejudice, if you have one, and reserve the sentence ofimprisonment for suitably flagrant cases of large scaletrafficking." It must have been difficult for him to setaside his own prejudice long enough to say that, but hedid! Ten years after the Wootton report, Ronald Buttwrote in The Times, without intended irony, that we should begrateful to Callaghan who put his foot down and saved us from thepermissive society by rejecting the Wootton Report. (17 March1979) When he wrote this article Butt should have known that theCriminal Justice Act of 1977 had reduced the maximum sentence onsummary conviction for possession to three months, less than thefour months proposed in the Wootton Report. He should also havebeen aware of the 1978 Report on Sentencing of the AdvisoryCouncil, which proposed a further reduction in penalties, endingthe status of possession of cannabis as an "arrestableoffence" (i.e. one for which a warrant is not required tomake an arrest) and abolishing the residual powers of the courtsto deprive offenders of their liberty. However, the Report notedthat the Courts were already observing this condition inpractice; they no longer imposed prison sentences for simplepossession offences.* Margaret Thatcher was heavily indebted to thetobacco and alcohol lobbies. She sought to use the drugs issuefor political purposes. The wise counsel of civil servants andprofessional advisers was by-passed when a planeload of tame MPsdeparted for a Cooks Tour of American lowlife organized by theU.S. Drugs Enforcement Agency. Thatcher opened the doors to smugglers byreducing the number of customs staff and she spent severalmillion pounds of public money on advertisements for the use ofheroin and cocaine, against the advice of the Advisory Council.But the use of cannabis was so widespread that any attempt tofocus on its dangers would have derailed the entire campaign.Cannabis was not singled out for attention and soon references tocannabis became conspicuous by their absence. There was no way tostress the dangers of narcotics without pointing up the relativeharmlessness of cannabis. On this issue Thatcher was caught in atrap of her own making. Of course she refused to implement thefurther proposals for cannabis law reform made in the 1978 Reporton Sentencing and re-affirmed in the 1982 Report onCannabis." However, she did make a crucial concession,granting Chief Constables discretion to caution offenders ratherthan bring them to trial. This practise has grown and now themajority of offenders are cautioned and thus escapeconviction. * Report on A Review of the Classification ofControlled Drugs and of Penalties Under Schedules 2 and 4 of theMisuse of Drugs Act 1971 (15 December 1978) The Advisory Committee on Drug Dependence wasan ad hoc body. The Misuse of Drugs Act made it a statutory bodyakin to the Poisons Board. It was renamed the Advisory Council onthe Misuse of Drugs. ** Home Office Advisory Council on the Misuseof Drugs - Report of the Expert Group on the Effects of CannabisUse (1982). The Wootton Report was implemented twenty yearsago. Since that time we have had a "half-way house",and possession of cannabis has been virtually"decriminalized." One solicitor, Bernard Simons, whohas dealt with many drugs cases, described the present situationin The Independent on July 22nd: ... For me, twenty-five years ago, it was really important in my life - as a libertarian issue. Today the police rarely prosecute; they're told to administer cautions, and even bringing small amounts into the country doesn't lead to court. In my youth, in Notting Hill, people were stopped and searched all the time. and they had nothing on them. You used to have police raids on parties, where they'd find a bit of cannabis and arrest everyone in the room. Twelve people would appear in court charged with the same bit of cannabis. It doesn't happen any more, certainly not in London - though I can't speak for rural Wales. The police arrest users by accident. If theyare looking for a dealer or a thief and they find some 'dope',they make a charge. The few cases that show up in the statisticsas leading to imprisonment are artefacts; for example, a sentenceserved concurrently for possession of cannabis and another moreserious drug or non drug offence. In some other cases thequantities of cannabis seized are rather large. A decision to legalize cannabis in the contextof EC drug policy would be bolstered by the results of suchresearch as has been done in the past twenty years, mainly inAmerica. However, the decision is likely to depend on the sizeand growth of the market. The media have muddied the waters byexaggerating the extent of cannabis smoking in the 1960s. Aleader and several articles in The Independent have insisted thatcannabis use is currently greater than at any time since the1960s. In fact, official statistics imply a steady growth incannabis use over the past quarter century. The total of cannabisseized in 1967 was 295 kilos and 457 plants. Currently seizuresare running at about 1,000 kilos per week. In twenty-five yearsseizures have increased by two orders of magnitude. Cannabis is normally sold in the form ofhashish at a price of about #30 for a quarter of an ounce. Thatis a week's supply for a user who smokes all day every day. Iassume that a typical user smokes cannabis two or three times aweek and consumes about a sixteenth of an ounce per week. On thisbasis, the current level of seizures alone would be enough tosupport a user population of half a million. But the customs usea notional figure of five or ten per cent for the average levelof seizures.* It is therefore likely that there are severalmillion regular cannabis smokers in Britain, up to ten per centof the population. Probably the market has been saturated.Cannabis is not everyone's cup of tea, and many people do notenjoy its effects or are unable to experience any effect at allfrom taking it. The experience of decriminalization in Holland isthat further relaxation of control does not produce any long termincrease in use. * In the 'sixties the proportion of seizureswas probably lower than it is today, partially because thepenalties did not distinguish users from suppliers. The legalization of cannabis may now be on thecards, but how will it be done? "Legalization" is anextremely vague expression. My personal view has always been thatthe vendor should be the State; that any other solution wouldintroduce a vested interest in maximizing the use of cannabis,and, in one way or another, advertising it. In oral evidence tothe Wootton sub-committee on December 5th, 1967 I said that therecent legalization of gambling had been a disaster because thecrooks who controlled illegal gambling remained in control oflegalized gambling. Yet there is today, in 1993, a strong opinionin favour of legitimizing the existing trade in drugs, much ofwhich is in the hands of organized crime and terroristgroups. Mr. Lucas, a psychiatrist, asked me if Ithought the tobacco companies should sell cannabis to help themto phase out of the production of tobacco. I said that thetobacco companies should not be allowed to sell cannabis and thatI doubted they should even be permitted to sell tobacco. Originally, I hoped that cannabis could be madeavailable through liberal prescribing of standardizedpreparations. Since the 1970s I have supported those who favour arationing system loosely tied to the National Health System. Ithink that prospective users should be required to purchase acannabis licence, which could be obtained from a NHS surgery. Thelicence would allow them to purchase up to the equivalent of oneounce of cannabis per month from a chemists shop. This would makeit a slight nuisance to obtain cannabis. The doctor would not beasked to prescribe the drug, but would be entitled to know hispatient was a cannabis user. All profits from such a scheme couldgo to the NHS. It would be worth a few billions per annum. Inthis way the gangsters are cut out, a small overflow is provided,the forms of cannabis available are standardized and purified,and the profits go to a good cause. Moreover, such a scheme wouldbe reversible. A detailed consideration of alternative licensingsystems was provided in a book, Cannabis : Options for Change,published by the semi-official Institute for the Study of DrugDependence in 1979. Hopefully, the solution of nationalizingcannabis may be the only one which is compatible with the controlrequirements of the UN Single Convention on Narcotic Drugs, towhich Britain is a signatory. The Convention requires all statesto enact laws prohibiting the "possession" of cannabisand providing for deprivation of liberty in suitable cases. Thisconvention was brought in as a result of long pressure from theU. S. Treasury, which acts on behalf of the alcohol lobby inAmerica, and controlled or prohibited cannabis in America in thesame way that it prohibited "moonshine", as taxevasion. The Federal Bureau of Narcotics controlled by H. J.Anslinger, a former commissioner of prohibition and a relative ofHoover's, was part of the U.S. Treasury. It was succeeded by theDrugs Enforcement Authority, which is part of the Department ofJustice. The Wootton Report was followed by similarreports in other countries including the Le Dain Report in Canada and the Shafer Report in America.Following publication of the latter, by a PresidentialCommission, the government looked into the legal status ofcannabis under the Single Convention. Apparently, they obtainedan opinion based on the French text of the Convention that theoffence of possession" had the meaning of the offencedescribed in British law as "possession with intent tosell" as opposed to simple possession. The conclusion seemedto be that cannabis could be legalized, though only with thestate acting as the seller. It will, however, be difficult or impossible toresist a claim from the tobacco industry. For example, onetobacco company pays Lady Thatcher a fee in excess of #1,000,000p.a. to act as a "consultant." Such sums are paid outto protect the public image of an industry which may have killedoff a hundred million people worldwide in the course of thetwentieth century. To the tobacco industry the Single Conventionis a paper tiger. Supplement On the 8th of July 1968, the News of the Worlddevoted its entire pre-tabloid front page to an attack on me.There was a marvelous picture, borrowed from the Sunday Times andretouched, and an arrow pointing at my head. The headline said:This dangerous man MUST be stopped! The article had no content;it attacked my plans to manufacture small quantities of THC forresearch purposes but admitted that the Home Office was aware ofthe project and had no objection to it. Four days later, on the 12th of July, theOxford drugs squad searched the digs of a gentleman named StephenAbraham, who lived with his landlady, Miss Susan Ratcliffe, in ahouse at 88, Sunningwell Road. A roach, a spent cannabiscigarette, was found in the room he occupied with Miss Ratcliffe.The police also found an empty bottle of tincture of cannabis andsome tobacco with a green tinge. Stephen Abraham was an Americanand a member of Pembroke College. He had just taken first classhonours in maths. He smoked dope like a chimney and he too had aprescription (arranged by me) from Dr. Dunbar. I am sorry that Graham Greene (a signatory tothe Soma advertisement) is not alive to read this, to learn aboutthe "other Steve Abrams" I kept in Oxford to getarrested on my behalf.* Steve Abraham beat a strategic retreat toAmerica, but on August 1st, his girlfriend, Miss Ratcliffe, wascharged with the absolute offence of allowing him to smokecigarettes dipped in cannabis tincture in their room. The Courtand the police accepted that Abraham had a legalprescription. The case was heard at Oxford City MagistratesCourt on October 17th, 1968. The Bench of Magistrates, includedMrs. H. Y. Bullock, wife of Sir Alan Bullock, the Head of myCollege, then elevated to the rank of Vice Chancellor. She musthave been aware of the deliberate confusion of identities. Somapaid half the cost of the defence, who were represented by oursolicitor, Martin Polden. Expert evidence for the defence wasprovided by Dr. Ann Robinson, assistant to Professor FrancisCamps at London Hospital. (Dr. Robinson is now Professor ofFerensic Medicine at London Hospital Medical College.) I have no criminal record and have never beencharged with any drugs offence. I was an Advanced Student of St.Catherine's College from 1960 to 1967. I have never met MissRatcliffe and have never been to 88, Sunningwell Road, Oxford. In1968 I lived at 81, Holland Road, London W11 with Jane Firbank,to whom I was then married. The forensic scientist from Aldermaston whogave evidence for the police said that his tests did notdistinguish between cannabis resin and extract of cannabis. Hepromptly concluded that they were the same substance. He insistedthat the product of evaporating the alcohol in tincture ofcannabis (made by adding alcohol to extract of cannabis) was infact cannabis resin, whereas the extract was made by percolatingcannabis leaf (marijuana) in alcohol. It contained only thosecomponents of cannabis that dissolved in alcohol. It was argued in evidence that Abraham wasentitled to be in possession of a bottle of tincture of cannabisbut not to open it. If a fraction of the alcohol that the extractwas mixed with evaporated, that would be a step in the directionof "manufacturing cannabis resin." By the same token,opening a bottle of cough syrup might be construed as a step inthe direction of manufacturing morphine. By pouring the contentsof a bottle of tincture of cannabis, cost 30/onto a tin oftobacco, Abraham was supposed to have, transformed the house intoa "factory" for manufacturing Ireefers', according to areport in The Times. According to The Telegraph, Abrahammanufactured enough cannabis "to supply five hospitals forseven years." That is to say, he used up a bottle oftincture of cannabis, the same amount used by the five Oxfordhospitals over the past seven years. This case was upheld on appeal by BrianGibbens, the Recorder of Oxford on January 11th, 1969, four daysafter the Wootton Report was published. The decision wascriticised in legal and medical journals for making a nonsense ofthe law and it was ignored outside Oxford. However, theimpression was created that following a campaign in the New ofthe World, I had been convicted (in absentia) of"manufacturing" cannabis resin in Oxford. This may be a great joke, but it got on mycredit records here and in America, and it left the police withan open warrant in my name. I was picked up several times inLondon, the premises of Soma were raided, and I realized that itwas time to pack it in. Callaghan had just published his DrugsBill, so I could claim a victory. There is buried somewhere in the personalcolumns of The Times, probably in January or February 1969 asmall announcement advertising the fact that Steve Abrams is notSteve Abrams &c. On July 24th 1992, twenty-five years after thepublication of the Soma advertisement, a new full pagedadvertisement appeared in The Times, sponsored by the ReleaseLegal Emergency and Drugs Service Ltd., registered charity no.801118. Registered charities are not permitted tocampaign for law reform, but Release, in soliciting contributionsto defray the cost (#17,000) of the advertisement altered theirstationery to remove the designation of their charitable statusand allowed the press, e.g.? the Independent, to describe them asa "soft drugs campaigning group." Prospective contributors and signatories to theRelease advertisement were sent a poster reproduction of the Somaadvertisement, together with advice that affirmed or stronglyimplied that they had published the original as their callingcard, twenty-five years earlier. None of the signatories to theRelease advertisement got to see the embarrassing document towhich their names were appended. I told the organizers of the Releaseadvertisement that they were in breach of copyright incirculating posters of the Soma advertisement, and that they werealso guilty of the additional offence of "passing off."The Director of Release, Michael Goodman, a barrister, and one ofthe "founders" of the organization, Mr. Rufus Harris, alaw clerk, ignored my protestations and authorised the use of aphotograph of me, ostensibly smoking a joint, on the invitationto their 25th anniversary party. Release did come into existence in 1967, but ittook no significant part in the cannabis law reform movement ofthe late sixties. To begin with, Release was a 24 hour referralservice for a group of solicitors who specialised in defendingdrugs cases. Release would have cut itself off from reputablesources of funding had it campaigned for the legalization ofcannabis. The solicitors, who were onto a good thing, would havebeen compromised. The earliest reference to Release in The Timesis in October 1967 and all of the references are to fund raisingstunts arranged by Carolyn Coon or criticisms of the police. Moresurprisingly, perhaps, there is no reference to Release in the"pot people's newspaper" International Times in thesummer of 1967. A complete history of the early work of Releaseis given in The Release Report by Caroline Coon and Rufus Harris(Sphere Books, 1969). This book covers the wider interests of theauthors in the drugs problem but the text contains no referenceto the Wootton Report or to an advertisement in the Times. Theauthors seem to think it wrong to, as James Callaghan said,"look at one drug in isolation." They contentthemselves with a bland and ambiguous injunction, still in use,to "change the drug laws." If this seems tame, it is. Release has agovernment grant of #3,000 per week, covering sixty per cent ofits operating expenditure. In twenty-five years Release has notdone anything adventurous, nor has it published any worthwhileresearch. Now independent action is out of the question. Theorchestrated pre-publicity for the 1992 advertisement, with themedia acting in concert, regurgitating handouts from the HomeOffice Press office was an embarassing confirmation of the extentof news management in the one party state that is Britaintoday. I know that things are hard, and that anorganization like Release must be encouraged to establish itsstreet credibility and to raise money on its own by tapping avein of sympathy among a drug using population of severalmillions and preaching to the converted. I am not happy aboutRelease living on my good will, but I am amused that the HomeOffice now want to get in on the act, to claim that theythemselves inspired the 1967 advertisement. Contents | Feedback | Search DRCNet Library | Schaffer Library | Major Studies | WoottonReport WT02-B03-39IA086-000614-B042-171http://206.61.184.43:80/schaffer/Library/studies/wootton/wootmenu.htm 206.61.184.43 19970122020432 text/html 2631HTTP/1.0 200 OKDate: Wednesday, 22-Jan-97 02:04:29 GMTServer: WebSitePro/1.1f (S/N wpo-0deb)Allow-ranges: bytesContent-type: text/htmlLast-modified: Saturday, 28-Dec-96 06:45:26 GMTContent-length: 2414 The Wootton Report - Main Menu Contents | Feedback | Search DRCNet Library | Schaffer Library | Major Studies The Wootton Report Thanks to Steven Abrams, the full text of the Wootton Reportwill soon be coming to these pages. We invite you to read hismost interesting history of this report, listed below. Hashish Fudge - The Times Advertisementand the Wootton Report, by Steve Abrams Extract from 'The Strange Case of Pot'by Michael Schofield (Penguin, 1971). Schofield was a social psychologist who sat on the Wootton Committee and, dismayed by its reception, which led to the introduction of the Misuse of Drugs Act, he subsequently published this book. Contents | Feedback | Search DRCNet Library | Schaffer Library | Major StudiesWT02-B03-40IA086-000614-B042-285http://206.61.184.43:80/schaffer/Library/studies/wootton/strange.htm 206.61.184.43 19970122020632 text/html 28315HTTP/1.0 200 OKDate: Wednesday, 22-Jan-97 02:06:19 GMTServer: WebSitePro/1.1f (S/N wpo-0deb)Allow-ranges: bytesContent-type: text/htmlLast-modified: Saturday, 28-Dec-96 06:45:35 GMTContent-length: 28097 Wootton Report - Extract from 'The Strange Case of Pot' byMichael Schofield Contents | Feedback | Search DRCNet Library | Schaffer Library | Major Studies | WoottonReport The Wootton Report Extract from 'The Strange Case of Pot' by Michael Schofield(Penguin, 1971). Schofield was a social psychologist who sat on the WoottonCommittee and, dismayed by its reception, which led to theintroduction of the Misuse of Drugs Act, he subsequentlypublished this book. Introduction In the introduction, he writes: 'The original title of this book was to have been 'The Case For And Against Pot.' It was intended to present both sides of the controversy and weight the evidence before coming to a conclusion. But once the myths were cleared, it became obvious that the case for and against was not evenly balanced. By any ordinary standards of objectivity, it is clear that cannabis is not a very harmful drug. But the simple ranging of issues side by side is to superficial an approach for what is a very complex situation - really a social problem, much less a legal problem, and still less a medical problem.' 'The book is divided into three major parts. In the first five chapters I present the basic information about cannabis and compare it with the other illegal drugs. In the next six chapters I try to explain the public attitudes to cannabis and discuss the main controversies. In the last five chapters I attempt to describe the legal and sociological aspects, and end by suggesting a more sensible plan of action.' Chapter 7, The Wootton Report - In this chapter, Schofield discusses the background to theestablishment of the Wootton Committee and then goes on tooutline the committee's recommendations, elucidating each one. Other Reports At first Government committees were only concerned with theopiates, and in particular with heroin addiction. The two reportsof the Interdepartmental Committee under Lord Brain in 1961 and1965 hardly mentioned cannabis. In the first report the committeedecided that cannabis was not within their terms of reference andconcluded: 'In our view cannabis is not a drug of addiction; itis an intoxicant.' In the second report they noted briefly thatthere is 'a risk that young people may be persuaded to turn tocannabis' which was something of an understatement even in 1965. One important recommendation in the second Brain report was toset up a Standing Advisory Committee to keep under review thewhole problem of drug dependence. As this was not a static but achanging problem, it would be useful to bring together a group ofexperts with authority to advise to advise on the social as wellas the medical aspects. This committee was set up in early 1967under the Chairmanship of Sir Edward Wayne, MD, PhD, DSc, FRCP,FRCP(G). Twenty-two other members were appointed, nine of whomwere doctors. A small secretariat was formed to help thecommittee, but there was no money to pay for research and nospecial facilities. Some of the members were doctors treatingaddicts, but most of them had only a limited amount of knowledgeof drugs although all of them have learnt over the years. Without the facilities to initiate or carry out research, thiscommittee cannot be expected to provide new facts or makeimportant discoveries. All that the members can do is to discussthe matter between themselves and listen from time to time towitnesses called to give evidence because they are experts insome particular aspect of drug use. But nearly everyone who givesevidence to this committee does so as the representative of anorganisation which has a special interest in drugs. Conflictingviews will be heard from the representatives of otherorganisations. The function of the committee is essentiallyjudicial and its purpose is to reconcile the conflicting claimsof its witnesses. As there is a wide variety of opinionrepresented among the members, the suggested solutions to thevarious problems of drug dependence are obtained by compromisingbetween opposing views. The reports which are issued from time totime usually consist of an aggregation of existing opinions.including those of the chairman, the committee members, and thewitnesses. A research team of three or four people working fulltime is more likely to produce more penetrating and workablesolutions to the problems of drug use than a committee ofprominent citizens meeting three or four times a year to compileand select from conflicting expert opinions. None the less the committee has been able to give usefuladvice to the Home Office and Ministry of Social Security on thebest way to implement the earlier recommendations of the Braincommittee. Treatment centres for heroin addicts have been set upand special arrangements were introduced to control the outbreakof methedrine injections. Perhaps the most important work hasbeen done in the sub-committees which have met more regularlythan the main committee. There have been sub-committees onrehabilitation (published as a report by HMSO in 1969) and healtheducation (the results were circularised by the Department ofEducation), amphetamines, LSD, and the powers of search andarrest (these reports were published by HMSO in 1970). In April1967 a special sub-committee was appointed to review theavailable evidence on the pharmacological, clinical,pathological, social and legal aspects of cannabis. Afterseventeen meetings under the chairmanship of Baroness Wootton,the sub-committee's report was published in January 1969. The Recommendations (1) We recommend that in the interest of public health, itis necessary for the time being to maintain restrictions on theavailability of cannabis. - Although it is stated in the report that the consumption ofcannabis in moderate doses has no harmful effects, the committeefelt less sure about the mental effects. This recommendation,therefore, is intended to be a temporary measure and should bereviewed from time to time, when more is known about the effectsas a result of medical and social research. Meanwhile the courtsshould recognise that there is considerable variation in thepersonalities and motives of people who use cannabis. (2) Every encouragement, both academic and financial,should be given to suitable projects for enquiry into thecannabis problem. - It follows that if there is a lack of information on animportant and controversial problem, every effort should be madeto provide research facilities. Although three working partieshave been set up by the medical Research Council and an Institutefor the Study of Drug Dependence has been established, progressis very slow. It is inevitable that research into drug use willbe a lengthy business, but it is disquieting that even threeyears after the formation of the Government's Advisory Committee,very few large-scale research projects have even been started. In March 1970, the Home Office issued a list of research ondrug dependence. This list contained ten biochemical andpharmacological studies, mainly concerned with the developmentsof techniques for detecting cannabis in the body. there were nocannabis studies listed under the clinical and treatment section.Five studies were listed under the social and psychologicalsection; three of these (Chapple, 1966; Paton, 1968; Tylden,1968) who had written papers strongly opposed to the use ofcannabis even before starting the research; only one of the fivehas been undertaken by a sociologist. so far the Social ScienceResearch Council has not supported any researches on the use ofcannabis even though it is in the area of sociology that we mostneed information. The Wootton committee found that it was impossible to estimatethe number of people who used cannabis and the guesses seem torange between 30,000 and 300,000. It is clearly impossible tomake sense of statements about the social consequences ofwidespread use of cannabis until there are some reliableestimates of the prevalence of regular users. No detailedinformation is available about the extent of cannabis use byimmigrants. There is an immediate need for sociological andpsychological studies to define the different social groups andto describe the personalities of people who smoke cannabis.People do not hesitate to criticise the young for taking drugs,but in fact no one knows how many adolescents do take cannabis,how many use the drug only occasionally at parties and week-ends,and how many take it regularly. Only a well-planned researchwould show if there are differentiating characteristics betweenusers who take only cannabis and people who used to take cannabisbut have now given up all drug use. (3) The law should progressively be recast to giveParliament greater flexibility of control over individual drugs. - This was one of the few recommendations which the HomeSecretary found acceptable, although it seems likely that he doesnot interpret the 'greater flexibility of control' in the samesense as the Wootton Committee. Mr Callaghan, speaking during thedebate on the Wootton report, said that he would put before theHouse proposals which would give him more power to handle theproblem in a much more flexible manner. He then went on tocriticise the restrictions of the 1964 Drugs Act which in factdoes not apply to cannabis. He wanted the power to bring newsynthetic drugs under the Act as they were developed and becamepopular with users, and he also mentioned the need to havestronger legal control over manufacturers, doctors, chemists, andothers who distribute the drugs. he felt that there was 'a clearrisk that each new fashion of drug taking will find new gaps inthe defences, which will only be plugged too late' and thesolution would be 'to have a single comprehensive code whichwould rationalise and strengthen the Government's powers.'(Quoted from Hansard, 27 January, 1969, column 967). There ismuch substance in Mr Callaghan's remarks about changing fashionsin the drugs scene but this has nothing to do with the Woottonreport which is about cannabis, a drug that is alreadyfashionable and is hardly ever prescribed by medical men. It isdifficult to see what the Home Secretary's call for newlegislation has to do with cannabis unless he feels that one drugis much like another, an attitude of mind that Lady Wootton andher colleagues were most anxious to alter. The Wootton committee suggested changes in the law becausethere is now a better understanding of the reasons why people usedrugs. Criminological studies have cast doubts on theeffectiveness of deterrents and the general law on the treatmentof offenders has been changed considerable. The committee feltthat 'the penalties for cannabis offences have gone unreviewedfor too long'. Their idea of flexibility was that the law shouldbe adjusted according to the dangers of the drug and the way itis misused. (4) The association in legislation of cannabis and heroinand the other opiates is inappropriate and new legislation todeal specifically and separately with cannabis and its syntheticderivatives should be introduced as soon as possible. - There are two reasons for this. Many people agree that theconfusion between cannabis and heroin leads to misunderstandingsand, in some cases, to injustice. The committee also stated quiteclearly that the present penalties for possession of cannabiswere altogether too high. The Government accepted the thirdrecommendation for reasons other than those given by thecommittee, and after some hesitation, the fourth recommendationwas also incorporated into the new (Misuse of Drugs) Bill,although the penalties for possession of cannabis are stillsevere. (5) Unlawful possession of cannabis without knowledgeshould not be an offence. The practicability of distinguishingbetween possession intended for use and possession intended forsupply should be examined. - This brings to notice two of the several difficultiesencountered in a law which is about possession when what we arereally concerned about is the misuse of drugs. Although a recenttest case was taken as far as the House of Lords the resultingdecision was by no means clear because the issues in thatparticular case were complex. The law should make it quitecertain that a person cannot be incriminated, for example, bysomeone putting cannabis in his coat pocket without hisknowledge. The police maintain that is extremely difficult tocatch someone in the act of dealing in cannabis or any otherdrug. The unsatisfactory solution to this problem under the 1965Act was to retain high maximum penalties for the offence ofpossession so that the courts could sentence a man who had beenfound guilty of one offence (i.e. possession) as if he has beenfound guilty of another (i.e. supply). It is a form of justicethat is open to question, it is a bit like the bench saying to amotorist: 'You have been caught exceeding the speed limit and wehave been told that you had been drinking rather heavily;however, we can't prove that you were drunk, so we are going togive you a very heavy sentence for speeding.' The proposals forthe new legislation allow this practise to continue: although thenew offence of 'possession with intent to supply' is introduced,a maximum penalty of five years for the possession of cannabis isproposed. It is difficult to imagine a situation where the simplepossession of cannabis deserves such a severe sentence. The newBill distinguishes between possession and trafficking andincreases the penalty for selling cannabis to a maximum offourteen years. This reflects the public demand for heavypenalties for traffickers which is based on a misunderstanding ofthe role of the dealer. Nevertheless if a man is making money outof selling an illegal substance, it is reasonable to expect himto be dealt with more severely than someone who is merely usingthe drug. (6) Possession of a small amount of cannabis should notnormally be regarded as a serious crime to be punished byimprisonment. - This is a very radical recommendation and one which caused alarge amount of adverse comment in the press. But informedopinion is coming round to the idea that prison is not a sensibleway to treat people who wish to use cannabis. What even informedopinion found it difficult to take was the explicit statementthat possession in not a serious crime. But the committee wentstill further in paragraph 90 of the report, where they statethat prison is the wrong place even for those who supply on alimited scale. they do not attempt to define what they mean by alimited scale, but even a fairly strict definition would includeabout nine out of ten of the transactions between users andsellers because the amounts involved are so small. (7) The offence of unlawful possession, sale or supply ofcannabis should be punishable on summary conviction with a finenot exceeding 100, or imprisonment for a term not exceedingfour months, or both such fine and imprisonment. On conviction orindictment the penalty should be an unlimited fine, orimprisonment for a term not exceeding two years or both such fineand imprisonment. - Thus the committee recommended considerable reductions inthe penalties. The penalties for possession under the 1965 Act inforce when the committee reported, the penalties in the new Billand the penalties recommended in the Wootton report aresummarised as follows: Maximum         1965 Act                1970 Bill               Wootton penalties                                                               ReportSummary conviction:Fine                    250            400            100 Imprisonment    12 months               6 months                4 monthsIndictment:Fine                    1,000          unlimited               unlimited Imprisonment    10 years                5 years         2 years Some members of the committee argued strongly against any kindof prison sentence for simple possession, but in the end werepersuaded to agree to a maximum penalty of four monthsimprisonment because this sentence would allow the defendant theoption of going for trial by jury and also because a prisonsentence gives the judiciary the chance to deal with what thecommittee called 'difficult individual cases'. The committee wereaware that a substantial part of the smuggling of cannabis is insmall amounts (paragraph 37) and is not exploited to anysignificant extent by professional criminals (paragraph 38).Therefore they expected that most cases would be dealt withsummarily by imposing a small fine. the reaction to this showedthat it was a most unpopular recommendation. The home secretaryand the opposition spokesman on Home Affairs both said that thisrecommendation would make it appear that Parliament was condoningthe smoking of cannabis. ('If we were to adopt what is proposedor started to take a namby-pampy attitude about it, we shouldneed our heads examined. I range myself wholeheartedly behind theHome Secretary on this issue.' Quentin Hogg in Hansard, 27January 1969, column 957) (8) The existing law which inhibits research requiring thesmoking of cannabis (section 5, Dangerous Drugs Act, 1965) shouldbe amended to allow qualified workers to study its use both byobservation and by laboratory and social experiments. - There has been considerable uncertainty about the smoking ofcannabis for research purposes with the result that no seriousstudy has been made in this country on the effects of smoking onhumans, even in laboratory conditions. As the social factors areeven more important than the pharmacological problems, it isessential that researchers should be free to study thesephenomena by observations and experiments outside as well asinside the laboratory without the risk of prosecution. Althoughthe Home Secretary gave the lack of information as the reason forrejecting many of the recommendations in the Wootton Report, itwas notable that he never mentioned this in the House of Commons.In fact this was one of the earliest and most urgent of thesuggestions made by the full Standing Advisory committee, longbefore the Wootton report was published. Many members realisedthat their work was hindered by the shortage of information thatcould only be obtained by fairly elaborate and lengthy research.It was suggested that a short Bill should be put beforeParliament to make research on cannabis possible without the riskof prosecution. It was thought that such a bill would not arousemuch opposition, but the Home Office advisors to the committeefelt that this plan was not practical. They maintained that for ashort Bill on the subject of research into cannabis could not beconfined to this subject and far-reaching amendments would beadded during its passage through Parliament. so it was decided towait until the Government was ready to introduce comprehensivelegislation into which a special clause would be included toallow bona fide research workers to investigate the effects ofsmoking cannabis. But in fact three years have been lost betweenthe time when the law on cannabis research might have beenchanged and the introduction of this new legislation. It ispossible that much useful information could have been obtained inthat time, information which would have been invaluable duringthe preparation of the new Bill and the subsequent discussion ofvarious proposals. (9) Section 5 of the Dangerous Drugs Act, 1965 (permittingpremises to be used for smoking cannabis, etc.) should beredefined in scope so as to apply to premises open to the public,to exclude the reference to dealing in cannabis and cannabisresin, and to remove the absolute nature of the liability onmanagers. - This recommendation has been partly approved by the HomeSecretary in the proposals for new legislation so that occupiersand managers commit an offence if they knowingly permit a drug tobe used or sold in their premises. This will obviate theliability of the landlord of private premises who would have beenconvicted under the old law even if he was able to show that hedid not know that pot was being smoked in his house. But the HomeSecretary has rejected the suggestion that this should only be anoffence in public premises. (10) The Advisory Committee should undertake, as a matterof urgency, a review of police powers of arrest and search inrelation to drug offences generally, with a view to advising theSecretary of State on any changes that may be appropriate in thelaw, particularly as regards cannabis. - The Wootton committee seemed to think this task was too bigfor them because they felt that the question of police powerscould not be realistically considered in relation to cannabisalone. But there is no doubt that this is a most important issue.There is a growing public concern about the way the police areusing their powers of search and arrest and many youth workerssee this as one of the main causes of the substantialdeterioration in the relations between young people and thepolice. It may be said that this recommendation is a bit timid.In a large numbers of cases, the police search for drugs ingeneral, but this is not true of every case. There must beoccasions when the reasonable grounds for suspicion relate onlyto the use of cannabis; for example, it is the only drug that hasa pungent smell. the very extensive police powers of search andarrest, which may be necessary for the more harmful drugs, aredifficult to justify for cannabis, the possession of which,according to the report, is a relatively minor offence. Thisrecommendation was thought to be 'a matter of urgency' and a newsub-committee under the chairmanship of William Deedes was set upsoon after the Wootton report was published. In an early debateon drugs Mr Deedes said in the House of Commons: 'It makes nosense for the police to go round raiding and stripping youngpeople at parties to find drugs, some of which their elders treatas a staple diet. the posture against the young becomes morallyuntenable.' But his report turned out to be rather adisappointing document, with few positive recommendations. (11) The development of the manufacture of syntheticcannabinols should be kept under review and, if necessary,control should be imposed under powers provided by the Pharmacyand Poisons Act, 1933, and The Drugs (Prevention of Misuse) Act,1964. - Much progress is being made in the pharmacological study ofcannabis and the active ingredient has been synthesised. It ispossible that synthetic pot will be available in large quantitiesbefore long, and this substance is likely to be purer and safer,and perhaps more potent, than the product obtained from theplant. Such a substance would not be covered by the DangerousDrugs Act of 1965, but the proposed legislation would make itpossible to add new products of the pharmacological industry tothe schedule of restricted drugs simply by regulations placedbefore the two Houses of Parliament. (12) Preparations of cannabis and its derivatives shouldcontinue to be available on prescription for purposes of medicaltreatment and research. Provision should be made in legislationfor records to be maintained so that the position can be keptunder review. - The committee did not want to hinder the few doctors who areexperimenting with the use of cannabis in the treatment ofdisturbed adolescents, amphetamine dependence, alcoholism andother conditions which are difficult medical problems. Althoughthere have been few indications of success in this treatment, itis hoped that the new legislation will not interfere with theseexperiments. In summary, the Wootton report found that most ofthe fears about cannabis were groundless. Physically it is muchless dangerous than the other illegal drugs; most people can giveit up readily and without withdrawal symptoms. Most cannabisusers are industrious and law-abiding; there is no evidence thatin Britain it provokes the user to crime other than the crime ofpossessing it. nor is there any evidence to support the widelyheld belief that cannabis is a significant step in the escalationto heroin. It was agreed that cannabis is a potent drug, likealcohol, and that is was necessary to maintain restrictions onits availability for the time being; these restrictions wouldhave to be more severe than they are for alcohol until more wasknown about the long-term effects of the drug. Nevertheless itwas quite inappropriate to make cannabis subject to the samepenalties as heroin under the Dangerous Drugs Act and it waswrong to send people to prison for the possession of a smallamount. Research has been hampered and the law should be changedso as to encourage careful long-term investigations into theeffects of smoking cannabis. When these results are available,the interim recommendations should be reviewed. These mainconclusions were not so very different from the results found inearlier reports including the very thorough investigations madein India and the city of New York, and the more recent studiesmade in Canada and by the President's Commission in Washington.But the publication of the Wootton report was greeted with achorus of abuse from politicians, press and the public. Contents | Feedback | Search DRCNet Library | Schaffer Library | Major Studies | WoottonReport WT02-B03-41IA087-000632-B015-179http://206.61.184.43:80/schaffer/Library/studies/inhemp/4chapt9.htm 206.61.184.43 19970122091233 text/html 29501HTTP/1.0 200 OKDate: Wednesday, 22-Jan-97 09:12:24 GMTServer: WebSitePro/1.1f (S/N wpo-0deb)Allow-ranges: bytesContent-type: text/htmlLast-modified: Saturday, 28-Dec-96 07:04:37 GMTContent-length: 29283 Indian Hemp Drugs Commission Report - Social and ReligiousCustoms Contents | Feedback | Search DRCNet Library | Schaffer Library | Major Studies | IndianHemp Drugs Commission Indian Hemp Drugs Commission Report CHAPTER IX SOCIAL AND RELIGIOUS CUSTOMS. Scope of this Chapter. 431. In the instructions issued to the Commission by theGovernment of India, reference is made to the use of hemp drugsamong fakirs and ascetics who are held in veneration by largeclasses of the people, and to the custom, which is believed toobtain to a large extent in Bengal, of offering an infusion ofbhang to every guest and member of the family on the last day ofthe Durga Puja. The Commission were instructed to ascertain towhat extent these and similar customs prevail in Bengal and otherparts of India, and how far the use of hemp drugs forms a part ofsocial, or possibly religious, ceremonial or observance.Questions 32 and 33 of the Commission's questions were intendedto elicit information on these points. Bengal. 432. In Bengal there is a considerable body of evidencedealing with these customs, and more particularly with the customof offering an infusion of bhang on the last day of the Durga Puja.Some few witnesses, it is true, state either that no social orreligious custom with which hemp drugs are connected exists, orthat they are unaware of any such custom; but the great majorityof the witnesses either give an account of them more or lessfull, or allude to them briefly as matters of common notoriety. Durga Puja. 433. The custom of offering an infusion of the leaves of thehemp plant to every guest and member of the family on the BijoyaDasami, or last day of the Durga Puja, is common in Bengal, andmay almost be said to be universal. It is alluded to by many ofthe witnesses who refer to its use on this occasion as well as onother days of the Durga Puja festival. But, while there can be nodoubt as to the existence of the custom, there is considerabledivergence of opinion as to the true nature of it. The customitself is a simple one. On the last day of this great festivalthe male members of the family go forth to consign the image tothe waters and on their return the whole family with their guestsexchange greetings and embrace one another. During this rejoicinga cup containing an infusion of the leaves of the hemp plant ishanded round, and all are expected to partake thereof, or atleast to place it to the lips in token of acceptance. Sweetmeatscontaining hemp are also distributed. Opinion is almost equallydivided as to whether the custom is a mere social observance, orwhether it is an essential part of the religious ceremonial ofthe festival. There is difference whether there is any injunctionin theof opinion among the witnesses as to Shastras renderingobligatory the consumption of hemp; but Tantric religious workssanction the use, and the custom whatever be its origin may nowbe said from immemorial usage to be regarded by many people aspart of their religious observances. From the evidence of thewitnesses it would appear that there is no specific direction inthe Shastras of the manner in which the drug should beused but from the references quoted it would appear that the usealluded to is authority that of bhang in the form of aninfusion. Witnesses who can speak Mahamahon hopadhya MahesaChandra Nyayaratna, C.I onthe subject, such as Principalof the Government Sanskrit College, Calcutta, testify toreligious sanction for the use of bhang or siddhi, while manywitnesses of high social position, well acquainted with thehabits of the people, as, for example, Maharaja Sir JotindraMohain Tagore, K.C.S.I., Maharaja Durga Charan Law, Raja PiariMohan Mukharji, C.S.I., Rai Rajkumar Sarvadhikari Bahadur, RaiBahadur Kanai Lall . Day, C.I.E., and others, speak to theprevalence of the custom, its intimate association with thereligious devotions of the people, and the innocent harmlessnessof the practice. Other occasions on which bhang is used. 434. The custom described above, and which refers solely tobhang as distinguished from other preparations of the hemp plant,is he most important occasion on which bhang is used as a part ofsocial or religious ceremonies; but there is evidence to showthat the drug in this form is used at other festivals. Forexample, at the Holi festival, which is observed more generallyin Behar than in other parts of the Lower Provinces, bhang iscommonly consumed; and, according to many witnesses, at suchfestivals as the Diwali, Chait Sankranti, Pous Sankranti,Sripanchami, Sivachaturdasi, Ramnavami, and indeed on occasionsof weddings and many other family festivities. But, so far as theevidence shows, the use on those occasions is a matter of socialcustom observed more generally in some parts of the province thanin others, and, although nodoubt there may be some who considerit essential to their devotions, partaking but little of thenature of general religious observance. In Orissa bhang islargely used by the attendants and worshippers at the temple ofJagannath at Puri; and there appears also to exist a custom,somewhat similar to that of the Durga Puja in Bengal, of offeringsiddhi or bhang in the form of sweetmeats to the god Ganesh,which are then eaten by the worshippers and their friends andrelatives. This festival, called the Ganesh Chaturthi, occurs inthe month of Bhadro (August-September). Connection of ganja with the worship of Siva. 435. It is chiefly in connection with the worship of Siva, theMahadeo or great god of the Hindu trinity, that the hemp plant,and more especially perhaps ganja, is associated. The hemp plantis popularly believed to have been a great favourite of Siva, andthere is a great deal of evidence before the Commission to showthat the drug in some form or other is now extensively used inthe exercise of the religious practices connected with this formof worship. Reference to the almost universal use of hemp drugsby fakirs, jogis, sanyasis, and ascetics of all classes, and moreparticularly of those devoted to the worship of Siva, will befound in the paragraphs of this report dealing with the classesof the people who consume the drugs. These religious ascetics,who are regarded with great veneration by the people at large,believe that the hemp plant is a special attribute of the godSiva, and this belief is largely shared by the people. Hence theof many fond epithets ascribing to ganja the significance of adivine pro-party, and the common practice of invoking the deityin terms of adoration before placing the chillum or pipeof ganja to the lips. There is evidence to show that on almostall occasions of the worship of this god, the hemp drugs in someform or other are used by certain classes of the people it isestablished by the evidence of Mahamabopadhya Mahesa ChandraNyayaratna and of other witnesses that siddhi is offered to theimage of Siva at Benares, Baldynath, Tarakeswar, and elsewhere.At the Shivratri festival, and on almost all occasions before theon which this worship is practised, there is abundant evidenceCommission which shows not only that ganja is offered to the godand consumed by these classes of the worshippers, but that thesecustoms are so intimately connected with their worship that theymay be considered to form in some sense an integral part of it. Trinath. 436. The special form of worship by the followers of Siva,called the Trinath or Tinnath Mela, in which the use of ganja isconsidered to be essential, is mentioned by many witnesses, anddeserves more than a passing notice. A full account of thisreligious practice given by Babu Abhilas Chandra Mukharji will befound in Vol. III Appendices of this Report. The origin of therite, which it is said sprang up first in Eastern Bengal, appearsto be of recent date, about the year 1867. It appears to beobserved at all times and at all seasons by Hindus andMuhammadans alike, the latter calling it Tinlakh Pir. When anobject of special desire is fulfilled, or when a person recoversfrom illness, or a son is born, or a marriage or other ceremonyis performed, the god Trinath, representing in one the Hindutrinity, is worshipped. Originally one pice worth of ganja, onepice worth of oil, and one pice worth of betel-nut was offered tothe god. But now ganja--it may be in large quantities--isproffered, and during the incantations and the performance of theritual it is incumbent on all present to smoke. This form ofworship is shown to have spread extensively throughout EasternBengal and the Surma Valley of Assam, and, according to onewitness, it has penetrated. even to Orissa. On the other hand,there are a few witnesses who say that the practice is graduallydying out. Muhamadans 437. The use of hemp drugs is as a rule in no way connectedwith orthodox Muhammadan observances, whether social orreligious. The Muhammadan religion condemns such practices. Assam.. 438. In Assam, where the use of hemp drugs is but littlepractised by the Assamese proper, there appear to be noindigenous customs connected with the drugs. But the customsprevailing in Bengal are also found in Assam. There is evidenceas to the use of bhang or siddhi at the Durga Puja, and of ganjaby the worshippers of Siva. In Sylhet the Trinath form of worshipappears to prevail to a considerable extent. With reference tothis practice, one witness (Prasanno Kumar Das) observes that"in the Surma Valley ganja is offered in the name ofPit Muhammadan saint) for the benefit of the cattle." North-Western Provinces. 439. In the North-Western Provinces, where the celebration ofthe Durga Puja is not so generally observed as in Bengal, acon-siderable number of witnesses (some fifty in all) state thatthere are no customs, religious or social, with which these drugsare connected. But, on the other hand, there is overwhelmingevidence to establish the almost universal use by the people ofbhang at the Holi festival, and some evidence as to the commonuse of ganja by certain classes of the followers of Siva at theirfestivals and seasons of worship. Of the witnesses who speak tothe use of ganja in connection with religious observances, 22state that it is essential and 92 that it is not essential. As towhether the use of bhang should be regarded as a purely socialcustom or as essential to religious observance,. the opinion ofwitnesses who speak on the point is about equally divided. It issufficient to say that the custom is now a general one, and thatwhere the Holi festival is observed, there the practice ofconsuming bhang during its observance is common. On otheroccasions, such as the Diwali festival, marriages, and familyfestivities, there is evidence to show that among certain classesthe consumption of bhang is common. Allusion is also frequentlymade to the habit of using bhang, to which, for example, theChaubes of Mathra and Brindaban are notoriously addicted, but howfar the habit is connected with the religious observances at thetemples the evidence does not justify the formation of anopinion. A custom is mentioned by, a Kumaon witness, Dharma NandJoshi, who states that a class of people called Kouls, whoworship spirits, meat, fish, etc., have the bhang plant as one ofthe objects of their worship. Punnjab 440. In the Punjab there is evidence as to the general use ofhemp by some of the followers of Siva, and especially of bhang,at the Holi, Dasehra, Diwali, and other festivals, and on theoccasion o marriages and other family festivities. Among theSikhs the use of bhang as a beverage appears to be common, and tobe associated with their religious practices. The witnesses whorefer to this use by the Sikhs appear to regard it as anessential part of their religious rites having the authority ofthe Granth or Sikh scripture. Witness Sodhi Iswar Singh, ExtraAssistant Commissioner, says :"As far as I know, bhang ispounded by the Sikhs on the Dasehra day, and it is ordinarilybinding upon every Sikh to drink it as a sacred draught by mixingwater with it. Legend--Guru Gobind Singh, the tenthguru, the founder of the Sikh religion, was on the gaddi of BabaNanak in the time of Emperor Aurangzeb. When the guru was atAnandpur, tahsil Una, Hoshiarpur district, engaged in battle withthe Hill Rajas of the Simla, Kangra, and the Hoshiarpurdistricts, the Rains sent an elephant, who was trained inattacking and slaying the forces of the enemy with a sword in histrunk and in breaking open the gates of forts, to attack andcapture the Lohgarh fort near Anandpur. The guru gave one of hisfollowers, Bachittar Singh, some bhang and a little of opium toeat, and directed him to face the said elephant. This brave manobeyed the word of command of his leader and attacked theelephant, who was intoxicated and had achieved victories inseveral battles before, with the result that the animal wasoverpowered and the Hill Rajas defeated. The use of bhang,therefore, on the Dasehra day is necessary as a sacred draught.It is customary among the Sikhs generally to drink bhang, so thatGuru Gobind Singh has himself said the following poems in praiseof bhang: "Give me, O Saki (butler), a cup of green colour(bhang), as it is required by me at the time of battle (vide'Suraj Parkash,' the Sikh religious book). "Bhang is alsoused on the Chandas day, which is a festival of the god SheojiMahadeva. The Sikhs consider it binding to use it on the Dasehraday-The quantity then taken is too small to proveinjurious." As Sikhs are absolutely prohibited by theirreligion from smoking, the use of ganja and charas in this formis not practised by them. of old Sikh times, is annuallypermitted to collect without interference a boat load of bhang,which is afterwards. distributed throughout the year to thesadhus and beggars who are supported by the dharamsala. Central Provinces. 441. The evidence as to social or religious customs in theCentral Provinces is somewhat discrepant, but on the whole pointsto the existence of customs akin to those existing in theNorth-Western Provinces. The use of bhang at the Holi and Diwalifestivals and at marriages and such occasions, and of ganja orbhang in connection with. the worship of Siva, is frequentlymentioned by the witnesses. A few local customs are alsomentioned by some witnesses. Regarding a custom of the Chamarcaste, the Rev. Mr. Jacob says: "At Chanda; the Chamars useganja dust in the preparation of a beverage called gulabpani, whichis drunk at a ceremony called dadhi (the first shaving ofthe beard), when no liquor is permitted." Among the Gonds,Cowasjee Nusserwanjee Hattidaru describes the following custom asexisting:." In the funeral ceremony amongst the Gonds ofthese provinces, kalli or flat ganja is placed over thechest of the dead body of the Gond, and when the funeral partyreturns home, a little of the ganja is burnt in the house of thedead person, the smoke of which is supposed to reach the spiritof the dead." Another Satpura witness, Hosen Khan, mentionsa custom of offering "a little ganja at the ChitaraiDebis, or collections of stones with rags tied to some treeabove. They offer either a cock or a cocoanut or some ganja. Itis a custom among travellers. These Chitarai Debis are in theopen, and the travellers have a smoke at the same time." Onewitness states that he has heard of the hemp plant beingworshipped in the Berars, but this is not corroborated by any ofthe witnesses from these districts. Another has heard that theGonds in their hill homes are worshippers of the plant Madras. 442. In the Madras Presidency, where the use of hemp drugs isless common than in most other provinces, many witnesses assertthat there are no customs, social or religious, with which theyare connected, and the evidence as a whole fails to establish theprevalence of any customs so general as those connected with theDurga Puja and the worship of Siva in Bengal or the Holi festivalin the North-Western Provinces. But there is evidence as to theexistence of customs of a less general or widespread nature. InGanjam, the witnesses speak to the common use bhang on the MeshaSankranti day in honour of Siva and Anjanayya, and also inthe worship of Durga. Several also allude to a custom of offeringa confection or draught containing bhang to the image at thetemples of Hanuman. At the festival of Kama, the Indian cupid,bhang is freely made and drunk according to several witnesses.The Rajputs or Bondilis are particularly referred to inconnection with this custom. On occasions of holidays orgala-days, and at the Mohurram, a number of witnesses say it isusual for Muhammadans as well as Hindus to take bhang. It is alsosaid that various intoxicants, including ganja, are sometimesoffered to the gods in worship, and then swallowed by thoseoffering them. Witness M. Sundaram Iyer, Deputy Tahsildar (60),says: "Some of the lower orders make use of ganja asan offering, like cocoa-nut, plantains, liquor, and such otherarticles, for certain deities, such as Mathura--veeran,Muniappan, etc., according to the vow taken by each person. Thiscannot be considered as essential, but is only a practiceobserved in very rare cases. Such practice is not followed bymany people, and it is not injurious. "Others allude to theoffering of ganja to Karuppannam, Kali, Mathuraveeran, Muniappan,Karuannaswami, and Aiyaswami, more particularly in the south ofthe Presidency. Mr. Azizuddin, Sahib Bahadur, Deputy Collector,says: "Neither the Musalman nor the Hindu religionrequires the use of these drugs on religious occasions. On theother hand, it is prohibited. Nevertheless, in the maths ofbairagis, such as at Tripati, and of Muhammadan saints, such asat Nagore Conjeveram, Arcot, and other places, the manager of theshrine distributes ganja to all the fakirs who assemble duringthe festival. In none of these places, religiously speaking,ganja should be distributed, but, according to custom among thefakirs, its distribution is essential." The Rev. Mr.Campbell says that ganja is used in connection with the funeralceremonies observed by certain classes, but that the use is notessential. Mr. Merriman alludes to a custom of offering andconsuming bhang at the funeral of bhang consumers. Bombay 443. An interesting note, entitled "The Religion ofHemp," by Mr. J. M. Campbell, C.I.E., will be found in Vol.III Appendices. In the Bombay presidency the use of hemp inconnection with the worship of Siva, Mahadev or Shankar appearsto be very common. It is referred to by many witnesses. Thefollowing description of this custom as prevailing in part ofGujarat, Kaira, and probably Ahmedabad has been furnished to theExcise Commissioner by Mr. B. E. Modi, Deputy Collector: "Onthe Shivratri day (the last day but one of the month ofMagh), sacred to the god Mahadev or Shankar, bhang water isfreely poured over the lingam. Mahadev is an ascetic, andis fond of bhang, and on this day it is considered a religiousduty to offer him his favourite drink. From this day to the 11thday of Ashad, on which day gods go to sleep, water is keptconstantly dripping upon the lingam of Mahadev from anearthen pot kept above it. "Somewhat similar accountsvarying in detail are given by many witnesses coming fromdifferent parts of the province, of whom some also refer to thehabit which ganja smokers have of invoking the deity beforeplacing the pipe. to their lips. Others also refer to hemp asrequired in the worship of Baldeo and to its use at the Shimga orHoli festival. The Marwaris and some other classes appear to usebhang at marriages and other festivities. Mr. Charles, Collectorof Belgaum, says that among Musalmans and Marathas the ganjaplant is offered to dead relatives who used it in their lifetimeat the time of the anniversary ceremonies of their death. Thereappears to be no special custom of worshipping the hemp plantitself. R. K. Kothavale, of Satara district, says the hemp plantis worshipped, by one sect only, namely, by people from NorthernIndia and Nepal, while Mr. Lamb, Collector of Alibag, remarksthat some of the Kunbis who make Offerings to the localdivinities of their fields at the harvest season include a. smallquantity of ganja in the offerings. Sind. 444. In Sind the customs, both religious and' social, appearto be much the same as in Bombay. In Karachi and some otherplaces bhang is generally offered to all comers on occasions ofmarriages, panchayats, and other gatherings; and the custom offreely distributing bhang as a charity to all who dare to partakeis common both at temples and at other places of resort. Berar. 445. In Berar there is evidence as to the use both of ganjaand bhang at the Shivratri and Holi festivals and at socialgatherings. The hemp plant itself is not worshipped, but,according to one witness, when a consumer dies, the plant is keptnear his corpse during the funeral ceremony. Ajmere-Merwara. 446. At the Holi and the Shivratri and at family festivitiesthe drugs, especially bhang, are used. Baluchistan. 447. Major Gaisford, Deputy Commissioner, states that amongthe Hindu sect called Barn Bargis the consumption of bhang isregarded as essential. Native States. 448. From Native States there is but little informationregarding customs, either social or religious, with which thesedrugs are connected. No purely local or indigenous customs havebeen brought to the notice of the Commission, but there issufficient information to show that practices similar to thoseexisting in British provinces at the Holi and Shrivratrifestivals and on occasions of family rejoicings are observed bycertain classes of the people in many Native States. Worship of the hemp plant 449. The custom of worshipping the hemp plant, although not soprevalent as that of offering hemp to Siva and other deities ofthe Hindus, would nevertheless appear from the statements of thewitnesses to exist to some extent in some provinces of India. Thereason why this fact is not generally known may perhaps begathered from such statements as that of Pandit Dharma NandJoshi, who says that such worship is performed in secret. Theremay be another cause of the denial on the part of the largemajority of Hindu witnesses of any knowledge of the existence ofa custom of worshipping the hemp plant in that the educated Hinduwill not admit that he worships the material object of hisadoration, but the deity as represented by it. The custom ofworshipping the hemp plant, though not confined to the Himalayandistricts or the northern portions of India alone, where the useof the products of the hemp plant is more general among thepeople, is less known as we go south. Still even far south, insome of the hilly districts of the Madras Presidency and amongthe rural population, the hemp plant is looked upon with somesort of veneration. Mr. J. H. Merriman (witness No. 28, Madras)says: "I know of no custom of worshipping the hempplant, but believe it is held in a certain sort of veneration bysome classes." Mr. J. Sturrock, the Collector of Coimbatore(witness No. 2, Madras), says: "In some few localities thereis a tradition of sanctity attached to the plant, but no regularworship. "The Chairman of the Conjeveram Municipal Board,Mr. E. Subramana Iyer (witness No. 143, Madras) says: "Thereis no plant to be worshipped here, but it is generally used assacrifices to some of the minor Hindu deities. "There is apassage quoted from Rudrayanmal Danakand and Karmakaud inthe report on the use of hemp drugs in the Baroda State, whichalso shows that the worship of the bhang plant is enjoined in theShastras. It is thus stated: "The god Shiva says toParvati-- 'Oh, goddess Parvati, hear the benefits derivedfrom bhang. The worship of bhang raises one to my position. In BhabishyaPuran it is stated that "on the 13th moon of Chaitra(March and April) one who wishes to see the number of his sonsand grandsons increased must worship Kama (Cupid) in thehemp plant, etc.". General conclusions In summing up their conclusions on this chapter, the Commission would first remark that charas, which is a comparatively new article of consumption, has not been shown to be in any way connected with religious observance. As regards Northern India, the Commission are of opinion that the use of bhang is more or less common everywhere in connection with the social and religious customs of the people As regards ganja they find that there are certain classes in all parts, except the Punjab, who use the drug in connection with their social and religious observances. The Commission are also of opinion in regard to bhang that its use is considered essential in some religious observances by a large section of the community, and in regard to ganja that those who consider it essential are comparatively very few. The Commission have little doubt that interference with the use of hemp in connection with the customs and observances above referred to would be regarded by the consumers as an interference with long established usage and as an encroachment upon their religious liberty. And this feeling would, especially in the case of bhang, undoubtedly be shared to some extent by the people at large. Regarding Southern India, the same remarks apply with this reservation, that. the difference between ganja and bhang as materials for smoking and drinking respectively is much less marked there, and the distinction between the two forms of the drug is much less clearly recognised, although by the term "bhang" is generally meant the drug as used for drinking, and by "ganja" the drug as used for smoking. Contents | Feedback | Search DRCNet Library | Schaffer Library | Major Studies | IndianHemp Drugs CommissionWT02-B03-42IA087-000632-B015-125http://206.61.184.43:80/schaffer/Library/studies/inhemp/2centen.htm 206.61.184.43 19970122091156 text/html 14542HTTP/1.0 200 OKDate: Wednesday, 22-Jan-97 09:11:47 GMTServer: WebSitePro/1.1f (S/N wpo-0deb)Allow-ranges: bytesContent-type: text/htmlLast-modified: Saturday, 28-Dec-96 07:04:43 GMTContent-length: 14324 Indian Hemp Drugs Commission Centennial Thoughts Contents | Feedback | Search DRCNet Library | Schaffer Library | Major Studies | IndianHemp Drugs Commission Indian Hemp Drugs Commission Centennial Thoughts Tod H. Mikuriya, M.D. This monumental study exposes the overriding and pervasivepowers of contemporary collective denial and moral failureunderpinning policies of cannabis prohibition. Motivated byconvenient moralism, questions are repeatedly disingenuouslyraised concerning the harm of hemp drugs, cannabis, or marijuana.The engine of agitprop bureaucratic ire fires up. Hearings arescheduled, witnesses heard, proceedings transcribed, summarized,presented to the requesting organization, discussed, filed, andforgotten. The prohibition policies go on. Enforcement,corrections systems strain under the demands of majoritarianmagical beliefs in coercive powers of Government; promoted bycontinuing self-serving Government misinformation and censorship.From the Indian Hemp Drugs Commission's policy perspective,today's drug polices would be unthinkable. In the century since the resolution passed the British Houseof Commons setting up the Indian Hemp Drugs Commission thatresulted in this massive inquiry documented in a nine volumereport there have been drastic changes in public policy in theUnited States and Great Britain. The Indian hemp drug regulation policies were explicitlypredicated upon optimal and minimal government intervention. The subsequent century in the United States, Great Britain,and Europe has seen pandemic spread of prohibitionistauthoritarian Government interference- the American Disease-social experiment run amok. Income taxes, mass conscription, and two world wars have seenregression from utilitarian governance of enlightenednon-interference to intrusive majoritarian autocracy.Authoritative Government has become authoritarian. Less and lessGovernment justification and demonstrated necessity are needed.The principle of non-interference is virtually inoperative. Thespace of human existence where a person reigns uncontrolledcontracts even further. The large departments of individualistichuman life are contracted or eliminated by laws, public andcorporate policy. The second intervention by Government; giving advice andpromulgating information has seen a parallel degradation. Fromlegitimate and trustworthy dissemination of factual informationthrough the institutions of science and medicine to censorship,giving bad advice, dissimulation and deception in the service ofcoercion and manipulation. The ensuing chaos of ignorance,partial truths, and outright lies has produced a cacophonoustoxic confusion surrounding the use of hemp drugs. The font ofcontemporary knowledge is now a stinking swamp, hopelesslypoisoned by the ignorant fantasies, fears, and untruths resultingfrom prohibitionists' drug propaganda efforts. Fifty years after the Indian Hemp Drugs Commission Report inAmerica the New York Mayor's Committee on Marihuana reported onuse of the drug after a five year study, seven years afternational marijuana prohibition. The perspective was based on thepremise that departments of human life and individual circle withuncontrolled reign did not include the right to use marihuana.The authoritative Government intervention of Prohibition is nowaccepted; the non-interference principle of the Millsean IndianHemp Drugs Administration policy; dead- a luxury enjoyed,ironically, by people of India subjugated by the Britishimperium. Descriptions of marihuana use were now from the perspective ofstudying the characteristics of the users of this illicit drug:to what extent, method of distribution, attitude of smoker towardsociety and use of the drug, relationship with eroticism, crime,and juvenile delinquency. Discussions of legitimacy of Governmentintervention are by implication discussing the relativedangerousness of marihuana. The legitimacy of Prohibition as asocial policy was neither justified nor discussed. Religious useor freedom is not mentioned. "I am glad that the sociological, psychological, andmedical ills commonly attributed to marihuana have been found tobe exaggerated insofar as the City of New York is concerned. Ihasten to point out, however, that the findings are to beinterpreted only as a reassuring report of progress and not asencouragement to indulgence, for I shall continue to enforce thelaws prohibiting the use of marihuana until and if completefindings may justify an amendment to existing laws." In the 1970 revision in Government marihuana prohibitionpolicy generated another report in 1972: Marihuana: a Signal ofMisunderstanding- First Report of the National Commission onMarihuana and Drug Abuse. Individual rights are at least discussed in order to beheavily discounted: "So, while we agree with the basic philosophical preceptthat society may interfere with individual conduct only in thepublic interest, using coercive measures only when lessrestrictive measures would not suffice, this principle merelyinitiates inquiry into a rational social policy but does notidentify it. We must take a careful look at this complicatedquestion of the social impact of private behavior. And we mustrecognize at the outset the inherent difficulty in predictingeffects on the public health and welfare, and the strongconflicting notions of what constitutes the publicinterest." "Religious freedom" as currently delineated by theGovernment places the burden on the individual to pass certain"tests" to prove that hemp drugs used for sacramentalpurposes: "Cases dealing with religious freedom in other contextshave isolated three distinct foci of inquiry when a law ischallenged as violative of the "free exercise" clause:(1) Is the claimant's belief and practice really a"religion" within the meaning of the First Amendment?(2) If so, is the practice prohibited by the challenged statuteessential to the practice of the "religion?" (3) Evenif the answers to (1) and (2) are yes, is there nevertheless asufficiently compelling state interest to warrant overriding thepractice? Only when the proscribed activity is essential to aqualified "religion" and the state's interest is notoverwhelming will the courts invoke the First Amendment toinvalidate an otherwise permissible legislativeproscription." In the 1989 Carl Olsen, a white Rastafarian and director ofIowa NORML unsuccessfully attempted a religious freedom defensefor charges of marijuana selling and importation for distributionto other members of the Ethiopian Coptic Zion Church. "If the 'compelling interest' test is to be applied...itmust be applied across the board, to all actions thought to bereligiously commanded... Any society adopting such a system wouldbe courting anarchy.... The rule respondents favor would open theprospect of constitutionally required religious exemptions fromcivic obligations of almost every conceivable kind- ranging fromcompulsory military service....to the payment of taxes.....druglaws." Dutifully crafted by Judge Ruth Bader Ginsburg, now on thesupreme court, no question of how authoritative interference ofGovernment is accepted to be appropriate public policy. Religiousfreedom is now restricted to activity that must be asserted andproven rather than assumed. Proving compelling interest hasswitched from the Government to the individual. Departments of human life were seen not to be imperiouslyguarded for the individual but regarded with mistrust and sourceof opportunities for dissent against public policy. At the heightof the Vietnam war marijuana use was strongly identified with thegrowing student antiwar resistance. The non-intervention principle is at least recognized but thedepartments of individuality and circle around the individualwere routinely stepped over by Government with justification inthis case for national security. Militarism preempted anyconsiderations of individual rights of privacy. Departments ofhuman life were small and confined to cosmetic obligatoryinstitutional ritual displays in the context of growing publicresistance to the American military industrial behemoth run amokin southeast Asia. Notwithstanding the cautious conclusion of the Commission tocritically examine the policies of marijuana prohibition, thereport was conspicuously rejected sight unseen by then presidentRichard M. Nixon to demonstrate his being "tough oncrime" in a presidency struggling to end the Vietnam war. Twenty-two years later on the centennial of the Indian HempDrugs Commission Report finds the principle of Governmentnon-interference is an all but forgotten faded idealistic icon,given hollow obeisance at state ceremonies, a quaintphilosophical curiosity of the past. The circle around theindividual is reduced to a pale, flaccid, tattered, transparent,and permeable membrane. Intrusion is limited only by availablefunding to Government interference. The worsening of the balanceof power between the individual and state has increased by anorder of magnitude, facilitated by advances in technology. Toqueville in his prophetic Democracy in America warns ofdangerous forms of despotism in democratic, egalitarian America: "A great many persons of the present day are quitecontented with this sort of compromise between administrativedespotism and the sovereignty of the people; and they think theyhave done enough for the protection of individual freedom whenthey have surrendered it to the power of the nation at large.This does not satisfy me: the nature of him I am to obeysignifies less to me than the fact of extorted obedience." "Thus it every day renders the exercise of the freeagency of man less useful and less frequent; it circumscribes thewill within a narrower range and gradually robs a man of all theuses of himself. The principle of equality has prepared men forthese things; it has predisposed men to endure them and often tolook upon them as benefits. After having thus successively taken each member of thecommunity in its powerful grasp and fashioned him at will, thesupreme power then extends its arm over the whole community. Itcovers the surface of society with a network of small complicatedrules, minute and uniform, through which the most original mindsand most energetic characters cannot penetrate, to rise above thecrowd. The will of the man is not shattered, but softened, bent,and guided; men are seldom forced by it to act, but they areconstantly restrained from acting. Such a power does not destroy,but it prevents existence, it does not tyrannize, but itcompresses, enervates, extinguishes, and stupefies a people, tilleach nation is reduced to nothing better than a flock of timidand industrious animals, of which the government is theshepherd." Attacked by oaths of "drug free," informers(including children), undercover police, drug-sniffing dogs,random and warrantless searches, child snatching, drug testing,forfeiture of property, surveillance of bank, business,electricity, and other records, the departments of human lifewither. The parts of human life considered reserved territory arenoticeably smaller- the individual, society and"civilization" suffer the loss. Review of the Indian Hemp Drugs Commission Report is importantfor perspective in assessing the legitimacy and direction ofcontemporary Government drug policy in a democratic society.Froude's theorem of functional governance: "no laws are ofany service which are above the working level of public morality,and evasion." was of importance to feudal England, theIndian Hemp Drugs Commission in 1894 and a century later a publicpolicy issue of prime magnitude. THM April 16, 1994 References Contents | Feedback | Search DRCNet Library | Schaffer Library | Major Studies | IndianHemp Drugs CommissionWT02-B03-43IA087-000632-B015-261http://206.61.184.43:80/schaffer/Library/studies/inhemp/7relhemp.htm 206.61.184.43 19970122091329 text/html 27475HTTP/1.0 200 OKDate: Wednesday, 22-Jan-97 09:13:15 GMTServer: WebSitePro/1.1f (S/N wpo-0deb)Allow-ranges: bytesContent-type: text/htmlLast-modified: Saturday, 28-Dec-96 07:04:03 GMTContent-length: 27257 Indian Hemp Drugs Commission Report - Note on the Religionof Hemp Contents | Feedback | Search DRCNet Library | Schaffer Library | Major Studies | IndianHemp Drugs Commission REPORT OF THE INDIAN HEMP DRUGS COMMISSION, 1893-94. APPENDIX NOTE BY MR. J. M. CAMPBELL, C.I.E., COLLECTOR OF LANDREVENUE AND CUSTOMS AND OPIUM, BOMBAY, ON THE RELIGION OF HEMP. To the Hindu the hemp plant is holy. A guardian lives in thebhang leaf. As the wife of Vishnu, the preserver, lives in thehysteria-curing tulsi, or Holy Basil, and as Shiva dwellsin the dysentery-scaring bel, AEgle marmelos, sothe properties of the bhang plant, its power to suppress theappetites, its virtue as a febrifuge, and its thought-bracingqualities show that the bhang leaf is the home of the great Yogior brooding ascetic Mahadev. So holy a plant should have special rearing. Shiva explains tohis wife, Parvati, how, in sowing hemp seed, you should keeprepeating the spell 'Bhangi', 'Bhangi', apparently that the soundof that guardian name may scare the evil tare-sowing influences.Again, when the seedlings are planted the same holy name must berepeated, and also at the watering which, for the space of ayear, the young plants must daily receive. When the flowersappear the flowers and leaves should be stripped from the plantand kept for a day in warm water. Next day, with one hundredrepetitions of the holy name Bhangi, the leaves and flowersshould be washed in a river and dried in an open shed. When theyare dry some of the leaves should be burnt with due repeating ofthe holy name as a jap or muttered charm. Then, bearing inmind Vagdevata, or the goddess of speech, and offering a prayer,the dried leaves should be laid in a pure and sanctified place.Bhang so prepared, especially If prayers are said over it, willgratify the wishes and desires of its owner. Taken in the earlymorning such bhang cleanses the user from sin, frees him from thepunishment of crores of sins, and entitles him to reap the fruitsof a thousand horse-sacrifices. Such sanctified bhang taken atday break or noon destroys disease. Before the religioususer of bhang stand the Ashtadevata or Eight Guardians withclasped hands ready to obey him and perform his orders. The wishof him who with pure mind pours bhang with due reverence over theLing of Mahadev will be fulfilled. Such holiness and such evil-scaring powers must give bhang ahigh place among lucky objects. That a day may be fortunate thecareful man should on waking look into liquid bhang. So anynightmares or evil spirits that may have entered into him duringthe ghost-haunted hours of night will flee from him at the sightof the bhang and free him from their blinding influences duringthe day. So too when a journey has to be begun or a fresh duty orbusiness undertaken it is well to look at bhang. To meet some onecarrying bhang is a sure omen of success. To see in a dream theleaves, plant, or water of bhang is lucky; it brings the goddessof wealth into the dreamer's power. To see his parents worshipthe bhang-plant and pour bhang over Shiva's Ling will cure thedreamer of fever. A longing for bhang foretells happiness: to seebhang drunk increases riches. No good thing can come to the manwho treads under foot the holy bhang leaf. So evil-searing and therefore luck-bringing a plant must playan important part in the rites required to clear away evilinfluences. During the great spirit time of marriage in Bombayamong almost all the higher classes of Gujarat Hindus, of theJain as well as of the Brahmanic sects, the supplies sent by thefamily of the bride to the bridegroom's party during their sevendays' sojourn includes a supply of bhang. The name of the fatherwho neglects to send bhang is held in contempt. Again, after thewedding, when the bride-groom and his friends areentertained at the house of the bride, richly-spiced bhang isdrunk by the guests. The Gujarat .Musalman bride before and aftermarriage drinks a preparation of bhang. Among the Pardeshi orNorth Indian Hindus of Bombay bhang is given not only atweddings, but the Pardeshi who fails to give his visitor bhang isdespised by his caste as mean and miserly. Another great spirittime during which bhang plays an important part is the time ofwar. Before the outbreak of a war and during its progress theLing of Mahadev should be bathed with bhang. Its power of drivingpanic influences from near the god has gained for bhang the nameof Vijaya, the unbeaten. So a drink of bhang drives from thefighting Hindu the haunting spirits of fear and weariness. So thebeleaguered Rajput, when nothing is left but to die, afterloosing his hair that the bhang spirit may have free entrance,drinks the sacramental bhang and rushing on the enemy completeshis juhar or self-sacrifice. It is this quality ofpanic-scaring that makes bhang, the Vijaya or Victorious,specially dear to Mahadev in his character of Tripur, .the slayerof the demon Tripurasur. As Shiva is fond of bel leaves,as Vishnu is fond of tulsi leaves, so is Tripuresvar fondof bhang leaves. He who wishes to obtain his desires mustconstantly offer bhang to Tripuresvar. Bhang the cooler is a febrifuge. Bhang acts on the fever notdirectly or physically as an ordinary medicine, but indirectly orspiritually by soothing the angry influences to whom the heats offever are due. According to one account in the Ayurveda, fever ispossession by the hot angry breath of the great gods Brahma,Vishnu, and Shiva. According to another passage in the Ayurveda,Shankar or Shiva, enraged by a slight from his father-in-lawDaksha, breathed from his nostrils the eight fevers that withermankind. If the fever-stncken performs the Vijaya abhishek, orbhang-pouring on the Ling of Shankar, the god is pleased, hisbreath cools, and the portion of his breath in the body of thefever-stricken pleased to inflame. The Kashikhanda Purana tellshow at Benares, a Brahman, sore-smitten with fever, dreamed thathe had poured bhang over the self-sprung Ling and was well. Onwaking he went to the Ling, worshipped, poured bhang this curebrings to Benares sufferers from fever which no ordinary medicinecan cure. The sufferers are laid in the temple pour bhang everthe Ling whose virtue has gained it the name Jvareshwar, theFever-Lord. Bombay many people sick of fever vow on recovery topour bhang over a Ling. Besides cure for fever bhang has manymedicinal virtues. It cools the heated blood, soothes theover-wakeful to sleep, gives beauty, and secures length ofdays. It cures dysentery and sunstroke, clears phlegm, quickensdigestion, sharpens appetite, makes the tonic of the lisperplain, freshens the intellect, and gives alertness to the bodyand gaiety to the mind. Such are the useful and needful ends forwhich in his goodness the Almighty made bhang. In thispraise of the hemp the Makhzan or great Greek-Arab work on drugsjoins... Ganja in excess uses abscess, even madness. Inmoderation bhang is the best of gifts. Bhang is a cordial, a bileabsorber, an appetizer, a prolonger of life. Bhang quickensfancy, deepens thought, and Judgment. As on otherguardian-assessed objects, the cow, the Vedas, or the leaf oathsare taken on the bhang leaf Even to a truthful witness an oathon of the be1 tree, dreaded. To one who forswears himself thebhang oath is death the bhang leaf. So holy a plant must play aleading part in temple rights. Shiva on fire with the poisonchurned from the ocean was cooled by bhang. At another timeenraged with family worries the fields. The cool shade .of aplant soothed him. He crushed and of the leaves, and the bhangrefreshed him. For these two benefits bhang is Shankarpri , theMahadev. So the right user of bhang or of ganja, before beginningto drinker smoke, offers the drug to Mahadev saying, lenaShankar, lena Babulnath: be pleased to take Shankar, take itBabulnath. According to the Shiva Parann, from the darkfourteenth of Magh (January-February) to the light fourteenth ofAsbadh (June-July), that is, during the three months of the hotweather, bhang should be daily poured over the Ling of Shivaevery day, bhang should be poured at least during the first andlast days of this period. According to the Meru Tantra on anyMonday, especially on Shravan (July-August) Mondays, on alltwelfths pradoshs, and on all dark fourteenths or shivratrisstill more on the Mahashivratri or Shiva's Great Night on darkfourteenth of Magh (January-February.), and at all eclipses ofthe sun or moon, persons wistful either for this world or for theworld to come should offer bhang to Shiva and pour it over theLing. Not every devotee of Shiva makes offerings of bhang. Suchrites in Bombay are seldom performed except in the Bhuleswar andBabulnath temples and there only on special occasions. The bhangoffered to Mahadev is without pepper or other spice. It is mixedwith water, water and milk, or milk and sugar. It is poured overthe Ling. According to some authorities the offerer should nottouch the offered bhang. Temple ministrants Atits, Tapodhans,Bhojaks, Bhopis, Bharadis, Gutaras alone should drink it. Ifthere are no ministrants the remains of the offering should bepoured into a well or given to cows to drink. Other authoritiesencourage the offerer to the bhang, since by sipping thebhang reaches and soothes the Shiva-Shakti or Shiva-spirit in thesipper. On certain social occasions during failures of rain,during eclipses, and also in times of war libations of bhang arepoured ever the Ling. Vaishnavas as well as Shaivas make offerings of bhang. Theform of Vishnu Or, the Guardian to whom bhang is a welcomeoffering is Baladev, Bainram, or Dauji, the elder brotherKrishna. Baladev was fond of spirits, not of bhang. But Banins,Bhatias, and other high class Hindus, not being able to offerspirits instead of spirits the offering of bhang to Baladev,unlike the special offerings to Shiva, present bhang. In Bombay,without an offering of bhang no worship of Baladev is complete,offerings to Shiva is a common and everyday rite. Unlike theplain or milk and sugared bhang spilt over the Ling, Baladev'sbhang is a richly-spiced liquid which all present, including theofferer, join in drinking. Such social and religious ionsdrinking of bhang is common in Bombay in the temple of Dauji inKalyan' Kirparam lane near Bhuleshwar. As in the higher classworship of Baladev the liquor offering has been refined into anoffering of bhang so it is in the worship of Devi, Shiva'searly and terrible consort. On any Tuesday or Friday, the twoweek-days sacred to Devi, still more during the Navrata or NineNights in Ashwin or September-October, those whose caste rulesforbid liquor make a pleasing spices bhang. And as in, theworship of Baladev all present, worshipper and ,ministrant alike,join in drinking. Shitaladevi, the Cooler, the dread goddess ofsmall-pox, whose nature, like the nature of bhang, is cooling,takes pleasure in offerings of bhang. During epidemics ofsmall-pox the burning and fever of the disease are soothed bypouring bhang over the image of Shitaladevi. So for thefeverishness caused by the heats especially to the old no cureequals the drinking of bhang. Unlike spirits the tempterto flesh bhang the craver for milk is pleasing to the Hindureligion. Even according to the staitest school of the objectorsto stimulants, while to a high caste Hindu the penalty forliquor-drinking is death, no penalty attaches to the use ofbhang, and a single day's fast is enough to cleanse from thecoarser spirit of ganja. Even among those who hold stimulants tobe devil-possessed penalty and disfavor attach to the use of hempdrugs only when they are taken with no religious object andwithout observing the due religious rites. At the other extreme of Hindu thought from the foes tostimulants, to the worshippers of the influences that, raisingman out of himself and above mean individual worries, make himone with the divine force of nature, it is inevitable thattemperaments should be found to whom the quickening spirit ofbhang is the spirit of freedom and knowledge. In the ecstasy ofbhang the spark of the Eternal in man turns into light themurkiness of matter or illusionand self is lost in the centralsoul-fire. The Hindu poet of Shiva, the Great Spirit that livingin bhang passes into the drinker, sings of bhang as the clearerof ignorance, the giver of'knowledge. No gem or jewel can touchin value bhang taken truly and reverently. He who drinks bhangdrinks Shiva. The soul in whom the spirit of bhang finds a homeglides intothe ocean of Being freed from the weary round ofmatter-blinded self. To the meaner man, still under the glamourof matter or maya, bhang taken religiously is kindly thwartingthe wiles of his foes and giving the drinker wealth andpromptness of mind. In this devotion to bhang, with reverence,not with the worship, which is due to Allahalone, the NorthIndian Mussulman joins hymning the praises of bhang. To thefollower of the later religion of Islam the holy spirit in bhangis not the spirit of the Almighty. Itthe spirit of thegreat prophet Khizr or Elijah. That bhang should be sacred toKhizr isnatural. Khizr is the patron saint of water. Still moreKhizr means green, the revered colour of the cooling water ofbhang. So the Urdu poet sings 'When I quaff fresh bhang I likenits colony to the fresh light down of thy youthful beard.' Theprophet Khizr or the Green prophet cries ' May the drink bepleasing to thee.' Nasir, the great North Indian Urdupoet of thebeginning of the present century, is loud in the praises of hisbeloved Sabzi, the Green one. 'Compared with bhang spirits arenaught. Leave all things thou fool, drink bhang.' From itsquickening the imagination Musalman poets honour bhang with thetitle Warak al Khiyall, Fancy's Leaf. And the Makhzan orgreat Arab-Greek drug book records many other fond names for thedrug. Bhang is the Joy-giver, the Sky-flier, the Heavenly-guide,the Poor Man's Heaven, the Soother of Grief. Much of the holiness of bhang is due to its virtue of clearingthe head and stimulating the brain to thought. Among ascetics thesect known as Atits are specially devoted to hemp. No social orreligious gathering of Atits is complete without the use of thehemp plant. smoked in ganja or drunk in bhang. To its devotee bhang is noordinary plant that became , holy from its guardian and healingqualities. According to one account, when nectar was producedfrom the churning of the ocean, something was wanted to purifythe nectar. The deity supplied the want of a nectar-cleanser bycreating bhang. This bhang Mahadev made from his own body, and soit is called angaj or body-born. According to anotheraccountsome nectar dropped to the ground and from the ground thebhang plant sprang. It was because they used this child of nectaror of Mahadev in agreement with religious forms that thee seersor Hishis became Siddha or one with the deity. He who, despitethe example of the Hishis, uses no bhang shall lose his happinessin this life and in the life to come. In the end he shall be castinto hell. The mere sight of bhang, cleanses from as much sin asa thousand horse-sacrifices or a thousand pilgrimages. He whoscandalizes the user of bhang shall suffer the torments of hellso long as the sun endures. He who drinks bhang foolishly or forpleasure without religious rites is as guilty as the sinner of lakhsof sins. He who drinks wisely and according to rule, be heever so low, even though his body is smeared with human ordureand urine, is Shiva. No god or man is as good as the religiousdrinker of bhang. The students of the scriptures at Benares aregiven bhang before they sit to study. At Benares, Ujjain, andother holy places yogis, bairagis and sanyasis take deep draughtsof bhang that they may Centre their thoughts on the Eternal. Tobring back to reason an unhinged mind the best and cleanest bhangleaves should be boiled in milk and turned to clarified butter.Salamisri, saffron, and sugar should be added and the wholeeaten. Besides over the demon of Madness bhang is Vijaya orvictorious over the demons of hunger and thirst. By thehelp of bhang ascetics pass days without food or drink. Thesupporting power of bhang has brought many a Hindu family safethrough. the miseries of famine. To forbid or even seriously torestrict the use of so holy and gracious a herb as the hemp wouldcause widespread suffering and annoyance and to the large bandsof worshipped ascetics deep-seated anger. It would rob the peopleof a solace in discomfort, of a cure in sickness, of a guardianwhose gracious protection saves them from the attacks of evilinfluences, and whose mighty power makes the devotee of theVictorious, overcoming the demons of hunger and thirst, of panicfear, of the glamour of Maya or matter, and of madness, able inrest to brood on the Eternal, till the Eternal, possessing himbody and soul, frees him from the having of self and receives himinto the ocean of Being. These beliefs the Musalman devoteeshares to the full. Like his Hindu brother the Musalman fakirreveres bhang as the lengthener of life, the freer from the bondsof self. Bhang brings union with the Divine Spirit. 'We drankbhang and the mystery I am He grew plain. So grand a result, sotiny a sin.'' NOTE BY BABU ABHILAS CHANDRA MUKERJI. NOTE BY BABU ABHIILAS CHANDRA MUKERJI, SECOND INSPECTOR OFEXCISE, BENGAL, ON THE ORIGIN AND HISTORY OF TRINATH WORSHIP INEASTERN BENGAL,. ' Date of origin.--In 1867 Babu Annnda Chandra Kali orKailai, of Dhamrai, a village in thana Sabhar of the Daccadistrict, first started the worship at the house of hisfather-in- law at Fattehpur in the Atia pargana of the Mymensinghdistrict (sub-division Tangail). Antecedent: of theoriginator.--Dhamrai is an important village in the Daccadistrict for its car festival, which is annually held in honourof a local idol named Madhab Thakur, and which iswitnessed by a large gathering of people. Ananda Chandra receivededucation at the Dacca Normal School. After leaving school heserved for some time as a pundit (schoolmaster), and then enteredthe Police Department, but was there only a short time. He is aBarendra Brahman and belongs to a respectable family. He learntto smoke ganja when he was only a boy. His present age Is 60years. He has the reputation of being a versifier. He smokes twopice worth of ganja every day. He married at Fattehpur in the Mymensingh district. There heintroduced Trinath worship 27 years ago. A panchali (poem)reciting the praises and exploits of Trinath was first publishedat Dacca in 1871 and the first edition (l,000 copies) was sold ina few months. The circumstances under which the worship was firststarted.-Ananda Chandra Kali was at the time living in thehouse of his father-in-law. He was thinking of introducing theworship of a common god, who might be worshipped by all classes,rich and poor, Brahman and Chandal, and by all creeds, Saktas,Baishnavas, and Shaivas, and the idea occurred to him of havingthe present worship at which ordinary and inexpensive things,such as ganja, oil, and betel-leaf, were alone to be used.  Trinath (from Sanskrit Tri, three, and Nath, lord) isrepresented to be Brahma, Bishnu and Shiva, the Hindu Trinity inone. Being a ganja-smoker himself Ananda Kali may have also thoughtthat by introducing the worship he would be able to save theganja-smokers from disrepute, as then ganja could be consumed inthe name of a god and under colour of doing a religious or piousact. Religious aspect of the worship.--The followingtranslation of the Introduction to the Trinath Mela Panchaligives some idea of the subject : The universe consists of the earth, the heaven, and the netherworld, and Trinath is the lord of these three worlds. "There was an incarnation of God in the form of Gour(Chaitanya), who delivered the sinners by preaching the name ofHari, but the Lord was not satisfied with this, and becameconcerned for the created, and soon he became incarnate again.Brahma, Bishnu and Shiva, gods in three forms, manifestedthemselves in one form. The one God, the Lord of the. universe,seeing the miseries of mankind, came to their deliverance. Ananda(Ananda Chandra Kali, the originator)declares that the true andsincere worshippers of Trinath are sure to obtain salvation.Brahma, Bishnu, and Shiva met together and expressed theirdesire, to come to this world in one form to receive worship. . "He is a truly pious man who worships Trinath, andblessings are showered on the worshipper. "The worship should be made in a form in which therich and the poor may equally join and may perform it easily. "Only three things, each worth one pice, arerequired for this puja (form of worship).. The things which please all must be selected. The offeringshould consist of siddhi (ganja),. pan (betel-leaf),and oil, each worth one pice. . "The votaries should assemble at night and worship withflowers. The ganja should be washed in the manner in which peoplewash ganja for smoking. The worshipper must fill three chillumswith equal quantities of ganja, observing due awe andreverence. When all, the worshippers are assembled the lampshould be lit with three wicks, and the praises of Tri- should besung. As long as the wicks burn, the god should be worshipped andhis praises chanted. The god should be reverentially bowed to atthe close of the puja. When the reading of the Panchali isfinished, those that will not show respect to the Prasad (the offering which has been accepted by the god), i.e., chillumof ganja, shall be consigned to. eternal hell, and the sincere worshippers shall go to heaven., How the worship spread.--Anauda Kali commenced the pujawith the aid of some ganja smokers in the village of Fattehpur. Alarge number of people consume ganja in the Dacca and Mymensinghdistricts, and the worship soon became popular. In fact it spreadlike wild-fire from one village to another among theganja-smokers. Those that were not in the habit of consumingganja also followed their example. The following circumstances assisted the spread of the Worship: I.--The puja is open to all classes from Brahmans to Chandalsand to the rich and the poor. Caste does not stand in its way,and it may be performed almost every day and in all seasons. II.--The pup is a Manarik Puja (made in pursuance of avow on the fulfillment of the object desired).. People have beenled to believe that Trinath possesses the power of .healing thesick and fulfilling desires, and .that those who. neglect hisworship meet with disgrace, while those who observe it attain successin life. There are several stories m the Panchali narrated inillustration of this statement. It is also popularly believedthat in the house where Trinath is worshipped cold: fever andheadache do not appear. III.--This is a cheap form of worship. The puja can beperformed by even the poorest, only three pies beingrequired. IV.--People of the lowest class can mix with those above themwithout distinction of caste or creed on the occasion of thesepujas. V.--Ganja eau be consumed by all in the name of a god, and thepractice cannot be looked down upon, because it is done undercertain forms and religious ceremonies. It is also popularlybelieved that those who mock the worshippers of Trinath shall beruined and shall be the victims of misfortune. The worship prevails not only among the poor, but also amongthe well-to-do. The latter often entertain their friends afterthe puja. Women do not take any active part in the worship, but theyoften listen to the reading. of the Panchali. The worship is more or less general in the following districts:--(1) Dacca, (2) Mymensingh, (3) Faridpur, (4) Backergunge, (5)Noakhali, (6) Tippers, (7) Chittagong, (8) Bogra, (9) Sylhet, and(10) Pabna (SerajgaDj side). .,, The worship is on the decline. It is almost dying out amongthe educated ]Jut among the masses it Still exists. . I have ascertained the above facts from Dr. Chandra SekharKali (brother of the originator, Ananda Chandra Kali) and manyother respectable persons, and also from personal inquiries inthe Daces, Chittagong and Rajshahi divisions. Contents | Feedback | Search DRCNet Library | Schaffer Library | Major Studies | IndianHemp Drugs CommissionWT02-B03-44IA087-000632-B015-203http://206.61.184.43:80/schaffer/Library/studies/inhemp/5chapt14.htm 206.61.184.43 19970122091245 text/html 74425HTTP/1.0 200 OKDate: Wednesday, 22-Jan-97 09:12:35 GMTServer: WebSitePro/1.1f (S/N wpo-0deb)Allow-ranges: bytesContent-type: text/htmlLast-modified: Saturday, 28-Dec-96 07:04:29 GMTContent-length: 74207 Indian Hemp Drugs Commission Report - The Policy of HempDrug Administration Contents | Feedback | Search DRCNet Library | Schaffer Library | Major Studies | IndianHemp Drugs Commission The Indian Hemp Drug Commission Report CHAPTER XIV. THE POLICY OF HEMP DRUG ADMINISTRATION General principles regarding sumptuary laws and theirapplication to India. 553. The question of prohibiting the growth of the hemp plantand the sale of ganja and allied drugs is one which stands in theto forefront Of the present inquiry. It has been remarked by awell known historian that "no laws are of any servicewhich are above the working level of public morality, and thedeeper they are carried down into life, the larger become theopportunities of evasion. If these words are true as applied toEngland under a feudal system, they are much more true in thepresent day as applied to British India. The Government of thiscountry has not grown out of the forces contained within it, buthas been superimposed upon them, and the paternal system ofgovernment which may have been suitable in England during thesixteenth century, and in, the initial development of some Indianprovinces during the period immediately following theirannexation, becomes purely visionary when public opinion is inprocess of formation and the needs of the people are year by yearfinding more ready expression. Occasionally, no doubt, theLegislature in India has anticipated a standard of morality notuniversally accepted by the people, as in the case of lawsrelating to infanticide or the burning of Hindu widows; but thesemeasures were passed under an overwhelming sense of the necessityof correcting popular notions of morality in matters coming wellwithin the sphere of Government, and in the assurance that in thecourse of time they could not fail to secure the assent of allintelligent members of the community. In the chapter of Mill'sPolitical Economy which treats of the non-interference principle,a distinction is made between two kinds of intervention by theGovernment-- the one authoritative interference, and the othergiving advice or promulgating information. And the followingremarks are made regarding the former: "It is evident, even at first sight, that theauthoritative form of Government intervention has a much morelimited sphere of legitimate action than the other. It requires amuch stronger necessity to justify it in any case, while thereare large departments of human life from which it must beunreservedly and imperiously excluded. Whatever theory we adoptrespecting the foundation of the social union, and under whateverpolitical institutions we live, there is a circle around everyindividual human being which no Government, be it that of one, orof few, or of the many, ought to be permitted to overstep thereis a part of the life of every person who has come to years ofdiscretion within which the individuality of that person ought toreign uncontrolled either by any other individual or by thepublic collectively. That there is, or ought to be, some space inhuman existence thus entrenched around no one who professes thesmallest regard to human freedom or dignity will call inquestion: the point to be determined is where the limit should beplaced; how large a province of human life this reservedterritory should include. I apprehend that it ought to includeall that part which concerns only the life, whether inward oroutward of the individual, and does not affect. the interests ofOthers, or affect. them only through the moral influence ofexample. With respect to the domain of the inward consciousness,the thoughts and feelings, and as much of external conduct as ispersonal only, involving no consequences, none at least of apainful or injurious kind, to other people, I hold that it isallowable in all, and in the more thoughtful and cultivated oftena duty, to assert and promulgate with all the force they arecapable of their opinion of what is good or bad, admirable orcontemptible, but not to compel others to conform to thatopinion, whether the force used is that of extra legal coercion,or exerts itself by means of the law. Even in those portions ofconduct which do affect the interests of others, the onus ofmaking out a case always lies on the defenders of legalprohibitions. It is not merely a constructive orpresumptive injury to others which will justify the interferenceof law with individual freedom. To be prevented from what one isinclined to, or from acting contrary to one's own judgment ofwhat is desirable, is not only always irksome, but always tends, protanto, to starve the development of some portion of thebodily or mental faculties, either sensitive or active; and,unless the conscience of the individual goes freely with thelegal restraint, it partakes, either in a great or in a smalldegree, of the degradation of slavery. Scarcely any degree ofutility short of absolute necessity will justify a prohibitoryregulation, unless it can also be made to recommend itself to thegeneral conscience; unless persons of ordinary good intentionseither believe already, or can be induced to believe, that thething prohibited is a thing which they ought not to wish todo." These remarks have been given at length, because theCommission believe that they contain a clear exposition of theprinciples which should guide them in deciding whether theprohibition of the hemp drugs should be authoritatively enforcedby Government. The question of entirely suppressing all intoxicants. 554- Now, a certain number of .persons (among whom may in allprobability,- be reckoned the mover of the question in the, Houseof Commons which led to the appointment of the-Indian Hemp DrugsCommission) deem it to be the duty of the British Government tosuppress the trade in all intoxicants in all the countries underits sway; and there are no doubt special circumstances inIndia which render it less, impossible than in some othercountries to consider even so drastic a policy. These are notablythe general sobriety of its races and the feeling, popular aswell as religious, which prevails against their use among a largesection of the community. Even then no appeal in support of sucha measure can be made to the public morality or practice ofcivilised nations at large, nor, so far as the Commission areaware, to any marked success attending the experiment inparticular instances. In the exceptional cases in which theexperiment has been attended with partial success (as in some ofthe American States), the reformation of the habit has become anobject of desire to the majority of the people, and the enactmentfor promoting Such reformation has presented itself less as arestrictive force than as an auxiliary agency Not laid before the commission 555. But the Commission are not called upon to pronounce on sowide an issue. It was not upon the basis of this generalprinciple that the Secretary of State for India accepted theproposal made in the House of Commons, nor do the instructionsissued to the Commission by the Government of India cover so widea field. The question of prohibiting the production and sale ofthe hemp drugs in India has to be considered by the Commissionapart from the general question, and such prohibition must bejustified, if at all, on some more special ground than the merefact that they are intoxicants. The past history of the case how far to be relied upon. 556. Again, there are a certain number of persons whose'evidence before the Commission points to the assumption that thecase for prohibition of the hemp drugs has already beenestablished in the records of the Government, and that furtherenquiry implies a willful blindness to what has been abundantlyproved by such records. A reference to Chapter XII of this Reportwill show how untrustworthy these records are in regard to theproduction of insanity by the use of the drugs-- an aspect of thequestion which is of the utmost importance, and has formed thebasis of nearly all the official opinion heretofore recorded.against such use. And, after availing themselves fully of everyopportunity of consulting the official literature on the subject,the Commission have arrived at the conclusion that it showslittle originality, and that a very limited amount of personalobservation has been made to do duty as the basis of largeconclusions. The want of reliable data has been compensated byannual reiteration until the stamp of antiquity has secured forthe opinions so expressed a large amount of acquiescence amongofficials who had neither the time nor the opportunity to examinethe matter for themselves So far, therefore, as the effects ofthe hemp drugs are concerned, the Commission have had to approachthe subject as almost a tabula rasa, and, while availingthemselves of the imperfect data previously collected, haveendeavoured to avoid accepting any conclusions without asubstantial foundation of well ascertained facts. The attitude,however, of the Government in regard to the question may bebriefly described. So far back as 1798 an inquiry was made inBengal regarding the quality of ten intoxicating articles--"opium, madak ganja, subzi, bhang, majum, banker, charas,tobacco, and toddy--" with a view to determining whether itmight not be advisable to prohibit altogether the sale of any ofthem. The conclusion arrived at, which was stated in a letter ofthe Board to the Governor-General in Council, No. 22, dated 29thMay 1798, was to the following effect. "It appears that theoriginal productions are as follows: Tobacco, opium, ganja, subzior bhang, banker, and toddy, and that the three remainingarticles are for the most part compositions of those hererecited, as above mentioned. With respect to the drugs specifiedm the foregoing schedule, they are not for the most partrepresented as producing any very violent or dangerous effects ofintoxication except when taken to excess; and, although theoperation of them-may be more powerful in their compound state,we apprehend it would be difficult to sanction the sale of theoriginal productions, and to prohibit with effect the use ofcompositions of which they are susceptible; to which may be addedthat most of these articles, both as original productions and asartificial combinations appear to be useful either in medicine orotherwise; for these reasons we do not deem it necessary torecommend that the sale of any of them be altogether prohibited,but shall proceed to state what appear to us the. best means ofrestraining the use of them, and improving the revenue by theimposition of such taxes as are best adapted to the nature of thecase." A complete inquiry was made in 1871 from allprovinces as to the effects of several preparations of hemp; andif the result should call for any action in the direction ofrestricting them by enhancement of the duty or of limiting, oreven prohibiting, the cultivation of the. plant, the advice ofthe Local Governments was invited as to the expediency andpracticability of such measures. The result is contained in theResolution of the Government of. India, Finance Department, No.3773, dated 17th December 1873. The following passage shows theconclusion arrived at: "Upon a consideration of all the opinions thus collected,it does not appear to the Governor-General in Council to bespecially proved that hemp incites to crime more than other drugsor than spirits. And there is some evidence to show that on rareoccasions this drug, usually so noxious, may be usefully taken.There can, however, be no doubt that its habitual use doesproduce insanity. The total number of cases of insanity is smallin proportion to the population, and not large even in proportionto the number of ganja smokers; but of the cases of insanityproduced by the excessive use of drugs or spirits, by far thelargest number must be attributed to the abuse of hemp. LowerBengal the circumstances have admitted of a system under whichthe consumption of ganja has been reduced one-half, while theamount of duty levied on it has been doubled. It would be verydesirable to control the cultivation and preparation of ganja andbhang elsewhere-in the same way. But it is believed that thiswould not be easy; indeed, it would probably be impracticable.Moreover, with the exception of the Chief Commissioners ofBritish Burma and the Central Provinces, the Local Governmentsare not in favour of altering existing arrangements. HisExcellency in Council, however, trusts that the various LocalGovernments and Administrations will endeavour, wherever it maybe possible, to discourage the consumption of ganja and bhang byplacing restrictions on their cultivation, preparation andretail, and imposing on their use as high a rate of duty as canbe levied without inducing illicit practices. As regards BritishBurma, the Chief Commissioner has already been informed that theGovernor-General in Council concurs with him in thinking that thecultivation and consumption of ganja should be absolutelyprohibited, and it has been prohibited from the beginning of theyear 1873-74. " In 1877 the Bengal Government appointed a special officer,Babu Hem Chunder Kerr, to make a full inquiry into the details ofthe cultivation of ganja, the sufficiency or otherwise of thepresent safeguards, and the reforms which it might be advisableto introduce. Sir Ashley Eden's conclusions on this officer'sreport in regard to the effects of ganja and policy to befollowed were as follows: "The Lieutenant-Governor hashimself no doubt that the use of ganja in any form is injuriousto the consumer, and that it is the duty of Government to makethe tax on this article as high as it can possibly bear.Unfortunately it is habitually used by large numbers of the lowerclasses of the population, who would, if deprived of italtogether, apparently find in the leaves of the wild hemp plantand in other drugs narcotics and stimulants of equallydeleterious character. It does not seem possible, therefore, tostop the cultivation altogether. The policy of Government must beto limit its production and sale by a high rate of duty withoutplacing the drug entirely beyond the reach of those who willinsist upon having it." The last important utterance on thesubject previous to the appointment of the Commission iscontained in the letter of the Government of India, FinanceDepartment, to Her Majesty's Secretary of State, No. 212, dated9th August 1892, in which the following remarks occur: "Weare inclined to believe that ganja is the most noxious of allintoxicants now commonly used in India. But even if the absoluteprohibition of the use of the drug could be enforced, the resultmight be to induce the use of still more noxious drugs. Indiaabounds with plants growing wild from which drugs can be procuredwhich are more deleterious in their effects than ganja. One suchplant is the dhatura (Stramonium), the seeds of whichare already used to intensify the narcotic effects of bhang, aliquid preparation of hemp leaves; and we apprehend that if theuse of ganja were suppressed altogether, dhatura might be largelyresorted to by the poorer classes as a means of satisfying theircraving for stimulants. Apart, however, from the objections justmentioned, we believe. that it would be impossible to enforce inIndia a prohibition of the use of ganja. That drug is produced inNative States, and the difficulties in the way of preventing itsimport from them, if the supply in British India were cut off,would be immense. It would not, moreover, be possible to suppressthe supply in British India. The hemp plant grows readily inIndia, in many places wild without cultivation of any kind, andit would be easy for any one addicted to the use of ganja to growa plant or two in the enclosure of his own house and in nooks andcorners which would be safe from observation and from the risk ofdetection. The question in the House of Commons suggests that asthe possession and sale of ganja has been prohibited for manyyears in Burma, it is desirable that the same prohibition shouldbe extended to other provinces of British India. The analogy ofBurma does not, however, apply to India. When the prohibition wasenforced in Burma, the drug was very little used by the NativeBurmese, its consumption being almost entirely confined tocoolies and other immigrants from India; and the cultivation ofthe plant in Burma, which had never been extensive, had virtuallyceased, the consumers being dependent on importations for theirsupplies. In India, on the other hand, the practice of ganjasmoking has existed from time immemorial, and among certain sectsof Hindus, ascetics, and religious mendicants hemp intoxicationis habitually indulged in; and, as explained in the precedingparagraph, it would be impossible to suppress the growth of theplant. But, although we consider it impracticable to enforce theabsolute prohibition of the use of ganja, we fully recognise itas our duty to restrict its consumption as far as practicable,and we have distinctly laid down the policy to be pursued inrespect of this drug in our Resolution of the 17th December 1873already quoted. The annual reports of Excise Administration showthat the subject has since been continually before LocalGovernments, who are making every possible endeavour to minimisethe evils and discourage the use of the drug wherever it is asource of danger to consumers." Thus "restraining theuse and improving, the revenue by the imposition of suitabletaxation," "discouraging the consumption byplacing restrictions on the cultivation, preparation, and retail,and imposing on their use as high a rate of duty as can be leviedwithout inducing illicit practices," "limiting theproduction and sale by a high rate of duty without placing thedrug entirely beyond the reach of those who will insist uponhaving it," "restricting consumption as far aspracticable, minimising the evils, and discouraging the use ofthe drug wherever it is a source of danger to consumers"have from time to time been the watch-words of the Government inthe matter of the hemp drugs, a policy only once definitelyabandoned, viz., in the case of Burma, where totalprohibition was introduced in 1873. Prohibition in other countries. 557. Allusion must be made to precedents for the prohibitionof the hemp drugs in other countries in order to complete thesegeneral observations. Excepting British Burma (reference to whichwill be made further on), the Commission only know of four casesof prohibition, viz., in Turkey, Egypt, Greece, andTrinidad. For the first three of these, the only information atthe disposal of the Commission is contained in the communicationsfrom Her Majesty's representatives addressed to the Secretary ofState for Foreign Affairs in 1892 in consequence of a requisitionmade on them by the Earl of Rosebery at the request of Mr. W SCaine, M.P. Turkey 558. The ground of the prohibition in Turkey is thus stated ina note addressed by the Grand Vizir to the Ministry Commerce,Constantinople, on 1st March 1292 (sic):"From thereports furnished by the Imperial Medical Council, it appearedthat the use of hashish in the preparation of medicines wasextremely rare, and that, being a narcotic, its use must ofnecessity be injurious, and that consequently the suppression ofthe cultivation of hashish could not fail to prove highlyadvantageous." The effect of the prohibition is thusdescribed in an enclosure to the Ambassador's reply: "Theimportation and sale in Turkey of hashish, though contraband, isstill, I hear, largely carried on, and is used for smoking, inthe composition of various sweetmeats, and as an opiate ingeneral." Egypt. 559. In Egypt the cultivation, use, and importation of hashishwere first forbidden in 1868, but in 1874 it was allowed to beimported on payment of duty. In November 1877 an order wasreceived from Constantinople that all hashish brought into Egyptwas to be seized and destroyed, and finally, in March 1879, theimportation and cultivation of hashish were prohibited by aKhedivial decree. In March 1884 it was provided that confiscatedhashish should be sold by the Customs (for delivery abroad)instead of being destroyed as formerly, and the proceeds of thesale divided amongst the informers and officers who took part inthe seizure. "This measure was rendered necessary,"says Mr. Caillard, the Director-General of the Customs, "bythe absence of any fund from which rewards could bedistributed; while, on the other hand, the profits of smugglingbeing very great, large sums were paid by the smugglers to insurethe silence or complicity of the Customs officers,coastguards-men, and others. A considerable number of persons areemployed in the smuggling trade, many of them having subsistence.Great ingenuity is displayed by the smugglers no other means ofand no sooner has one trick been discovered than another isinthis illicit trade, of the contrainvented. The great obstacle,however, to the complete repression band trade is the refusal ofsome of the European Governments to recognize the right of theEgyptian Government to search suspected shops or warehouses, andto punish the delinquents by fine as well as confiscation. Inview of the impossibility of suppressing the contraband trade inhashish under the suggested to the Minister of Financecircumstances described above, desirability of removing theprohibition against the importation of the and I proposed tocollect a customs duty of P. T. 100 per kilogramme (9s. 3d.perlb.), besides it license-tax on the sale of hashish. It has beenabundantly proved that the vice of hashish smoking cannot besuppressed by legislation, whereas by a system of licenses it maybe kept under control to some extent. "Mr. Caillardestimates that the quantity of hashish consumed annually in Egyptcannot be less than 50,000 okes (about lbs. 140,000)notwithstanding the prohibition. He states that the hashishappears to be manufactured chiefly in Greece. Greece. 560. In Greece there is no law regulating or speciallyalluding to the product as merchandise is allowed, but a Policeorder of 1891 prohibits its sale and consumption in the smallcafes of Athens and the Piroeus, in some of which, during theprevious ten or fifteen years apparently, the habit of using thisdrug had been gradually introduced. The order was based upon areport of the Sanitary Board at Athens, in which prominentmention is made of the observations made in India by Englishdoctors, and the statistics of insanity in Bengal lunatic asylumsascribed to the use of the hemp drugs are put forward asjustifying, repressive measures. The effect of the order passedis not mentioned, sufficient time not having elapsed. Trinidad.. 561. As regards Trinidad, the Commission are not surethat the hemp drugs are prohibited. The fact has been stated bythe Indian Immigrants Commission, Natal, 1885-87, and by Dr.Thomas Ireland, Government Medical Officer, British Guiana, in apaper published in the Alienist and Neurologist, St.Louis, in October 1893. But, on the other hand,Surgeon-Major Comins, lately on special duty in British andForeign Colonies and the Netherlands, in his Note on Emigrationfrom India to Trinidad, 1893, quotes a statement of the Protectorof Immigrants, who says that in the year 1885 an Ordinance waspassed requiring the payment of L100 per acre to obtain a licenseto grow ganja, which had previously been grown in largequantities. This practically put a stop to the growth andconsumption for several years, but immigrants who had leftTrinidad two years previous to the writing of his report had beengrowing it in Venezuela, and several seizures had been made bythe Customs officers from persons endeavouring to introduce itinto Trinidad. The Protector adds: "With a coast linesuch as ours, adjacent to that of the Spanish Main, it will beimpossible to prevent its introduction into this colony ifimmigrants who go there continue to grow it." Dr. Cominshimself says: "I do not know what are the laws in force hereregarding the sale of opium and ganja." Basis of prohibition and results in these countries. 562. Thus in the case of other countries, where the useof the drugs has been prohibited, the Commission do not find inthe literature available to them many arguments for prohibition.In Turkey it rests upon the theory accepted by orthodoxMuhammadans that hashish "being a narcotic its usemust of necessity be injurious," while in Egypt theprohibition emanated from Turkey. In both these countries themeasure has by no means been attended with complete success. InGreece the prohibition in the cafes of Athens is based largelyupon Indian experience, which the Commission have had cause ingreat measure to recast. In Trinidad, if there has beenprohibition, it does not seem of late to have been effectual. Itmust be added that the Commission have no scientific informationregarding the strength of the article of commerce called hashish,and it may differ to some extent from the Indian products. Fromthe description of its manufacture even by the Mayor ofOrchomenus in Mantines in Arcadia, whence the Egyptian supply ismainly derived, it appears to resemble more the charas of Yarkandthan the ganja or bhang of India. Is prohibition in India justifiable, feasible, andadvisable? 563. Starting, therefore, from the position that what is knownof the hemp drugs in the past is not sufficient to justify theirprohibition in India, and that for such a measure there must bestrong justification based on ascertained facts scientificallyand systematically examined, the first question for theCommission to decide is whether such justification is to be foundin the evidence before them, and the second-whether, if this isso, prohibition is feasible and advisable on other grounds. Thesewill now be considered. Prohibition of bhang 564. The effects of the hemp drugs have been treated inChapters X to XIII of the Report; and as the first result ofthese conclusions, the Commission are prepared to state that thesuppression of the use of bhang would be totally unjustifiable.It is established to their satisfaction that this use is veryancient, and that it has some religious tion among a large bodyof Hindus; that it enters into their social customs; that it isalmost without exception harmless in moderation, and perhaps insome cases beneficial; that the abuse of it is not so harmful asthe abuse of alcohol; that its suppression, involving theextirpation of the wild hemp plant, would in some tracts be amatter of great difficulty; that such a measure would beextremely unpopular, and would give rise to widespreaddiscontent; and, finally, that, if successfully accomplished, itwould lead to the use of more hurtful stimulants. The Commissiondeem it unnecessary to traverse the evidence further than hasbeen done in the preceding chapters of this report in support ofthese propositions. It is almost unanimous in regard to them. Theutmost that is necessary in regard to this product is that itshould be brought under more effective control, and this matterwill be dealt with further on. But absolute prohibition is, inthe opinion of the Commission, entirely out of the question. Prohibition of ganja and charas 565. Though it has been shown that as a rule ganja and charasare used in moderation, and that the moderate use ordinarily.does not cause appreciable injury, yet it has been establishedthat the excessive use of these forms of hemp drugs has been moreinjurious than in the case of bhang. Whether they should beprohibited or merely controlled is a question which might besettled merely with reference to their ascertained effects. TheCommission consider that the effects are not such as to call forprohibition, and on the general principles discussed in theopening paragraphs of this chapter, such interference would beunjustifiable. Nevertheless, it. seems advisable to refer to theother evidence with a view to ascertaining the generallyprevailing views on the subject, and considering the grounds onwhich prohibition is advocated or opposed. The evidence regarding prohibition of ganja and charas maybe considered together. 566. In reviewing the evidence on these points, it will not benecessary to draw a distinction between ganja and charas. Theeffects of these two drugs have been shown to be similar, thoughcharas is cateris paribus the more potent. They are bothordinarily smoked, though very occasionally used for eating anddrinking usually in the form of admixtures with other condimentsstated by Mr. Lyall (Bengal 1): "Ganja and charas arereally one, and in time, if the question be scientificallyfollowed up, possibly charas will be the only form used."The refuse of ganja is used in some provinces as bhang, but thissubstance more nearly resembles bhang than ganja properly socalled. The ganja of the different provinces varies in quality.But these distinctions cannot here be specially observed; it willbe sufficient to bear in mind that the opinions in Bengal, theCentral Provinces, Madras, Bombay, and the smallerAdministrations relate to ganja; that those in the Punjab relateto charas; and that those in the North-Western Provinces and Sindrelate to ganja and charass, both of which consumed. Supply of ganja and charas in its relation to prohibition. 567. A few remarks, however, recapitulating the localconditions of ganja and charas will not be out of place. Charasis practically a foreign article. Small amounts are imported fromNepal and Gwalior, but they may be left out of the account. Thebulk comes from Yarkand through the Himalayan passes, or to amuch smaller. degree from offer parts of Central Asia through theroutes on the frontier of Afghanistan. It would not be a verydifficult matter to stop these imports, though the co-operationof the Kashmir Darbar would be necessary in regard to Yarkandcharas. It may, therefore, be accepted that the supply of charasmight be cut off without much difficulty, though, as this articleforms the principal import from Yarkand, the prohibition ofcharas would paralyse, if not extinguish, the trade with thiscountry. In regard to ganja, the problem is more complex. Ganjais regularly cultivated in Bengal, the Central Provinces, Madras,Bombay, and Berar. In Bengal and the Central Provinces, thecultivation of the hemp, plant for its production is undercomplete control. In Berer cultivation is only permitted underlicense. In the other tracts of British territory it is notdirectly Controlled. Assuming that control is possible in thesetracts, it does not follow that it would be equally possible toprevent cultivation altogether. Moreover, there still remains aconsiderable amount of production in many of the Native Statesall over India. To induce these States to prohibit cultivationwould be a difficult matter, and, even if this were done, thesuppression of illicit cultivation would offer the most seriousdifficulties. For, though ganja of good quality requires somecultivation and tending, the evidence before the Commission tendsto establish the fact that ganja of an inferior kind can bemanufactured from the spontaneous or casual growth which is foundnear human habitations and amidst cultivation of other crops inmany parts of India. While, therefore, it cannot be asserted thatthe task of preventing the manufacture of ganja is an impossibleone, it would certainly at the present time be attended withconsiderable difficulty. Opinions of the witnesses regarding prohibition of ganjaand charas. 568. The question addressed to the. witnesses regarding theprohibition of the hemp drugs (No. 35) was so framed as to elicitin the first place opinions as to the feasibility of such. ameasure. The considerations bearing upon the subject were alsoset forth in the form of subsidiary questions. The questionwhether the witnesses advocated prohibition. was not specificallyput, but it is not difficult, comparing the answers to thequestions above mentioned with those relating to other questions,to decide what the opinion of each witness is on this question.Those who hold decided views have no doubt generally stated themin some portion of their answers, and at all events ampleopportunity of doing so was afforded them. A larger number of thewitnesses have contented themselves with merely giving anaffirmative or negative answer to the questions on .the subject.It is impossible to attach much importance to such answers. TheCommission have abstracted them and considered them, but theyfeel bound to give far more weight to the opinions of witnesseswhose replies show that they have formulated an opinion, on thedesirability of prohibition. Some account will now be given ofthese answers. Opinions regarding prohibition of ganja and charas. 569. Out of the total of 1,193 witnesses, 575 haveexpressed a decided opinion on the question of prohibition. Ofthese only 99 advocate it in their answers. The remainder areagainst it. The classification of these witnesses is shown in thefollowing table: Superior Superior Subordinate Civil Officers. Officers. PRACTITIONERS. PROVINCE. ..... Bengal ......... Assam ......... 4 1 .. , North-Western Provinces 10 79 Punjab . 3 ."' 3 36 Cerntral Provinces ....... Madras ] 11111 67 Bombay and Sind 19 7 69 Berar, Ajmere, Coorg, and 1 12 . Quetta-Pishin.  Total - x6 138 4 3 106 4 2o Per cent .... 3 97 x7 83 1o 90 36 64 83 Thus, not only is there a very large preponderance of opinionagainst prohibition, but the preponderance is specially markedamong superior Civil officers. The only witnesses indeed of thelatter class who favour prohibition are three in the Punjab,where charas and not ganja is consumed. The most important of these opinions on either side will nowbe specified. The most forcible opinions in favour of prohibitionwill be quoted at some length in order that the argument for thisview may be .thoroughly appreciated. The opinions againstprohibition are too numerous to be quoted, but the witnesses willbe named under headings setting forth the most prominent viewsexpressed. Bengal opinions in favour of prohibition of ganja 570. The Bengal witnesses in favour of prohibition of ganjaconsist of a Sub-Deputy Collector, an Assistant Surgeon. twoMedical Practitioners, an Honorary Magistrate, two zamindars, twopleaders, a delegate from the Indian Relief Society, Calcutta,the Secretary to the Band of Hope, Faridpur, the Secretary to theBogra Medical Society, and two Missionaries. The Commissioncannot find much to quote from these opinions, but the followingare the most forcible: (238) Delegate, Indian Relief Society, Calcutta, BabuAmrita Krishna Mullick, B.A., B.L.: After quoting officialand medical opinions relating to the injuriousness of ganja, theSociety, endeavours to show that the cultivators of the hempplant lose largely by their occupation, and maintains that it isthe duty of the Government to come to their rescue by abolishingit. The society maintains that the privation to the consumerswould not be serious, and that it is difficult to suggest anydrug more deleterious than ganja to which they could take. TheSociety contends that the alleged religious sanction to the useof the drugs is a fallacy, and refers to the opinions of severalpandits in support of this view. The Society argues that to meetthe deficit in the revenue, which would be about lakhs per annum,the salaries of European officers should be cut down, the dutieson cotton goods re-imposed and the income-tax increased with anenhanced taxable minimum. Savings would be effected by reductionof establishment and by decreased cost of lunatic asylums. (286) Secretary, Band of Hope Temperance Society, Faridpur,Babu Purna Chandra Maitra: "This Society begs to urgeupon the Commission to consider the justice and propriety of ajust, benign, and Christian Government to allow cultivation andsale of a drug which has been excluded from some countries, andin England doubly protected in the poison list." The witnessargues that the drug" has been unreservedly condemned byeminent doctors as one of the most dangerous poisons known, asthe most potent cause of lunacy, and as the most pernicious anddeleterious of all excitants ever in use in any country." Headmits that there are a number of yogis, sanyasis, fakirs, andmendicants addicted to ganja smoking, but states that ganjasmoking forms no part of their religion, and there is not asingle Hindu or Muhammadan religious book which sanctions the useof ganja. "No real disaffection can under the benign rule ofthe British Government be seriously apprehended, and, even in theevent of there being such apprehension, the fact should not belost sight of that the Government in this case will have thesupport of the bulk of the population." He alleges thatganja produces crime, and that the taxation, amounting to 22lakhs, is a drain on the poverty-stricken and half-famishedpeople of Bengal. He finds it difficult to suggest a substitutefor ganja, but liquor may be one, and a peculiar preparation ofstrong tobacco may also serve the purpose. (134) Secretary to Bogra Medical Society (10 members),Pyari SankerDass Gupta, L.M.S.: "the prohibition willgive rise to no political danger. For the ganja smokers have verylittle influence over society. The Government has faced questionsof a greater religious character, as the Suttee or the Age ofConsent Act, with boldness. This is comparatively a minorquestion affecting only depraved men." (203) Rev. W. B. Phillips, Missionary.: "What withliquor and opium and hemp drugs of various kinds, all licensed byGovernment, it does seem as if the population were terriblyexposed to degrading influences. It is not my province to facethe difficult task of dealing with these evils; and I sincerelysympathize with the Government in the heavy duty of solving thegrave problems involved. But I do feel it my duty to set forth asstrongly as possible the assurance that very much mischief isbeing worked in the country by the various intoxicants so freelyand largely sold. I hardly care to distinguish between opium,alcohol, and ganja. I regard them all as bad. My mind is soimpressed with the evil effects of excessive use that I do notcare to consider the moderate use. I would wish Government tobegin with ganja, to proceed with little delay-against opium, andthen tackle alcohol. I prefer this as a matter of policy, asganja is easiest dealt with I am prepared to prohibit all threeintoxicants on account of the evil which I see done by them. (81) Kali Das Mukerji, Sub-Deputy Collector: Afteradvocating prohibition of ganja on the grounds of the evileffects, and stating that there would be no danger from thediscontent caused owing to the small number of the consumers, thewitness proceeds: "The reasons usually put forward infavour of ganja consumption are as follows: (1) that Hindu friarsand jogis cannot do without it, for it helps them in theirreligious contemplation, and sustains them under severe exertionand exposure; (2) that it is a safeguard against disease inmalarious tracts; and (3) that it serves the labouring classes asa refreshing stimulant, alleviating fatigue. I do not think thatany of these reasons is conclusive, though plausible. In fact,none of them stands the test of close examination. If anyintoxicating drug is at all necessary for friars and jogisalcohol, opium or siddhi may serve the purpose. Eight kinds ofintoxicating drugs are prescribed in the Tantras for Hindudevotees, and it is optional with them to take any if they careto do so at all. That ganja is a safeguard against disease inmalarious tracts is not necessarily true Even as a stimulant andremover of fatigue, ganja has very little to recommend it to thelabouring classes A careful observation is sure to establish thefact that any ordinary labourer whose only stimulant is tobaccois on the whole a better workman than his ganja consumingbrother." Opinions against prohibition of ganja in Bengal. 571. It is impossible to quote the mass of opinion againstprohibition of ganja, but the following analysis of some of themost important opinions will give an idea of the strength ofthese opinions :-- (1) Prohibition impossible or unnecessary, or could not beenforced without a large preventive establishment. (1) Hon'ble D. R. Lyall, C.S.I., Member, Board of Revenue. (2) Mr. Westmacott, Commissioner. (9) Mr. Price, Collector. (11) Mr. Skrine, Collector. (21) Mr. Jenkins, Collector. (17) Mr. Gupta, Commissioner of Excise (46) Ganendra Nath Pal, Deputy Collector. (197) Mr. H. M. Weatherall, Manager, Nawab's Estates, Tippera. (2) Prohibition would be strongly resented by religiousmendicants, would be regarded as an interference with religion,or would be likely to become a political danger. (1) Hon'ble D. R. Lyall, C.S.I., Member, Board of Revenue. (3) Mr. Westmacott, Commissioner.(19) Mr. Manisty,Collector.(18) Mr. Hare, Collector. (16) Mr. Marindin, Collector. (32) Mr. Bedford, Deputy Commissioner. (63) Abhilas Chandra Mukharji, Deputy Collector. (62) Kanti Bhushan Sen, Deputy Collector of Excise. (163) Maharaja Bahadur Sir Jotendra Mohan Tagore, K.C.S.I. (174) Radhika Churn Sen, Zamindar. (175) Raghonandan Parsad, Zamindar. .(185) Jogendra Krishna Rat Chaudhri. (207) Purnendu Narayan Sinha. (2o8) Mahendra Chandra Mitra, Chairman, Naihati Municipality. (92) Mr. Ricketts, Manager, Nilgiri State. (217) Biprodas Banarji, Pleader, Newspaper Editor, andChairman, Baraset Municipality. (250) District Board, Monghyr. (228) Jadubans Sahai, Vice-Chairman, Arrah Municipality (3) Prohibition might lead to the use of dhatura or otherintoxicantsworse than ganja. (21) Mr. Jenkins, Collector. (46) Ganendra Nath Pal, Deputy Collector. (62) Kanti Bhushan Sen, Deputy Collector of Excise. (161) Maharaja Girijnath, Roy Bahadur.(164) Raja Surja KantaAcharjya, Bahadur. (167) Radha Balav Chaudhri, Rai Bahadur. (233) Secretary, Rajshahi Association. (217) Biprodas Banarji, Pleader, &c. Assam.Assam.Opinions in favour of prohibition of ganja. 572. The opinions in favour of prohibition of ganja in Assamare those of a Civil Surgeon, the Secretary to the Tezpur RaiyatsAssociation, the Secretary to the Upper Assam .Association, amerchant, and a pensioned Overseer, Public Works Department, andmember of a Local Board. There is nothing especially to note inthese opinions. Opinions against.. 573. Against prohibition we have the Commissioner of the AssamValley, the Commissioner of Excise, the Director of Land Recordsand Agriculture, an Officiating Deputy Commissioner, a CivilSurgeon, an Extra Assistant Commissioner, a medical practitioner,four pleaders, and four planters. Mr. Driberg, Commissioner of Excise,says: "It would be useless to prohibit the use of ganja in aprovince like Assam, surrounded as it is by independent hillpeople, who would cultivate it in their hills and smuggle it downwith little risk of detection. Any prohibition will only lead tothe increase of illicit consumption and to the secret use of thedrug, which would be decidedly bad; of course, stop cultivationin Bengal, and the prohibition of the use of excise ganja couldbe enforced; but there would be serious discourse, though in thisprovince it might not amount to a political danger, and theprohibition would be followed by recourse to opium, and in somecases to alcohol." The evidence of planters tends generallyto show that the use of ganja by the garden coolies, who (exceptin the western districts of the Assam Valley and those of theSurma Valley, all of which border on Bengal) are the principalconsumers, produces no serious effects. There is nothing in anyof the Assam evidence to controvert these views. North-Western Provinces.Opinions in favour of prohibitionof ganja and charas. 574. The advocates of prohibition of ganja and charas in theNorth-Western Provinces are as follows: 6 subordinate civilofficers, 9 subordinate medical officers and private medicalpractitioners, and 18 non-officials. Butfew of these witnessesgive any reasons for their opinions. And the Commission are notable to quote any one of them as having any special weight. Theonly opinion which it appears worth while to quote is that of aCollector (Mr. Addis (4), who does not, however, specificallyrecommend prohibition. He says: "It probably would befeasible to prohibit the use of all these drugs. Public opinionis against their use, and the people are very obedient toauthority. The prohibition would certainly lead to the increaseduse of opium and alcohol. Opinions against prohibition. 575. On the other hand, the opinions against prohibition arevery strong. The following is an analysis of some of the mostimportant:- (1) Prohibition impossible or unnecessary, or could not beenforced without a large preventive establishment. (1) Hon'ble A. Cadell, Member, Board of Revenue.(5) Mr.Stoker, Commissioner of Excise(12) Mr. Brownrigg, OfficiatingDeputy Commissioner.(2o) Mr. Partridge, Officiating DeputyCommissioner.(9) Mr. Jackson, Collector.(10) Mr. Tweedy,Collector.(17) Mr. Spencer, Officiating Collector.(34) Mr.Cockburn, Assistant Sub-Deputy Opium Agent.(32) Mr. Robarts,Joint Magistrate.(26) Rama Shankar, Assistant Collector(24) Mr.Rogers, Assistant Commissioner.(191) Kanwar Kundan Singh,Zamindar. (12) Mr. Brownrigg, Officiating Deputy Commissioner.(9)Mr. Jackson, Collector.(10) Mr. Tweedy, Collector.(34) Mr.Cockburn, Assistant Sub-Deputy Opium Agent.(21) Mr. Gillan,Assistant Collector, (26) Rama Shankar, AssistantCollector.o(46) Panditi Bishambar Nath, Deputy Collector.(28)Mr.Bruce, Assistant Collector..(33)Pandit Sri Lulls OfficiatingJoint(227) Syad Mahammad Nuh, Zamindar. (3) Prohibition might lead to use of dhatura or otherintoxicants worse than ganja or charas. (6) Mr. Stoker, Commissioner of Excise.(15) Mr. Ferard,Collector (28) Mr. Bruce, Assistant Collector.(51) Thakur TukmanSingh, Deputy Collector. Punjab 576. The advocates of theprohibition of charas Opinions for prohibition of charas. in thePunjab are as follows:-- 3 superior civil officers, 3 subordinatecivi1 officers, 2 subordinate medical officers, and 10non-officials.It may be noted that Mr. Ogilvie, FinancialCommissioner in charge of Excise (2), records the followingopinion: "I am inclined to hold the opinion, though I am notquite satisfied on the subject, that the use of charas is sodeleterious that it might be permissible, both on grounds ofmorality and utility, for its use to be prohibited or for theprice of the drug to be so artificially raised as to confine itsconsumption to a very small number indeed. The reason why I saythat I am not quite satisfied on the point is because I have notsufficiently investigated the facts. All that I can, therefore,say with certainty is that my opinion tends to the directionabove indicated I would observe, however, with regard to theYarkand trade that the imposition of a duty so high as to bepractically prohibitive would very considerably injure thattrade, . because the Yarkand trader in exchange for the churnstakes back the products of the Punjab to his own country or toKashmir. The extinction or serious injury of the Yarkand tradewould, of course, be a very regrettable circumstance. On theother hand from my personal knowledge as Deputy Commissioner ofthe Dera  Ismail Khan District, I would say no harm wouldaccrue to general trade on the western border from theprohibition of churns." Mr. Coldstream. Deputy Commissioner (5), though he doesnot seem to have formed a definite opinion regarding the moderateuse of the drugs, says: "The gradual stoppage ofimport of ganja and charas might be tried. It is not as yet avery widely-spread habit, but it might grow. It would cause gentpain and discontent if the prohibition were sudden andcomprehensive, but this would not amount to political danger. Aprohibitory measure regarding ganja and charas would no doubt befollowed at once by a recourse to opium and alcohol. I can quitebelieve the moderate occasional use of the drugs may becomparatively harmless, but I am not aware that they are commonlyused occasionally and in moderation. They may, however, be soused for all I know." Mr. Wilson, Deputy Commissioner (14), says that heshould like to see the experiment made in selected districts ofprohibiting trade in charas (and bhang) all together. As regardscharas, he thinks the prohibition would be feasible, as it isimported, and the discontent would be insignificant. knows of noclass, such as labourers, who take the drug in moderation as anordinary stimulant. Among fakirs and other excessive consumers,he thinks the use produces great evils, and that there is no moreharmful drug which they are likely to take to. He does not knowanything of the use of dhatura except its administration as apoison. He thinks sudden prohibition would be cruel. He wouldtherefore begin by taxation and gradually raise it, leaving thequestion of total prohibition to be decided by experience. Theevidence of Arjan Singh, Extra Assistant Commissioner (19),is much to the same effect, but he states that the use of dhaturais general among the followers of Siva at the Shivratri in theDera Ghazi Khan district. He says it is taken in very smallquantities, so that its effect is almost imperceptible. GeneralMillet (69), formerly District Superintendent of Police,would like to see all intoxicants prohibited which cannot beproved to be actually necessary. He thinks gradual prohibition ofthe hemp drugs feasible, and that educated, intelligent nativepublic opinion, which to a great extent leads that of the lowerclasses, would support prohibition. Discontent at first among thedegraded classes would be inevitable, but there would be nopolitical danger, though tact and discretion would be needed andcalm-minded European officials at the helm. He fears thatrecourse to alcohol would be the result. Shekh Riaz Husain,zamindar (67), thinks that "having regard for thewelfare and good of the people which the British Government hasin view, the prohibition of the hemp drugs (including bhang) isimperatively necessary. Loyal and intelligent subjects andwell-wishers of the country would welcome the prohibition, thoughthe unscrupulous habitual consumers would indeed dislike it. Butas it would be for the good of the people, it is not hoped thatany class of persons would resent it. The enforcement of theprohibition should be effected like other new laws andregulations, exceptions being made to some extent in the case ofthe existing old habitual consumers, because its sudden stoppagewould cause them serious privation. The discontent resultingwould not amount to a political danger. If it were possible tomake charas as expensive as alcohol, that would be one way ofdealing with the subject."Sardar Sujan Singh, RaiBahadur, Contractor (59), considers charas as certainly mostinjurious, and thinks its use should most certainly beprohibited. It does no good to anybody. There are not many kaharswho take it. Those who do, go to the bad. He does not know ofthe use. of dhatura as an intoxicant. The use of madak and chanduis more injurious than charas, and they also should be prohibitedas well as liquor. He would not recommend immediate prohibition,but would put on such a tax, increasing it gradually, as to makeit impossible for the majority of people to buy them at all. Dr. H. M. Clark, Missionary (46), would like to seecharas prohibited if it were possible, He thinks. however, thatalcohol does more harm than charas. He cannot believe that amoderate use of charas is possible. Fakirs and devotees are thechief consumers. Devi Dayal, Editor of the Kaitistha Mitra,*Lahore, circulation 300 copies (83), says: "If charas becalled poison (fatal, killing, murdering drug), it is not anexaggeration of any kind. It is a great vice to smoke charas. MayGod not give this even in the lot of a foe. Only just people ashave bad luck get engaged in this vice. Government will do theirsubjects a very great obligation by saving them from early deathand whirlpool of destruction and ruin. My present belief is thatthere is no such thing as moderation in the use of chards,because, when a charsi visits another, he offers him the chillum,and they smoke in company. The smoke is thus repeatedfrequently." Consumers acknowledge that they would have nocomplaint; and if Government were to prohibit the use of charasto-morrow, the bad habit would die out of itself. Ganesh Das,Pleader, and President, Sarin Sabha, Hoshiarpur (77): Charasjogis, sanyasis, and suthra fakirs, andis consumed by shoemakers,musicians, by some Khatris and Brahmins. The physical effects arevery bad, and most consumers become incapacitated for work andlead a miserable life. The subcommittee of the Sarin Sabhaappointed to consider the subject recommend prohibition. Enquirywas not made from medical experts. Consumers would not take toother intoxicants, because the intoxication of chards is not likethat of opium or other intoxicants. The greatest loss would bethat of the traders of Hoshiarpur and Amritsar, who takemerchandise to Ladakh and Yarkand and bring back charas. Opinions against prohibition of charas. 577. The following is an analysis of some of the mostimportant evidence against prohibition (1) Prohibition impossible or unnecessary, or could not beenforced without a large preventive establishment. (1) Mr. Rivaz, First Financial Commissioner.(3) Mr. Thorburn,Commissioner. (6) Mr. Ibbetson, Deputy Commissioner.(8) Mr.Maconachie, Deputy Commissioner. (13) Mr. Drummond, DeputyCommissioner. (66) Kazi Syad Ahmad, retired Government servant. (2) Prohibition would be strongly. resented by religiousmendicants, or would be regarded as an interference withreligion, or would be likely to became a political danger. (3) Mr.Thorburn, Commissioner. (6) Mr. Ibbetson, Deputy Commissioner. (10) Mr. A. Anderson, Deputy Commissioner. (8) Mr. Maconachie, Deputy Commissioner. (13)Mr. Drummond, Deputy Commissioner. (29)Mr. Brown, Officiating Deputy Inspector-General of PoliceThis paper has ceded to (39) Thakur Das, Rai Bahadur, Assistant Surgeon. (36) BhagwanDass, Assistant Surgeon. (25) Muhammad Ikramulla Khan, Khan Bahadur, Honorary ExtraAssistant Commissloner. (27) Muhammad Barkat Ali Khan, KhanBahadur, retired Extra Assistant Commissioner (86) Bahram Khan, Honorary Magistrate.(93) Gujar Ma!,Trader.(94) Jawala Bhagat, Trader.(3) Prohibition might leadto use of dhatura or other intoxicants worse than charas. (76)Babu P. C. Chatterji Judge, Chief Court.(10) Mr. A. Anderson,Deputy Commissioner.(18) Rai Bahadur Bhagwan Dass, ExtraAssistant Commissioner.(39) Thakur Das, Rai Bahadur, AssistantSurgeon.(27) Muhammad Barkat All Khan, Khan Bahadur, retiredExtra Assistant Commissioner.(85) Lachman Dass, Merchant. Opinions.in favour of the prohibition ofganja. 578. There are only two witnesses in the Central Provinces whoadvocate the prohibition of ganja.Honorary Surgeon-Major Harrison(38) on the retired CentralProvinces.list, employed in theKalahandi State,. Advocates gradual prohibition, "which wouldcause discontent, but not any serious danger. The prohibitionwould no doubt be followed by recourse to alcohol and otherstimulants." The other is a pensioned hospital assistant,who also advocates gradual prohibition. Opinions against prohibition of ganja. 5 79. The following is an analysis of some of the mostimportant evidence against prohibition:- (1) Prohibition impossible or unnecessary, or could not beenforced without a large preventive establishment. (1) .Mr. Neill, Judicial Commissioner.(4) Mr. Laurie,Officiating Secretary to Chief Commissioner.(2) Colonel Bowie,Commissioner. (9) Mr. Drake-Brockman, Officiating ExciseCommissioner.(39) Dr. Prentie, Civil Surgeon.(.66) Rev. IsraelJacob, Missionary. a) Prohibition would be strongly resented by religiousmendicants, or would be regarded as an interference withreligion, or would be likely to become a political danger. (1) Mr. Neill, Judicial Commissioner.(4) Mr. Laurie,Officiating Secretary'to Chief Commissioner.(2) ColonelBowie, Commissioner.(3) Mr. Anderdson, OfficiatingCommissiOner.(6) Mr. Duff, Deputy Commissioner.(27} Mr. Lowrie,Officiating Deputy Conservator of Forests(17)Batuk Bharthy (65)Rev. Israel Jacob, Missionary.(68)Rev. Oscar Lohr,Missionary.(22)Vinayak Balkrishna Khare, Excise Daroga.(59)(47)Mir Iradad Ali Honorary Magistrate. (2) Prohibition might lead to use of dhatura or otherintoxicants worse than ganja. (1) Mr. Neill, judicial Commissioner.(9) Mr. Drake-Brockman,Officiating Excise Commissioner. (39) Dr. Prentie, Civil Surgeon.(64) Rao Sahib Balwantrao Govindrao Bhuskute, Jagirdar. Madrass Opinions in favour of theprohibition of ganja 580. The Madras witnesses in favour of prohibition are a CivilSurgeon, a subordinate civil officer, a medical practitioner, aHindu priest, and six missionaries. Dr. King, (85) says-"The restriction of the sale of ganja under conditionssimilar to those required for poisonous drugs in Great Britainwould be an unqualified blessing to the country, thus contrastingwith the action taken against agitation which I believe to beunnecessary and mischievous. I consider special measures shouldbe taken to restrain the use of ganja by sepoys, and especiallyto prevent the young sepoy from acquiring the habit" In oralexamination however, Dr. King, stated as follows- "Myopinion of the effect of the moderate use in impairing the moralsense and inducing laziness, etc., is a general impression andnot based on actual observation. My impression is based on thefact that persons alleged to have been ganja smokers havepresented these characteristics. They were pointed out asnotorious ganja smokers. I did not discriminate in these casesbetween the moderate and excessive use." Synd Mahmud(I22) says: "It is anunquestionable fact that ganja, bhang, and charas are poisons,and this fact is admitted by all. In my opinion their suppressionwould be an act of virtue deserving of future reward, but it isnot advisable to suppress their use at once. Its suppressionshould be regulated under certain rules without any loss to theState. To the best of my knowledge and researches, alcohol cannotbe safely used as a substitute for ganja, charas, andbhang." Rev. Mr. Laflamme (153) speaking on behalf of theBaptist Missionary Conferences of the Presidency, advocatesprohibition in these terms: "Owing to the scarcity of shopsin these parts practical prohibition exists. Much that isconsumed is consumed illicitly. The introduction of the licensesystem Seems to have had no appreciable effect on the use of thedrugs. The ganja is nearly all grown by the consumers in theirown yards." "The drugs should all be so safeguarded asto prevent or minimize any possible harm resulting from theirabuse." "The general sense of the people isopposed to the use of the drugs." So far as the witness cangather, the members of the Mission are. united in the belief thatin these parts hemp drugs are far less injurious than opium andalcohol; thus far that the latter are not only much moreextensively used, but much more baleful in, their effects. Twoother missionaries, though neutral in opinion, are worth quoting Rev.Mr. Pittendrigh Missionary (160) says that he would haveultimate prohibition in view if possible, but there is not muchground for special interference in anything that he has seen.Another Missionary, the Rev. Mr. Goffin. (145), cannotundertake to criticise the present or any system of exiseadministration. His impression is that Government would be wiseto adopt strictly "let-alone" policy, leaving it to thespread of education and enlightenment among the people to preventand lessen all its effects. The province government should becarefully to watch such effects, and wherever and whenevernecessary interfere with prohibitive legislation. Such necessity,however, in his opinion would not often occur. Opinions against prohibition 581. Among those who are opposed to prohibition, the evidenceof the following witnesses may be quoted :-- (1) Prohibition impossible or unnecessary, or could not beenforced without a large preventive establishment. (1) Hon'ble C. S. Crole, Member, Board. of Revenue.(8) Mr.Willock, Collector.(14) Mr. Bradley, Collector.(19) Raja K. C.Manevedan, Collector. (23) Mr. Campbell, Sub-Collector.(3o) Mr.Levy, Acting Deputy Collector, Salt and Abkari. (2) Prohibition would be strongly resented by religiousmendicants, or would be a political danger. (8) Mr. Willock, Collector.(10) Mr. Stokes, Collector.(6) Mr.Sewell, Collector. (30) Mr. Levy, Acting Deputy Collector; Saltand Abkari.(94) Dr. Walker, Civil Surgeon. (95) Dr. Sarkies,Civil Surgeon. (38) Buddhavarapu Narayana Murthi Pantalugaru,Assistant Collector.(23) Mr. Campbell, Sub-Collector.(121)H.S.A.M..Manju Miyyah Sahib, Medical Practitioner. (3). Prohibition might lead to use of dhatura or otherintoxicants worse than ganja. (23) Mr. Campbell,Sub-Collector, Bombay. Opinions in favour of prohibition of ganja. 582. For the prohibition of ganja or charas in Bombay andSind, we have the following advocates: in Bombay two mamlatdars,a hospital assistant, and a medical practitioner; and in Sind ahealth officer, two hospital assistants, and a. banker. There isnot much that need be quoted from the evidence of thesewitnesses. It may be noted that the Hon'ble T. D. Mackenzie,Commissioner of Abkari, etc. (1), holds that the policy ofGovernment in relation to the hemp drugs should be one ofrestriction, as far as restriction, 'is possible, and that, ifabsolute prohibition were possible, he thinks it would be a goodthing. Owing, however, to the fact that the territories of theBombay Presidency interlace so extensively with foreignterritory, and to the feeling which would be aroused among theconsumers and those who sympathize with them, it would in hisopinion be impossible or undesirable. The Secretary to the AryaSamaj in Bombay (109) states that while fully sympathising withthe objects of the Commission, which are apparently understood tobe the restriction or prohibition of the drugs, the Arya Samaj"is of opinion that any Governmental action in the directionof further restricting the preparation and sale of the drug willbe productive of very little good. The ' * Samaj believesthat education of the masses is the only proper and effective .remedy for correcting such baneful habits, and fears that anycompulsion in this matter is likely to drive the consumersof these comparatively innoccuous drugs to the use. of moreinjurious intoxicants that are plentifully supplied to the peoplelike the various preparations containing alcohol." TheSamaj.prays that the Government will devise measures for therestriction of the sale of European liquor in India. and leavethe hemp drugs to themselves. The only thorough advocateof prohibition whose opinion is worth specifying is RaoSahibShesho Krisna Madkavi (41), who considers-such prohibitionvery necessary and holds that, although there would be temporarydiscontent among the consumers such discontent would not amountto a political danger "the people in this part of thecountry being loyal and of mild nature. and the proportion of thepersons using bhang and ganja to the general population being toosmall to be taken into consideration." Opinions against prohibition 583. On the other hand, the opinions against prohibition areweighty. The following may be specially quoted: (1) Prohibition impossible or unnecessary, or could not beenforced without a large preventive establishment. Bombay (1) Hon'ble T. D. Mackenzie, Commissioner of Abkari, etc (3)Mr. Vidal, Chief Secretary to Government. (10) Mr. Monteath,CoIlector. (12) Mr. Cumine, Acting Collector. (53) Mr. Vincent,C.I.E., officiating commissioner of Police. (110) Rai BahadurVishvanath Keshava Joglekar, Merchant. (108) Daji Abaji Khare,Honorary Secretary, East Indian Association. Sind (1) Mr. James, Commissioner in Sind. (26) Seth VishindasNihalchand, Zamindar and Merchant. (2) Prohibition would be strongly resented by religiousmendicants, or would be regarded as an interference withreligion, or would be likely to become a political danger. Bombay. (l) Hon'ble T. D. Mackenzie, Commissioner of Abkari, etc. (2)Mr. Reid, Commissioner ganja. Apart from all this, there isanother consideration which has been urged in some quarters witha manifestation of strong feeling, and to which the Commissionare disposed to attach some importance, viz., that torepress the drugs in India and to leave alcohol alone would bemisunderstood by a large number of persons who believe, andapparently not without reason, that more harm is done in thiscountry by the latter than by the former. The conclusion of theCommission regarding bhang has been given in paragraph 564; underall the circumstances they now unhesitatingly give their verdictagainst such a violent measure as total prohibition in respect ofany of the hemp drugs. II. The policy advocated is one of control and restrictionaimed at suppressing the excessive use and restraining themoderate use within due limits (Chapter XlV, paragraph 586) Policy in regard to hemp drugs. 586 Failing prohibition, the question arises, whatshould be the policy of the Policy in regard to hemp drugs.Government in regard to the hemp drugs? On this point someimportant evidence has been recorded, and the Commission deem itto be within the scope of their duty to state in general termstheir own conclusions. In the first place, then, they are ofopinion that in view of the harmful effects produced by theexcessive use, and in exceptional cases even by the moderate use,of the drugs, the action of the Government should be directedtowards restraining the former and avoiding all encouragement tothe latter. The object should be to prevent the consumers, as faras may be possible, from doing harm to themselves and to lessenthe inducements to the formation of the habit which might lead tosuch harm In aiming at this object, however, other considerationsneed to be kept in view. There is in the first place the questionof illicit consumption. If the restriction. imposed by Governmentis counterbalanced by a corresponding increase in smuggling noadvantage is gained but, on the contrary, a moral wrong is doneto the community apart from the annoyance necessitated by suchrestrictions. Than, if there is a legitimate use of the drugs,restrictions should not be such as to make the exercise of thisuse impossible. The Commission have formed the opinion that thereis a legitimate use of the hemp drugs, and that it existsgenerally among the poorest of the population. Again, if therestrictions lead to the use of more deleterious substances, oreven drive the people from a habit the evil of which is known toanother of which the evil maybe greater, they are no longerjustifiable. The policy of Government must be tempered by allthese considerations, and the neglect of any one of them may leadto serious error. Contents | Feedback | Search DRCNet Library | Schaffer Library | Major Studies | IndianHemp Drugs CommissionWT02-B03-45IA087-000632-B015-151http://206.61.184.43:80/schaffer/Library/studies/inhemp/dopefien.htm 206.61.184.43 19970122091214 text/html 52686HTTP/1.0 200 OKDate: Wednesday, 22-Jan-97 09:12:03 GMTServer: WebSitePro/1.1f (S/N wpo-0deb)Allow-ranges: bytesContent-type: text/htmlLast-modified: Saturday, 28-Dec-96 07:03:55 GMTContent-length: 52468 Indian Hemp and the Dope Fiends of Old England Contents | Feedback | Search DRCNet Library | Schaffer Library | Major Studies | IndianHemp Drugs Commission INDIAN HEMP AND THE DOPE FIENDS OF OLD ENGLAND A sociopolitical history of cannabis and theBritish Empire 1840-1928 Sean Blanchard & Matthew J. Atha MSc When the report of the Indian Hemp Drugs Commission (IHDC)reached 1890's England it met official and public apathy. Therewas no political debate. It went into the 'forget about this'file on arrival and has stayed there ever since. There was nopublicity; The news that "Ganja is not appreciablyharmful" was of no concern to the majority of users, whotook cannabis products for their medical benefits. Thenon-medical users were mostly artists who didn't mind alittle harm. Prohibitionist sentiment was concentrated on theopium trade between India and China and on alcohol at home.Cannabis use in England was considered negligible, and theauthorities were content to have no laws at all controlling itfor another thirty years. When laws were later proposed, the Government paid noattention to the evidence in their possession from the IHDC. InIndia, the recommendations of the IHDC report for control bytaxes rather than prohibition went into force quietly,standardising laws and tariffs on cannabis in all the provinces.In March 1895, the Indian Government passed a resolution afterreviewing the report. It said that for the last twenty yearstheir policy had been of "restraining use and improving therevenue by the imposition of suitable taxation" and"imposing as high a rate of duty as can be levied withoutinducing illicit practices" on the grounds that "thebest way to restrict the consumption of drugs is to taxthem..." So, "to that policy the Governor-General...has decided steadily to adhere."[1] There was never any suggestion that the same rules might beapplied in the UK; the Empire didn't work like that. TheGovernor-General (also known as Viceroy), Lord Landsdowne, wasappointed by the UK Government. When they instructed him tocommission a report, he did so, then accepted or rejected it,passed any regulations needed, and told the UK what he'd done.His job was to 'keep natives in their place' and help the Britishget on with de, not to give advice on home affairs. From Mother's Friend to Opium Wars Cannabis was virtually irrelevant to 19th century England. Thedrug of the century was opium, freely available to the Britishpopulation and so popular that the government went to war toprevent the prohibitionist Chinese disrupting the trade. Theopium wars still write their history in the 1990s, as Britain issoon due to hand back Hong Kong, the territory it won from Chinaand those territories leased for 150 years, in 1997. Thomas De Quincy, in his 'Confessions of and English OpiumEater' gave the first popular account of the '...marvellousagency of opium, whether for pleasure or pain'. He may have beenthe first glamouriser of the psychotropic effects of the drug,but, for most people opium was a friend and medicine asindispensable as aspirin or Valium in the 20th century. Godfrey'scordial, or chemists' home-brewed versions of popular patentmedicines, were used to quiet children, while no home would bewithout laudanum (alcoholic tincture of opium). Opium was firstused in the treatment of cholera in the epidemics of the early19th century, and continued to be used for the treatment ofdiarrhoea and sickness, common complaints in the less than hygienicenvironment of the day. It was during the Crimean war that theanalgesic effects were fully exploited, and it is certain thatthe widespread use of laudanum, Collis Browne's mixture or otheropium-based medicines, available to the poor for a penny abottle, enabled ordinary people to cope with the harsh realitiesof life in Dickensian England. From the government's point ofview, it was no doubt preferable to have the poor in a state ofcomfortable stupor than rioting on the streets. India was not the main source of opium for the domesticmarket. Most of this was grown in Turkey or Persia (Iran), asthis opium was of generally high qualify, and trade flourished inthe period following the end of the Napoleonic wars, particularlyafter the treaty of Balta Limon (1838) granting the OttomanEmpire 'most favoured nation' trading status[2]. Indian opium,however, was responsible for one of the British Government inIndia becoming the largest drug-trafficking syndicate in theworld during the latter part of the century. Opium and tea were the mainstays of the British East IndiaCompany, who had a monopoly on the opium produced in Bengal. In1772 Warren Hastings, then chief executive of the company,realised the potential for foreign revenue in exporting Indianopium to China. Opium had been known in China for centuries, but imports bad been banned in 1729 by decree of the Emperor. Anforeign trade was funneled through Canton, opium being smuggledwith legitimate consignments in British ships, and sold throughcorrupt officials to an eager market Other traders smuggled opiumto China overland, and the consumption spread to all levels ofsociety, even to the personal retinue of the Emperor. Exports toChina rose from 10,000 chests ill 1820 to 40,000 chests in 1840.By 1836, a Chinese official in Canton, Hsu Nal-chi, petitionedthe emperor to legalise the trade after witnessing the failure ofprohibition... "the severer the interdicts against (opium)became, the more widely do the evils therefrom spread." Hewas summarily dismissed from his post and replaced with acommitted "war on drugs"-minded individual, LinTse-hsu. Lin was determined to wipe out the opium trade by threateningthe British merchants with the loss of the tea trade, and in 1839forced them to surrender 20,000 chests of the drug. CaptainCharles Elliot the British Chief Superintended, retaliated byordering all British ships out of the Canton estuary,transferring the tea trade to American ships who would transporttheir cargoes to Hong Kong, an inconvenience, but not anobstacle, to the trade. Instead of using Canton, smugglers wouldtake opium consignments ashore up and down the coast in sinallboats, fast enough to evade the Customs craft. Meanwhile Elliothad ordered an expeditionary force of naval steamships whicharrived in 1840 and put direct pressure on Peking. Lin wasdismissed and the trade continued uninterrupted following theChinese capitulation and the end of the first opium war in 1842.To the domestic audience in the UK, Palmerston, the PrimeMinister, bad portrayed the war as an attempt to force theChinese to accept free trade. In reality, the only commoditydirectly involved was -opium, tax revenue from which was becomingincreasingly important to the Indian Government [3]. In Britain, the Conservative opposition was not satisfied withPalmerston's explanations and they opposed the opium trade in the1840 Commons debate. By the time they took power in 1841 theirtune had changed, and the trade continued to expand. The Chinesegovernment was effectively warned that no British ships should besearched. Although fresh edicts against the drug were issued bythe Chinese, they were powerless to stop the trade following thetreaty of Nanking, which ceded Hong Kong to Britain, allowing abridgehead for further opium supplies. In 1856, following growingand-British sentiment, the Chinese gave the British government afurther excuse for war by seizing the Arrow, a Britishvessel with a crew of Chinese criminals anchored off Canton. Thefact that the Arrow's registration had expired,technically justifying the Chinese action, was overlooked byPalmerston, once again the Liberal Prime Minister after fightingan election forced by government defeat on an opposition motioncondemning the war, and winning on a wave of patriotic fervour. Lord Elgin was dispatched with an expeditionary force whichburned down the Summer Palace in Peking to impress upon theEmperor the need to keep agreements. The main consequence of theSecond Opium War was that China was forced to legalise the tradein opium, and were only permitted to tax the product at a levelacceptable to the British. Consumption increased from 60,000chests in 1860 to 105,000 by 1880. The trade generated taxes tothe British Indian Government equivalent to over half their totalrevenue, enough to cover the entire civil service and armedforces budgets. In this climate, financial expediency, as sooften is the case, took precedence over the growing moralarguments against the drug trade. Following increased public pressure to end the trade, and inresponse to a Parliamentary motion, the Government called a RoyalCommission on the production and consumption of opium, which wasonly to consider prohibition among other options, after fullinvestigation. It was during these manoevres that the IHDC wasalso established. The Indian Viceroy, Lord Lansdowne was againstanything that might disrupt business. Prime Minister Gladstonewas much more pro trade than he was anti drug. They packed theopium commission with pragmatists from the Indian Civil Service,with some of the more economically literate abolitionists, andensured that it would concentrate a good deal on money. It firstmet in September 1893 and saw 2,500 witnesses by February '94. When the report was published in '95, it said that opium was"generally used in moderation", and "led to noevident ill-effects". Even some senior anti-opiumists hadbeen convinced. The fact that Chinese missionaries wereoverwhelmingly critical of the effects of opium, in contrast tothe Indian witnesses who were predominantly favourable towardsthe drug, was put down to the fact that in India the drug isnormally taken orally, whereas in China it was generally smoked[3]. There was only one dissent; Joseph Rowntree, one of thecommittee members, was later to denounce the Commission's reportas a whitewash. By that time there was another election underway. Prohibition had no chance under the Conservatives, and therewould be no Liberal government until 1905.(4). The government,despite public opinion, was determined to continue the opium "The Lunatic asylums are filled with GanjaSmokers." The question of cannabis occasionally cropped up as anincidental issue in skirmishes during the long legislative battleagainst the opium business. As early as 1840 the pro-opium bankerWilliam Bingham Baring MP told the Commons that if the opiumtrade were suppressed then there would be a danger of usersturning to drugs "infinitely more prejudicial to physicalhealth and energy than opium". Baring, one of 10 MPs of bothparties from the same pro-free trade family, was particularlyconcerned about "an exhalation of the Hemp plant, easilycollected at certain seasons, which is in every way moreinjurious than the use of the poppy." [3] This was anotherjustification for the lucrative opium trade which flourished in aclimate of official and unofficial governmental encouragement.However, attitudes were slowly changing and in 1875 Mark StewardMP had proposed that the Indian Governor General be instructed toinvestigate the opium trade "with a view to gradualwithdrawal," and lost by 37 votes. Similar moves wereregularly defeated for the next twenty years. By April '91, aspokesman for the Society for Suppression of the Opium Trade(SSOT) had obtained a 30-vote majority for a motion that theGovernments' revenue from opium was "Morallyindefensible". On 16 July 1891 Stewart asked a three part question aboutganja [5]: "i Whether the Secretary of State for India has seen areport in the Allahabad Pioneer of 10 May that ganja, which isgrown sold and excised in much the same way as opium, is far moreharmful, and that "the lunatic asylum of Bengal are filledwith ganja smokers." ii Is he aware that ganja has been made illegal inLower Burma and that excise reports say this has been 'ofenormous benefit to the people.' iii Will he call to the attention of the Governor General thedesirability of extending theprohibition to otherprovinces?" The answers to which were yes, yes, and that he would"Enquire whether further steps should be taken to limitconsumption..." On 7 August 1892 those enquiries wereanswered at some length. The Viceroy's office told London thatthe whole question had been extensively discussed with provincialadministrations in 1871-73. They sent 174 pages of old dispatchesfrom Indian provincial governments to the centre, and from thereto London. After considering these, "The Governor General isof the opinion that while ganja may be among the most noxious ofall intoxicants commonly used in India... even if absoluteprohibition could be enforced, the result might be to induce theuse of more noxious drugs" (e.g. datura). Apart from whichit would be impossible to enforce a prohibition. It was "Ourduty to restrict consumption, but unnecessary to do more thanpersevere in the policy established In 1873." These paperslanguished unread in London, perhaps because there was a generalelection going on. The 1873 dispatches showed the pragmatism of imperialadministrators which was to be repeated by the IHDC, in verysimilar words. The then Viceroy had said that while theGovernment should endeavour to restrict the use of ganja, itwould be impossible to enforce general prohibition, especiallybecause of religious feelings in some groups and because theplants grew freely some areas. It would be inexpedient to orderwhat could not be enforced... "It does not appear to theGovernor-General to be specifically proved that hump incites tocrime more than other drugs or spirits." There was also someevidence that hump, "usually so noxious", mightusefully be taken for medical reasons. There was no doubt thathabitual use tended to cause insanity but not in very many casesrelative to the numbers of the insane.(6]. "General opinionseems to be that the evil effects of Ganja have beenexaggerated." The dispatches from regional governments were more forthright.The Lt.-Governor of the Punjab wrote that considering thepracticalities, they should not restrict hemp drug use unlessthere was proof of connection with crime. Civil, police andmedical officers disagreed on the details but: "His Honouris of the opinion that if people were prohibited from usingpreparations of hemp or opium, they would, in all probability,have recourse to some other stimulant, such as alcohol, the crimeresulting from the use of which would be much greater than thatresulting from the abuse of these drugs .... It seems that theamount of crime, violent or other, incited by ganja, isexceedingly small... If, therefore, these preparations have noeffect on crime and only injure the persons who use them, it isdifficult to see in what manner the law can restrict their use ina country where opium is a monopoly of the Government, theeffects of which are perhaps as injurious when taken in excess asthose of hemp." The local governments of Mysore, Hyderbad, Oudh, and Burmasaid that as hump drugs were little used locally, not necessary.Central Provinces sent plenty of data but no opinions. TheNorthwest Provinces (later Pakistan), one of the main cannabisgrowing areas, said the evidence on crime was confused, where ifthe situation was bad as supposed there would surely be aconsensus. To stop production would be almost impossible, so theycould not recommend attempts to limit or stop consumption.Bombay, Madras, and Bengal said that restrictions and taxesalready in place should be preserved. All agreed excessive use tobe somehow connected with physical harm and perhaps insanity, butthe numbers harmed were very small. Bengal sent the mostinformation. Asked if a particularly popular type of local ganjawas more deleterious than others, they submitted a long report oncultivation, uses and profit margins on all hemp products by DrWatt, State Reporter on Economic Products. Their local productwas popular due to the quality of plants and traditionalproduction skills, rather than sheer strength. A table of samplesanalysed for "Resinous extracts or Cannabin" rangedfrom 1.4% (NW Province) to 12% (Madras), mostly about 4% [7]. Allof the legal trade was inside India. The state of Bengal had beenmaking an average 1 million rupees per year through the 1860's intax on ganja shops and duty at government auctions, about100,000 - tens of millions in today's money. When these papers were taken from the files, twenty yearsafter they were written, the August 1892 elections were underway. The Conservatives went out and the Liberals came in. Drugcontrol was not high on their agenda; however, the new HomeSecretary, Foreign Secretary, and Secretary of State for Indiawere all known to be anti-opium, and the Prime Minister hadspoken out against it in the past. The prohibitionists knew theymight get some sort of opium control agreed if it didn't opposethe Liberals' central Free Trade policy. Believing their momenthad come, they began to quarrel among themselves. Criminalise it! Before the development of the hypodermic syringe by AlexanderWood, the main concern about opium was not the threat ofaddiction, but the danger of poisoning. Only after the 1860s didthe risk of dependency start to cause concern among the medicalprofession. Certainly, people would have been habituated to thedrug, but the stereotype of the drug addict had yet to gainacceptance within the UK. Even where individuals wrote of theirhabit, such as a chemists wife who had been using morphia for 30years, described her experience in a matter of fact way, freefrom any sense of stigma her major concern being the perceivedtendency of the drug to cause her to put on weight. Although thedependency syndrome had been described two centuries earlier byThomas Sydenham, the risk was not taken seriously by most medicalpractitioners. Following increasing reports of dependencysymptoms after 1860, culminating in a series of articles in ThePractitioner in 1870, the debate on the wisdom ofpermitting free access to opium accelerated. In 1878 EdwardLevinstein in Germany started the 'moral' argument about theeffect of opium on the character of the user, and was one of thefirst to promote abstinence as a cure for the addict [2]. From the 1840s on, there were several anti-opiumorganisations, all small and mostly broke. Their membershipsoverlapped, but the leaders didn't get on well. None of them hadever tried to gain mass support. The first organisation to comeout against the trade were the Birmingham Quakers. In 1869, LordShaftesbury urged the Indian government to withdraw from itsmonopoly position in the trade. By 1884 the Society for the Studyand Cure of Inebriety, founded by Sir Norman Kerr, aimed "toeducate the professional and the public mind to the dangers ofintemperance". At that time, alcohol was the main target forthe temperance movement, whereas other, more exotic drugs werenot seen as much of a threat to respectable Britons. These drugswere not expected to be a threat to the well-adjusted Britishgentleman, and habituation among the Chinese and others wasregarded as the kind of 'filthy foreign habit' that should bestopped for the foreigners' own good. Kerr recognised the dangersof opium with a crusading zeal, and railed against its use,denying any possibility that some persons could be able torestrict their use to a moderate level. The Society forSuppression of the Opium Trade (SSOT), founded in 1874, becamethe best-known anti-opium organisation, but had always beenelitist, controlled by Quaker businessmen with knighthoods,funded by one family. Their best argument combined economic andhumanitarian interest; other exports to China had been damaged bythe sleaziness of the opium business. Trade with China had beenstagnant between 1860-80 while business with Japan had tripled.The SSOT moved for ending the India-China opium trade, and anenquiry into alternate ways of making up the money. They took toolong agreeing a proposal with other lobbyists, but did manage toforce the government to concede the 1893 Royal Commission onOpium [8]. Meanwhile, in February '93, William Caine, MP (Bradford East),had the papers on ganja collected the previous year placed in theHouse of Commons Library. 0u the 2nd March 1893 he put a publicquestion to the Under-secretary of State for India. "If hewill instruct the Government of India to create a commission ofexperts to enquire into and report on the cultivation of andtrade in all preparations of hemp drugs in Bengal, the effects oftheft consumption on society, and on the moral condition of thepeople, and the desirability of prohibiting its growth andsale." Would he also invite written reports on the samematters from all other provinces, and include in the commissionnon-official natives of India. The Secretary of State would askthe Viceroy to do just that, "and he will be glad if theresult of this inquiry is to show that further restriction can beplaced upon the sale and consumption of these drugs."(7)Since the Government seemed so amenable, a secondary question bythe Right Hon. Sir Charles E. Schwann, Bart, was then dropped. The members of the commission were named on 3rd July, and heldtheir first meeting on 2nd August - a mouth before the Opiumcommission began to meet. They continued until April, seeing over800 witnesses, assembling over 3000 pages into seven volumes, anda confidential extra volume on hemp drug use in the Army; thenthe Finance and Commerce department of the Government of Indiaconsidered the report, and another British election crept closer.It is unclear what Caine and Schwann thought they were up to.Both were Liberals, Temperance campaigners, and probablyanti-opium. Schwann had a safe scat, a comfortable merchants'fortune and radical opinions. Caine wrote books, including 'YoungIndia', 'Picturesque India' and 'A Trip Around the World.' He hadquit the Liberal Party six years earlier over the Irish question,and been re-admitted in a new scat after losing as anIndependent; he was to lose it again in 1895. The timing, and therequest for the commission to include non-official Indians,suggest that they were part of a faction among theanti-opiumists, perhaps trying to stir them into holder demandsor quicker action. Perhaps they were simply trying to get in onwhat looked like a winning side. Neither is recorded as evermentioning hemp drugs in public again. The Dope Fiends of Old England The international drugs trade was quite a different thing fromhome consumption; for example although the British Empireproduced a great deal of the worlds' opiates, over 80% of theopium used in the UK was from Turkey and Persia [2]. The economicpressure for international prohibition came from traders andnations with rival products. In the UK drug control was at firstpan of an increase in medical involvement in social policy.Prescription by professionals had to take over fromself-medication before complete prohibition became possible. There was not much openly recreational drug use in VictorianEngland, other than alcohol. A few serf consciouslyunconventional young artists and mystics searched for innerexperience, rejecting vulgar materialism, but the majority ofdrug abusers, then as now, considered themselves to be takingmedicines, to help them work or relax. This was an age whichdemanded refinement, in every sense of the term. They tookextracts, tinctures, distillations or the 'active ingredients' oftraditional medicinal plants like Indian hemp or poppies, inamounts that would kill modern addicts. This was all for the goodof their health, so morally impeccable. They didn't do dope toget wasted, or didn't admit to it Vulgar materialism provided ever more purified forms of relieffrom the stresses of righteous life, as opium was dissolved intolaudanum, concentrated into morphine, re-concentrated intoheroin. Some condemned booze while chewing opium, just aswell-known modern anti-drug campaigners have been tranquilliseraddicts. In this atmosphere Cannabis Indica was just anotherpotentially useful plant, which could be perhaps refined intosome sort of medicine but was quite unsuitable in natural form.The distinction between drug use and abuse had hardly beeninvented. Doctors were expensive and not well trusted, so thepoor dosed themselves with whatever remedies they could afford.Pseudo-medical opiate use was decreasing, but still respectable;Elizabeth Barrett Browning and Florence Nightingale had used it,and William Wilberforce, saint of the anti-slavery movement, hadeaten twelve grains a day for thirty years. Self-medicationbluffed into non-medical use. Boozing was low class andunfeminine, so respectable ladies took "tonics." Patentmedicines were a huge business, often including alcohol, opium,or cannabis. Sales of pure morphine, cocaine, and barbiturates weresupposedly controlled by the 1868 Poisons and Pharmacy Act, butquack nostrums and patent medicines were not, and an attempt toextend the law in 1884 had failed. The Act only affected shops,not users. One especially dangerous popular remedy was CollisBrownes' Chlorodyne, containing chloroform and morphine, whichthe British Medical Association campaigned through the 90's tohave banned. "One of the most valuable medicines we possess" There had been increasing medical interest in cannabis sinceWilliam O'Shaughnessy described the use of indian hemp asmedicine and intoxicant [9], relying on accounts of hashish usefrom ancient Persian and Arabic sources, as well as on his ownobservations in India. He described the use of hemp in thetreatment of rheumatism, hydrophobia, cholera, tetanus andinfantile convulsions, as well as describing the delirium inducedby continued use. O'Shaughnessy had written in 1839 that, with acouple of exceptions, "I have been unable to trace anynotice of the employment of this drug in Europe." However,despite citing western works by Ainslie and von Estebeck hemanaged to overlook one classic account. The noted medieval herbalist, Nicholas Culpepper (1616-1654),listed a variety of medical uses of the common european hemp(Cannabis sativa), including anti-inflammatory, analgesic, andantiparasitic activity [10]. Culpepper made no mention of thepsychotropic activity, although the temperate hemp he describedwould normally be of low drug content and be grown for fibre.Culpepper's work would have owed much to the folk herbalism usedby British witches, or wise women, who until the christianpersecutions had provided most primary health care to the ruralpopulation, as well as to the monastic healers who replaced them.By the Victorian "age of reason" most traditional usehad been suppressed, as the pioneer pharmacologists began toanalyse folk medicines to refine and extract the active compoundstherein. An unsuccessful attempt had been made in the 1840's togrow hemp for medicine in the London suburb of Mitcham.Experimenters used it for athsma and other chest problems,sleeplessness especially in cases of opiate or alcoholwithdrawal, and with opium and bromide of potassium in treatinginsanity. One reason why cannabis was not as widely used as opiumproducts, or the newer chemical remedies, was the difficultyfound refining an "active ingredient." There wereproblems getting supplies of reliable strength, confusion aboutapparently different products from the same plant, anduncertainty about its effects in the body. However, it was usedto treat many disorders. In 1889, Dr E.A.Birch described in theLancet the successful use of cannabis indica in the treatment ofchloral hydrate and opium withdrawal, drawing attention to theabolition of craving and the antiemetic (vomit suppressing)effects and the stimulation of appetite in patients who would notnormally eat, or keep down, their food [111. Queen Victoria'spersonal physician, J.R. Reynolds described it in 1890 as"One of the most valuable medicines we possess." Inanother Lancet article published in 1890, he described the use ofcannabis indica for treating insomnia in the senile, alcoholicdelirium, neuralgia, migraine, spastic paralysis, and convulsions[12]..He allegedly prescribed tincture of cannabis to QueenVictoria herself for the treatment of menstrual cramps. Cannabistincture and an extract made from resin were available from PeterSquire of Oxford St in 1864, and wholesale through the Society ofApothecaries by 1871. Chemists extracted stuff they calledcannabene, cannabin tannin, cannabinnene etc. but had no ideawhich, if any, was the "active ingredient" untilcannabinol was isolated in 1895. At the same time some thought of drug-taking as a form ofpoisoning, and some researchers proposed that it either caused,or was, a type of insanity. W.W. Ireland compared the mentalstate of cannabis users to delirium, with its alteration of timeand space and visual illusions. British doctors' reports fromCairo Asylum in 1894 linked violent insanity with"Hashism"(13,14) Some of the medical studies would havebeen recreational use in any other context. Walter Dixon musthave tried it on himself as well as small furry animals when heshowed in 1899 that the effects vary according to type ofpreparation as well as method of ingestion. He recommendedsmoking for immediate effect and wrote in the British MedicalJournal, "Hemp taken as an inhalation may be placed in thesame category as coffee, tea and kola. It is not dangerous andits effects are never alarming, and I have come to regard it inthis form as a useful and refreshing stimulant and foodaccessory, and one whose use does not lead to a habit which growsupon its votary." He was to be a member of the RollestonCommittee on Morphine and Heroin Addiction in the 1920's, whoopposed criminalising narcotics policy. At the end of the century cannabis tincture became popularagain as a cure for cramps, migraine, opium addiction, withdrawaland insomnia, but the fashion faded. In the early 1900's aBritish Medical Association campaign against 'Secret Remedies'got most of the opiates, cocaine and cannabis out of tonics andnon-prescription medicines. Doctors became responsible for mostdrug distribution as the consumer beverage trade withdrew. Asdrag dispensing was professionalised, substances used forself-medication were replaced by more refined, more medicallycontrollable drags. The Indian Hemp Drugs Commission report madeno apparent difference to this at all, and it's quite possiblethat nobody in the medical establishment read it. It held quite alot of scientific data but its purpose had been political ratherthan medical. The political and economic interests of the BritishMedical Association were quite different from those of theGovernment of India. The Cosmopolitan Dope Fiends It is worth noting that most publications from the time referto "Hashish," the Arabic term, Indian Hemp, orCannabis, rather than Charas, Ganja or Bhang, the Hindi names.The French empire in North Africa had at least as much effect onEuropean cannabis use as the British empire in India. A certainstyle of drug use, the Wasted Artist role, as established by thelaudanum swigging Coleridge and De Quincey early in the century,was revived by Dr Jean Moreau in Paris after 1845. The doctor,who experimented with hashish to treat insanity, founded the Clubdes Hashishins with the writer Theophile Gautier, for non-medicalexperiments. Some of the members were quite keen on a littledelirium. Gautier was a hack with brilliant friends, an 'art forarts sake' romantic with a taste for macabre fantasy whoencouraged the Symbolist poets. Rimbaud and Verlaine shared hisdrugs. Baudelaire dedicated "Fleur du Mal" to him, andwrote an essay that explained their attitudes: "On Hashishand Wine as a means of expanding individuality." Theycreated strange, sensuous art, struck foreign poses based ontheir beliefs about the romantic East, scandalised bourgeoissociety [15]. By the 90's the club had imitators in London. If there was norecreational drug use "subculture" in the 1890's, onenetwork came close. This was the circle of poets, psychics,writers and would-be magicians around the Rhymers Club and theHermetic Order of the Golden Dawn. They didn't define theirconnection by shared drug use, but they certainly included drugexperiments in their self-definition. Occult studies, drugs,hypnotism, proto-psychiatry and new styles of arts were all1890's fashions mingled in overlapping cliques in central London.The Golden Dawn was established in 1888 by some occultistFreemasons, as a society of "Christian practiced magic. In1890 Yeats and two others formed the Rhymers Club as a sort ofliterary wing, drawing inspiration from the French Symbolists.None of the Rhymers Club apart from Yeats ever achieved as muchrecognition as their French heroes, but they had the style. Theywere melancholy, self-dramatising, they hoped Byronic. They haddoomed love lives and nervous breakdowns, and mostly died young.Their defiance of conventional society included such un-Englishdeviance as drinking black coffee and speaking comprehensibleFrench, as well as attempted magic, sexual permutations notdiscussed in polite company, and hefty drug use. Yeats and his lover Maude Gonne tried using hashish to improvetheir telepathic powers. Others had a more relaxed, recreationalapproach. Arthur Symons was one Rhymer who survived to hedescribed as "highly strong, over-sensitive" in the1930's, best known for "Confessions - A study inPathology" which described his two years in an Italianlunatic asylum and cure by near-fatal pneumonia in 1909. He wasthe author of 'The Opium Smoker; "I am engulfed, and drowndeliciously/soft music like a perfume, and sweet light/Goldenwith audible odours exquisite/ swathe me in cerements foreternity.../". In a biography of fellow Rhymer Ernest Dowsonhe described one afternoon; a couple of ballet dancers and a poetvisiting, the host issuing tea, cakes, cigarettes and thenhashish. "That slow intoxication, that elaborate experimentin visionary sensations... he sat awaiting the magic, half shy inthe midst of that bright company of young people." Dowsonwrote poems with Latin titles about doomed love affairs,and consorted with the "most degraded" women indockside dives. He experimented with mescal in 1896, with thesexuality researcher Havelock Ellis. He died of TB in 1900, aged32. The other poet present at the hash and tea party and themescal experiment was John Addington Symonds, a historian whostudied the criminal mentality - he was part blinded afterseveral breakdowns and TB. One of their associates, Count EricStenbock, who wrote The Shadow of Death and Studies of Death, wasknown for wearing a live snake around his neck; he died aged 35,of either alcohol or opium.(13) The Wasted Artists were picturesque and dramatic, and theirstyle became a popular image of drug abusers. Ethereal and ratherunhealthy, possibly creative but definitely pasty-faced. Theperception of a difference between drugs suitable for legitimateuse, under medical control, and drugs which can only be abused,was extended by their example; anything they took was obviouslynot doing any good for their health. Still there was no anti-drugpanic in the UK. Drugs were still seen as foreign stuff, onlyused by those who wanted to act like foreigners. The artists wereadded to an existing mythology of the opium addict and the opiumden, spread by popular fiction from Wilkie Collins to OscarWilde, the addict over-sensitive, hollow-cheeked with torment,the dens glided in rococo brothel style, populated by viciousChinese and degenerate aristocrats. The Respectable Fear begins The first demon dope stories came over from the USA in the mid1890's. There were, apparently, ever-increasing numbers of Blackmen with cocaine, Chinese with opium, and Mexicans with both,plus marijuana. These coloured men were allegedly using theirfiendish substances to gain the flesh of white women, and many ofthem would go crazy with big knives if frustrated in any way. TheBritish media only retold a few of these tales at first.The pathological imagination of the US Press kept it up for thenext forty years, changing the drug and the villains' colour nowand again. Heroin was refined in 1898 but for the first few yearsit was considered a miracle painkiller and cure for morphineaddiction. The subject of the grossest stories was cocaine, alsoconsidered a miracle cure a few years earlier. The medicalenthusiasts didn't think it suitable for recreational use. Therecreational users disagreed. The alcohol prohibitionists built amass following and inflicted a huge social disaster on the USA.When the alcohol ban was repealed, drug control was not. Themyths were retired for a few years, but similar stories can befound, only slightly less racist, in the mass media today. Before, during and after Prohibition, the USA lobbied forinternational drugs laws, mixing economic self-interest withmoralism. The Hague Conference in 1912 agreed to the principle ofcertain drugs being strictly for "legitimate medicalpurposes." It was never effective internationally because ofobstruction by the British opiate and German cocaine businesses.The conference suggested an investigation of hemp, but it wasn'tfollowed up. The Assam Opium & Ganja Committee of 1913(16)showed that the IHDC had been forgotten or ignored in thatprovince of India, for instance accepting that ganja causesinsanity without calling any evidence. It did say that when ganjaprices rose users turned to opium, when opium prices rose theyturned to alcohol or, alarmingly, morphine. The number oflicensed shops in Assam had fallen from 1116 in 1878 to 347 in1911, and the committee thought it couldn't be reduced furtherwithout provoking unrest. Recreational drug use in British literary circles in the '90sspread through the next two decades into a wider worlds. Cocaineuse had spread well into the upper class by the First World War.Officialdom grew concerned about officers on leave, who oftenweren't afraid to wreck their health since their chances ofsurvival were slim. Morale would not be improved, it was felt, bythe sight of the upper ranks behaving like beasts, and it wouldbe worse yet if the common soldiers imitated them. There was apress scare about the Germans using drugs and prostitutes,collecting blackmail material. This unlikely tale and otherstories of moral degeneracy caught the imagination of the ArmyCouncil, who banned the sale of all intoxicants to troops in mid1916. In July the first U K law against possession of drags wassneaked through, section 40B of the Defense of the Realm Act. Itcovered cocaine and opiates; cannabis was not included, althoughit had been considered. Section 40B also banned"Malththusian appliances" (contraception) and quackmedicines. The same Act established legal closing times for pubs,which caused a lot more fuss. The post war scandal boom Immediately after the Great War the British press got theirfirst US-style dope story. Actress Billie Carelton, age 21, diedsupposedly from cocaine taken at an alcohol-free Victory Ball.Her supplier was tried for manslaughter but could not beconvicted. It was just as likely the sleeping drug Veronal thatkilled her, but that didn't bother the Daily Express. Theyincluded hashish eating in the habits of a circle of degenerateswho, they said, had mined a sweet and innocent girl. In September1920 a Dangerous Drugs Act was passed, clarifying the wartimepossession law and effectively dividing the drug trade intomedical vs criminal. It was greeted with such apathy byParliament that it was hard to make up a quorum in some ofthe committees. Cannabis was still not banned. Internationally, the UK government stopped blocking drugcontrols after several scandals at home and reports that morphineand cocaine addiction were spreading in the colonies. There weremore sex drugs and foreigner stories to keep up the postwar drugscare. In 1922 the death of dancer Freda Kempton gained unwantedpublicity for Brilliant Chang, Chinese restaurant owner andalleged dope king since 1917, handling morphine, opium andhashish as well as cocaine. After many raids and mentions in thepress he was sentenced to 14 months - not much for such analleged villain - then departed in 1924. Eddie Manning, Jamaicanjazz drummer and alleged dope king, was convicted of dealingopium and cocaine in '23. Both, it was strongly implied, had usedtheir dealing to get close to English girls. In 1922 threesisters were found half dressed and unconscious in the company ofa dead Chinese man, Yee Sing a.k.a. Johnny Hop, in a sealed roomfull of opium smoke above a Cardiff laundry. The girls never toldquite what had happened, so the press made it up, including aChinese love potion made from hashish used especially to subduewhite women, with an antidote made from geraniums.(17) Pulpfiction by the likes of Sax Rohmer helped spread the corruptaristocrat and Chinese dope plot themes. Despite all this advertisement, there was still no workingclass drug subculture. The upmarket drug users of the 20'scontinued to be found where the overlap between high society andthe arts copied what were seen as American fashions for jazz andcocaine. Aleister Crowleys' 1922 novel, Diary of a Drug Fiend,thinly disguised a real West End scene where cocaine was dealt inthe Cafe Royal on Regent Sweet. Crowley was a former Golden Dawnmember who publicised himself as "The Wickedest Man in theWorld," and ran a black magic cult largely based on sex. Heoccasionally kicked his morphine habit cold turkey in front ofacolytes, to show the power of his will; he did quite a lot toestablish a link in the public mind between heavy drug use andbeing a dangerous but pretentious creep. Chloroform and morphinewere popular with Lady Diana Cooper and Katherine Asquith, modelsfor several wild aristos in fiction. Morphine might be risky andmaybe immoral, but boozing was common, which was much worse.Compared to these types cannabis users were sweethearts. Havingpreviously tried smoking it to no effect, the painter AugustusJohn tried a hashish compote or jam after sardines and wine withfriends in Hampstead; "...catching the eye of Iris, we wereboth simultaneously seized with uncontrollable laughter, aboutnothing at all..." Despite the publicity, and penaltiesincreasing in 1922, prosecutions under the Dangerous Drugs Actaveraged a steady 60 a year for cocaine, 65 for opium. Cannabis lust became illegal in the UK after the countryagreed the 1925 Geneva International Convention on NarcoticsControl. It was included in the '25 Convention with the opiatesand cocaine, because Egypt and Turkey proposed it. An Egyptiandelegate stirringly denounced "Chronic Hashism" whichhe said caused most of the insanity in his country. It also, hesaid, weakened users, gave them heart and digestive troubles andmade them look wild-eyed and stupid. India opposed includingcannabis in the Convention, as their delegate said it had beenused there since time immemorial, grew wild, and they doubtedthat a prohibition could enforced. The British delegate abstainedfrom the vote but signed in the end. There was hardly anyparliamentary debate before it came into law as amendments to theDangerous Drugs Act on 281h September 1928. Despite this cannabisoffences, and 206 for opium. In 1950 for the first time therewere more prosecutions for cannabis than for opium andmanufactured drugs together - 86 against 41 opium and 42 others.That year a series of police raids on jazz clubs produced a newcrop of stories about black men with drugs and white women, thistime involving marijuana and benzedrine. Cannabis had finally gotinto the shock horror league. Epilogue The Indian Hemp Drugs Commission finally had its moment inParliament in July 1967, after the Government had established anAdvisory Committee on Drug Dependence. J.J.S. Driberg, Chief ofPolice and Inspector of Prisons for Assam, had given gaveevidence to the IHDC. His son Tom was a Labour MP. According tohis autobiography [18], the poet Alan Ginsberg asked Tom to"look up for him the report... in the House library I foundthat my father had given evidence before this commission, puttingforward strongly the view that people living in a damp, coldclimate needed the traditional consolation of ganja... Theclimate referred to was that of Assam, rather than England; but Ifelt it was almost an act of filial piety to sign a full pageadvertisement in the Times calling for a liberalisation of thelaws on pot..." When it became obvious that there would beno liberalisation, be attacked the government, his own party, inthe parliamentary debate. He said his father had told the IHDCthat when insane people were arrested a form had to be filledsaying why they were insane, and the safest thing to say wasganja as the police knew that no further enquiry would be made.When the government spokeswoman asked rhetorically "Whatsort of society will we create if everyone wants to escape fromreality 7" Driberg answered that "They want to escapefrom this horrible society we have created." The 1968 WootonCommittee on Cannabis was "in agreement with the conclusionsreached by the IHDC... that the long-term consumption of cannabisin moderate doses has no harmful effects." Given widepublicity, the government couldn't completely to ignore this newstudy; instead they did exactly the opposite of what itrecommended, and increased penalties for all cannabis offences ina new 1971 Misuse of Drugs Act. Cannabis use continued toincrease dramatically. By 1990 there were 40,194 convictions andcautions for cannabis in the UK, well over 90% of all recordeddrugs crimes. References: 1. Resolution 1369, Finance and Commerce Dept. (SeparateRevenue), Government of India, 21/3/1895. 23 pp. 2. T.M.Parssinen, Secret Passions, Secret Remedies - Narcotic Drugs inBritish Society, 1820-1930. Manchester University Press 1980 3. B. Inglis (1975) The Forbidden Game London Hodder &Stoughton 4. Report of the Royal Commission on Opium. Parliamentarypapers 1895 5. Hansand, Parliamentary Questions, 6. Resolution 3773, Finance and Commerce Dept., Government ofIndia, 17/12/1873. 7. In full IHDC report. India (Ganja) 97 in House of Commonspapers 1893-4 LXVI.79. 8. In (2) V. Berridge & J. Griffith Edwards, Opium and thePeople, Yale 1982. 9 0'Shaughnessy W.B. (1839) On the preparations of IndianHemp, or Gunjah. Transactions of the Medical and Physical Societyof Bengal 1838-40 pp 421-461 10. Culpepper's Complete Herbal. London, W. Foulsham & Co. 11. Birch E.A. (1889) Indian hemp in the treatment of chronicchoral & opium poisoning. Lancet 30-3-89 p625 12. Reynolds Sir J.R. (1890) Therapeutic Uses & ToxicEffects of Cannabis Indica Lancet, 22-3-90 13. V. Berridge, Origins of the English Drug "Scene"1890-1930, Medical History 32, 1988. Also 14. Walsh J.T. Hemp Drugs and Insanity. Journal of MedicalScience 40 1894 15. The Hashish Club, Ed P. Haining, Peter 0wen 1975, 16. Assam Opium & Crania Committee 1913. 17 Marek Kohn, Dope Girls, Lawrence & Wishart, London1992. 18. Tom Driberg, Ruling Passions, Cape 1977 About the Authors. Sean Blanchard is a freelance journalist andresearcher. From 1981 to 1983 he was coordinator of the LegaliseCannabis Campaign. Matthew J. Atha B.Sc. MSc, was Legalise CannabisCampaign Secretary from 1983 to 1989. His MSc psychology thesis"Quantitative Assessment of Illicit substance use"(Birmingham University 1987) included analyses of surveys of druguse at pop festivals. He divides his time between advocacy workand performing as a rock musician. Contents | Feedback | Search DRCNet Library | Schaffer Library | Major Studies | IndianHemp Drugs CommissionWT02-B03-46IA002-000022-B023-304http://www.questercorp.com:80/index.html 204.174.117.37 19961231213854 text/html 1989HTTP/1.0 200 OKDate: Tue, 31 Dec 1996 21:39:03 GMTServer: Stronghold/1.3.2 Ben-SSL/1.3 Apache/1.1.1Content-type: text/htmlContent-length: 1789Last-modified: Tue, 24 Dec 1996 18:44:52 GMT Quester Tangent Marine Instrumentation Quester Tangent Corporation, a systems engineering andmanufacturing company, specializes in hydrographic survey equipment, seabedclassification products and electronics for rapid transit systems. QTC VIEW Seabed Classification Hydrographic Survey Systems Under Keel Clearance Guide Paper presented at Canadian Hydrographic Conference, 1996 Urban Transit Electronics How to reach us: Phone: 1-250-656-6677 Fax: 1-250-655-4696 E-mail: sales@questercorp.com Copyright  1996 by QUESTER TANGENT CORPORATION 9865 West Saanich Road, Sidney, B.C. Canada V8L 3S1WT02-B03-47IA002-000022-B023-106http://www.questercorp.com:80/qtcview.html 204.174.117.37 19961231213715 text/html 3017HTTP/1.0 200 OKDate: Tue, 31 Dec 1996 21:37:23 GMTServer: Stronghold/1.3.2 Ben-SSL/1.3 Apache/1.1.1Content-type: text/htmlContent-length: 2817Last-modified: Tue, 24 Dec 1996 18:45:42 GMT Quester Tangent QTC VIEW Digital Approach to Seabed Classification Digital Approach to Seabed Classification Currently, high speed digital signal processors can extract many features from an echo sounder signal. Quester Tangent's QTC VIEW digitizes and processes the signal providing an accurate, repeatable seafloor classification. Information is displayed as a colour representing seafloor class along the vessel's track. Depth is calculated and portrayed as a bottom profile along the track with class color superimposed. The QTC VIEW also generates 3 values representing each echo's description and when displayed in 3-D, the user can identify relationships between the seabed classes. The QTC VIEW approach to classification of the seafloor has a variety of applications. The system is currently used in marine biological research for seabed habitat assessment, in large scale survey work supporting emplacement of seafloor engineering facilities related to off-shore oil and gas production and in the dredging industry for aggregate evaluation. QTC VIEW Details: Configuration Screen Display System Specifications Survey Reports Harwich Chesapeake Bay Grand Banks Preliminary Information Request Go to HOME PAGE How to reach us: Phone: 1-250-656-6677 Fax: 1-250-655-4696 E-mail: sales@questercorp.com Copyright  1996 by QUESTER TANGENT CORPORATION 9865 West Saanich Road, Sidney, B.C. Canada V8L 3S1WT02-B03-48IA002-000022-B023-121http://www.questercorp.com:80/hydro.html 204.174.117.37 19961231213722 text/html 3959HTTP/1.0 200 OKDate: Tue, 31 Dec 1996 21:37:30 GMTServer: Stronghold/1.3.2 Ben-SSL/1.3 Apache/1.1.1Content-type: text/htmlContent-length: 3759Last-modified: Tue, 24 Dec 1996 18:44:45 GMT Quester Tangent Hydrographic Survey Systems - ISAH-PC ISAH-PC Hardware and Software for Real-Time and Production Survey Operations Proven hydrographic data acquisition on PC platforms with WindowsNT Utilizes commercially available PC hardware with data concentrator for data acquisition Data management utilizing graphical user interface with associated data storage, terminal and display devices Real-time bathymetric and seabed classification comparisons on graphical display Configurations available for single beam, sweep and swath echo sounding systems, towfish and MCM capabilities Incorporates proven ISAH technology with an easy to use menu driven system delivering integrated navigation, survey control and data acquisition APPLICATIONS Hydrographic surveys for nautical chart production Engineering surveys and harbour control surveys with real-time data comparisons Incorporating over a decade of field-proven ISAH marine technology SYSTEM SPECIFICATIONS IBM Compatible PC Data Concentrator Standard PC chassis and power supply complete with 4 GB disk, 1.44 FDD, Ethernet, SCSI I/F and three SVGA channels Power requirement: 110/220 VAC 24 VDC Independent Real-Time Displays VGA hydrographer display VGA tactical display monitor LCD helmsman display Serial data logging channel interface Instrumentation trigger/time sync output, instrumentation trigger output Parallel data interfaces Data transfer via Ethernet to the ruggedized ISAH-PC SOFTWARE SPECIFICATIONS Survey planning module Historical data set creation Real-time data acquisition and display near real-time validation, position and depth processing Post-processing capabilities Compatible with CARIS systems Tide and current analysis and prediction Reports and archiving modules Output to GIS for field sheet production Go to HOME PAGE How to reach us: Phone: 1-250-656-6677 Fax: 1-250-655-4696 E-mail: sales@questercorp.com Copyright  1996 by QUESTER TANGENT CORPORATION 9865 West Saanich Road, Sidney, B.C. Canada V8L 3S1WT02-B03-49IA002-000022-B023-136http://www.questercorp.com:80/ukeel.html 204.174.117.37 19961231213731 text/html 7619HTTP/1.0 200 OKDate: Tue, 31 Dec 1996 21:37:38 GMTServer: Stronghold/1.3.2 Ben-SSL/1.3 Apache/1.1.1Content-type: text/htmlContent-length: 7419Last-modified: Tue, 24 Dec 1996 18:46:20 GMT Quester Tangent Under Keel Clearance Guide Under Keel Clearance Guide Integrated Port & Waterway Information System A real-time accurate assessment of clearancebetween the vessel keel and the seabed INTRODUCTION Incorporating over a decade of field-proven marine technology, Quester Tangent's Under Keel Clearance Guide (UKCG) provides status information for the safe and efficient management of port operations. The UKCG system receives data from the Vessel Traffic Management System (VTMS) and other oceanographic and meteorological sensors, to provide information, planning tools and emergency alarms. As port operations become increasingly competitive, there is a growing need for more accessible, detailed and accurate port and waterway information by ship operators, VTMS operators and vessel pilots. Traditionally operators and pilots have relied on tide tables, paper or electronic charts, and a history of local knowledge when determining vessel clearance safety or planning berthing procedures. These predictions may not take into account day to day changes due to depth, current, tide and weather. The UKCG integrates bathymetry, weather, tide, current and vessel squat to predict vessel under keel clearance information for the particular port or waterway. By integrating this data, the UKCG is used as a forecast tool and alarm system alongside the VTMS. The operator receives an accurate assessment of vessel under keel clearance usingoptimal and real-time data based on accurate forecast and now-cast information DESIGN: A schematic of a typical UKCG system is shown in Figure 1 which details the operational flow of data to and from the VTMS. The UKCG system operates in parallel with the VTMS and can receive, process and transmit data to the VTMS operator displays. Figure 1 UKCG - VTMS Network Configuration Digital Tidal Atlas (DTA): The DTA accepts requests for water depth and current information from the VTMS to provide real-time and forecast conditions for the port or specific vessel routes. The DTA's tidal predictor is based on a 3-D finite element model tuned and run in the port area. Adjustments due to weather effects incorporate seasonal variations in water density, actual wind velocity and air pressure. Data from permanently installed and strategically placed sensors, such as Doppler current meters and tide gauges is used to validate water depth and water column current forecasts within the DTA. Squat Predictor (Squat): The Squat Predictor utilizes water depth and current information, bathymetric data, vessel hull shape information, and actual or forecast speed heading and draught information to predict the vessel draught increase due to its motion through the water. Under Keel Clearance (UKCG): The UKCG processes the information and forecasts the vessel's under keel clearance while providing a confidence level indication.The now-cast and forecast information is validated by tide and current information from the on-line sensors in the port area. VTMS operators may request information on water depth, current speed and clearance parameters using a graphics interface technology supported by on-line help, alarm and status indicators. Water column currents, surface currents and time series of currents are displayed for any position in the port region, as well as current information over a geographic region of interest. Figure 2 UKCG System Design Other information available from the UKCG system are planning and real-time monitoring tools. For example, "Cross Flow Over Route" is a forecast of the currents across a planned route. "Clearance Over Route" is a graphic display of the forecast clearance as a function of time and position along the planned route. In addition, as the vessel transits the route, real-time positions and speed provide a real-time clearance forecast. This forecast also includes an alarm system for potentially hazardous situations. The "Safe Passage Window" and "Clearance During Loading" functions are used in rapid investigation of trade-offs, such as increasing cargo with a delayed sailing versus a quicker departure with less cargo. Future enhancements of the UKCG system include installations with remote laptop computers and communication links to the VTMS. Onboard pilots will have instant access to real-time under keel clearance information. The UKCG system can be used in a "stand alone" configuration or integrated into a new or existing VTMS. The integration of forecast and real-time data, combined with sophisticated mathematical and physical models, allows the system to provide detailed forecast and now-cast tools for the specific port. Graphical displays show forecasted under keel clearances for a vessel as it transits its route. Other tools allow for quick analysis of "safe" vessel draught conditions of vessels while loading or entering the port using actual current, tide and vessel speed conditions. The UKCG operators access real-time and forecast prediction information which is used in conjunction with the planning tools, and to assist in making decisions to enhance safe and economical port operations. This information is particularly valuable in ports with limited clearance, strong currents or where lightering operations are required. Berthing and loading operations are optimized and safety enhanced utilizing UKCG forecasts to provide safe transit "windows" and tools that can be used in emergencies. The UKCG system displays forecast clearance on the vessel's route, allowing the operator to make decisions regarding vessel loading, planned draught, departure times and route selection. See Paper presented at Canadian Hydrographic Conference, 1996 by Paul Lacroix and James Kightley. Go to HOME PAGE How to reach us: Phone: 1-250-656-6677 Fax: 1-250-655-4696 E-mail: sales@questercorp.com Copyright  1996 by QUESTER TANGENT CORPORATION 9865 West Saanich Road, Sidney, B.C. Canada V8L 3S1WT02-B03-50IA002-000022-B023-156http://www.questercorp.com:80/ukeelpap.html 204.174.117.37 19961231213741 text/html 16196HTTP/1.0 200 OKDate: Tue, 31 Dec 1996 21:37:48 GMTServer: Stronghold/1.3.2 Ben-SSL/1.3 Apache/1.1.1Content-type: text/htmlContent-length: 15995Last-modified: Tue, 24 Dec 1996 18:46:33 GMT Quester Tangent Under Keel Clearance Guide - Paper at  Canadian Hydrographic Conference, 1996 Paper presented at Canadian Hydrographic Conference, 1996 An Under Keel Clearance Guide for Ports and Waterways Paul Lacroix and James Kightley Quester Tangent Corporation Sidney, British Columbia, Canada Abstract The Under Keel Clearance Guide (UKCG) is a new element in a modern VTMS system. The UKCG integrates bathymetry, weather and sophisticated tide, current and squat models to provide predictive vessel clearance information. Operating on a networked work station, it provides both real-time and forecast products and planning tools to the user. It is able to display forecast clearance along a route and allows trade-offs to be made during loading, regarding planned draught, departure time and route selection. Introduction As ports and waterways infrastructure becomes more integrated, ship operators, port operators and pilots are requiring that more information be available on-line and on-demand. This article describes a new element of a Vessel Traffic Management System (VTMS) which is providing, among other products, water depth, water column current and vessel under keel clearance. Integrating a number of technologies for the first time, this system provides information for any area in the port or waterway, including forecast information for a 12 hour period.At present, vessel operators and pilots rely upon tide tables, paper or electronic charts, and local knowledge to determine acceptable draughts for vessels, and to plan berthing procedures. While reliable, these sources of information are not optimal, and cannot easily take account of day to day changes. While tidal effects dominate water column current and depth, other non-tidal effects can be quite significant. The technology described here incorporates these effects to improve capabilities to forecast water depths, currents, and under keel clearance in the port area. The Under Keel Clearance Guide (UKCG) is based upon accurate forecast and now-cast water depth and current information. It integrates vessel hull shape, speed and other information to provide a forecast tool and alarm system component of the VTMS. The technology is delivered as a work station that runs database and modeling software, and delivers reports through an easy to use Graphical User Interface (GUI). This technology helps to optimize berthing and loading operations, while enhancing safety. As described below, forecasts of safe transit windows are routinely provided and tools for emergencies are available. The technology offers significant advantages in ports with draught limitations or strong currents, and also those ports with lightering operations. The Under Keel Clearance Guide is an integration of technologies from several disciplines. A sophisticated Digital Tidal Atlas (DTA) is a major module. This atlas, with integrated wind, air pressure and water density elements, is derived from decades of research by oceanographers working in coastal regions. The vessel squat model is a second key element. Finally, accurate digital bathymetry with tools for validation and editing is a third essential module. To be useful, this system can be delivered as an integral part of a VTMS. Operating as part of a Local Area Network, the Under Keel Clearance Guide accepts data from the VTMS system as well as from other oceanographic and meteorological sensors, and provides status information, planning tools, and emergency alarms. Alternatively, the system can operate as a stand-alone unit alongside existing port information systems. The implementation described here is supplied by Quester Tangent as an element of a VTMS system being delivered by Lockheed Martin to a major oil port. System Design The design of the Under Keel Clearance Guide is described in terms of the flow charts shown as Figures 1, 2, and 3. For example, the Digital Tidal Atlas Predictor (DTA) accepts requests for water depth or current information from the system, and provides actual and forecast conditions throughout the port or along a route. The Atlas is based upon a 3-D finite element model which is tuned and run in the port area. The DTA uses the constituents from the tidal model, and incorporates seasonal water density variability and actual winds and air pressure to estimate the water level. Permanently installed sensors such as acoustic Doppler current meters, tide gauges and meteorological sensors are used to update and validate the water depth and water column current forecasts from the DTA. Figure 1 Digital Tidal Atlas Predictor The vessel squat predictor requires water depth/current information, bathymetric data, information about the vessel hull shape, and actual or forecast speed, heading, and draught information. Figure 2 Vessel Squat Predictor The Under Keel Clearance Predictor combines the above results. Taking forecast squat plus forecast water depth, and adding digital bathymetry, it produces a forecast of the under keel clearance for the vessel. The predictor incorporates its knowledge of the vessel dimensions and the surrounding bathymetry to return both the forecast clearance and a confidence level. This design supports the operator requests illustrated in Figure 4. Based upon modern GUI technology supported by on-line help, and alarm and status indicators, the operator can request information under the general headings of current, water depth, and clearance. Water column currents, surface currents and time series of currents can be displayed at any point in the port region. Current information is similarly available when a request specifies the time, depth range, and the geographic region of interest. All of this nowcast and forecast information is validated by tide and current information provided by on-line sensors in the port area. The remaining information products include both planning and real-time monitoring tools. For example, "Cross Flow over Route" provides a forecast of currents along a planned route. "Clearance over Route" provides a graphical display of the forecast clearance as a function of time and position along the planned route. In addition, as the vessel is transiting this route, real-time position and speed along the route is used to provide a real-time clearance forecast, including an alarm system which alerts the operator of a potential hazardous situation ahead of the vessel being tracked. Figure 3 Under Keel Clearance Predictor FUNCTION OUTPUT INPUTS Water Column Current current vector profile over water column position, time Current Vector Field current vectors over rectangular area area extent, depth, time Current Time Series current vector over time period position, depth, time period Depth Time Series water depth over time period position, time period Tidal Height Table hourly tidal heights over calendar month position, month Tidal Current Table hourly tidal currents over calendar month position, depth, month Cross Flow over Route cross flow current speed as function of time/position route, depth, start time Water Depth over Route water depth as function of time/position route, start time Vessel Squat maximum vessel squat depth position, time, vessel ID, static draught, speed, heading Clearance over Route under keel clearance as function of time/position route, start time, vessel ID, static draught Safe Passage Window time windows during which it is safe to sail route, earliest and latest start times, vessel ID, vessel static draught, safe clearance limit Clearance During Loading under keel clearance as function of time position, start time, vessel ID, initial static draught, loading rate, load remaining Figure 4 Operator Requests The "Safe Passage Window" and "Clearance during Loading" functions are used as planning tools. Based upon vessel status and forecast conditions, they allow quick investigations of trade-offs between additional cargo and delayed sailing, and quicker departure with a lighter cargo. System Architecture The Under Keel Clearance Guide is implemented on a powerful work station, with real-time data flow as illustrated in Figure 5. Here we see a Local Area Network connecting the port VTMS system with remote terminals and displays and the UKCG system. Figure 5 Under Keel Clearance and Digital Tidal Atlas Real-Time Data Flow On the right-hand side of this diagram, the manual and automated input of sensor and other data are shown. During an initial configuration and validation period, the data bases shown in the diagram are installed and tested. A vessel data base describing hull form and vessel identification is required. The tides/currents and non-tidal effects data bases are developed by running the models described above as customized for the port area. Finally the bathymetric data base is collected, validated and installed from new surveys or existing charts and digital data. After initial validation, these data bases are maintained and edited as required. The remainder of Figure 5 shows the three main processing modules described earlier, and their interfaces to the data bases and the GUI which handles information requests. Recognizing that the technology described here involves on-going evolution and improvement after installation, the system incorporates validation software tools, editing and Quality Assurance procedures, and a plan for regular review of performance. In addition, training is an essential component of a successful long term implementation. Including these elements within the system ensures that advanced technology like the UKCG continues to be a useful tool in the hand of the trained operators on a continuing basis. Implementation The system is implemented on a DEC Alpha UNIX work station and requires 100 Mb of disc space and 40 Mb of virtual memory during operation. A detailed interface specification was designed and implemented to ensure ease of integration of the UKCG into the Lockheed VTMS. The system receives real-time data from both oceanographic and meteorological sensors via the VTMS local area network. Four bottom mounted acoustic doppler current meters are being installed in the port area. Wind and air pressure data will be received from five existing meteorological stations located in the general area of the port. The tidal data base has been constructed using existing bathymetry and coastline, together with the historical tide and current meter data. A 3-D finite element model generated the tidal constituents data base with over 16,000 nodes each with 11 depth levels. The nontidal effects data base was statistically generated using the observed meteorological and oceanographic data. The bathymetry data base includes all of the over 300,000 data points provided by the Port. Vessel hull characteristics are obtained from an on-line Lloyds data base of ships or from the system operators. In order to access the system performance the validation software tool was used to verify correct operation. This validation tool uses either operator entered commands or command files to exercise the UKCG system and provide a quantitative assessment of the system performance. The historical oceanographic and meteorological data were played back and water level and current forecasts calculated for up to 48 hours in the future. These DTA predictions were compared with the observed data to validate operation. The vessel under keel clearance and loading functions were tested with information of ships known to visit the port transiting through the port traffic corridors. These results were compared with manual observations. Results from the validation process show that the UKCG provides significantly improved forecasts of water levels and vessel clearance forecasts over existing procedures up to 12 or 18 hours in the future. It was found that non-tidal effects on water levels in the area of interest were up to 60 cm. Typical vessel squat estimates for oil tankers underway in the port area were 50 cm. The present port standing orders provide for a fixed safety allowance of 152 cm above the tidal predicted water level at the shoalest point of the vessel traffic corridor. Considering these figures it is expected that UKCG will provide information which potentially would allow vessels to be loaded to optimal draughts 50 to 100 cm greater than currently used depending upon local conditions. Conclusions The Under Keel Clearance Guide represents another tool for the safe and efficient management of modern port operations. Integrating real-time and forecast winds and currents, digital bathymetry, and sophisticated models, the system provides detailed forecast and now-cast tools in the port area. Graphical tools which allow a display of the forecast clearance as a vessel transits a route are provided. The tools allow quick analyses of safe draughts for vessels while loading or entering the port, under actual current, tidal, and vessel speed conditions. The technology will be particularly valuable in ports with limited clearance, or having strong currents, and where lightering operations are required. At present, this technology is delivered as part of an integrated VTMS. In the future, it will be implemented with remote portable terminals based upon a lap-top computer and a communications link with the VTMS. This will allow pilots aboard vessels to access under keel clearance products in real-time. Go to HOME PAGE How to reach us: Phone: 1-250-656-6677 Fax: 1-250-655-4696 E-mail: sales@questercorp.com Copyright  1996 by QUESTER TANGENT CORPORATION 9865 West Saanich Road, Sidney, B.C. Canada V8L 3S1WT02-B03-51IA002-000022-B023-169http://www.questercorp.com:80/transit.html 204.174.117.37 19961231213748 text/html 2738HTTP/1.0 200 OKDate: Tue, 31 Dec 1996 21:37:57 GMTServer: Stronghold/1.3.2 Ben-SSL/1.3 Apache/1.1.1Content-type: text/htmlContent-length: 2538Last-modified: Tue, 24 Dec 1996 18:46:06 GMT Quester Tangent Transit Capabilities Transit Capabilities With over a decade of field-proven instrumentation experience, Quester Tangent has delivered custom hardware and real-time software solutions in environments where high shock, vibration, temperature extremes and electrical transients are present.This has led to the design and manufacture electrical subsystems for light rapid transit and rail suppliers including: the Health Monitor Unit (HMU 5801) for British Columbia Transit (Skytrain), Vancouver, Canada, the Health Monitor Unit (HMU 5802) and Brake Assurance Monitor (BAM 5811) for Bombardier Inc.'s Kuala Lumpur Rapid Transit project. Health Monitor Units were custom designed to minimize recurring costs and maximize functionality.The Brake Assurance Monitor represents Quester Tangent's entry into safety critical systems. Quester Tangent's technical capabilities in the transit industry include: off-the-shelf to fully custom designed capabilities for demanding environments spread spectrum radio modems for data transfer ISO 9002 compliant LonWorks networking for interconnection to intelligent subsystems development of safety critical software including full FMECA's, FTA's and software safety analysis Go to HOME PAGE How to reach us: Phone: 1-250-656-6677 Fax: 1-250-655-4696 E-mail: sales@questercorp.com Copyright  1996 by QUESTER TANGENT CORPORATION 9865 West Saanich Road, Sidney, B.C. Canada V8L 3S1WT02-B03-52IA002-000022-B023-187http://www.questercorp.com:80/qtcconf.html 204.174.117.37 19961231213755 text/html 1662HTTP/1.0 200 OKDate: Tue, 31 Dec 1996 21:38:05 GMTServer: Stronghold/1.3.2 Ben-SSL/1.3 Apache/1.1.1Content-type: text/htmlContent-length: 1462Last-modified: Tue, 24 Dec 1996 18:45:29 GMT Quester Tangent QTC VIEW Configuration - Digital Approach to Seabed Classification Configuration [Screen Display] [QTC VIEW Details] Go to HOME PAGE How to reach us: Phone: 1-250-656-6677 Fax: 1-250-655-4696 E-mail: sales@questercorp.com Copyright  1996 by QUESTER TANGENT CORPORATION 9865 West Saanich Road, Sidney, B.C. Canada V8L 3S1WT02-B03-53IA002-000022-B023-202http://www.questercorp.com:80/display.html 204.174.117.37 19961231213802 text/html 1761HTTP/1.0 200 OKDate: Tue, 31 Dec 1996 21:38:12 GMTServer: Stronghold/1.3.2 Ben-SSL/1.3 Apache/1.1.1Content-type: text/htmlContent-length: 1561Last-modified: Tue, 24 Dec 1996 18:44:10 GMT Quester Tangent QTC VIEW Screen Display - Digital Approach to Seabed Classification Screen Display Click anywhere on the image to see the full screen. [Specifications] [QTC VIEW Details] Go to HOME PAGE How to reach us: Phone: 1-250-656-6677 Fax: 1-250-655-4696 E-mail: sales@questercorp.com Copyright  1996 by QUESTER TANGENT CORPORATION 9865 West Saanich Road, Sidney, B.C. Canada V8L 3S1WT02-B03-54IA002-000022-B023-217http://www.questercorp.com:80/qtcspecs.html 204.174.117.37 19961231213810 text/html 4563HTTP/1.0 200 OKDate: Tue, 31 Dec 1996 21:38:19 GMTServer: Stronghold/1.3.2 Ben-SSL/1.3 Apache/1.1.1Content-type: text/htmlContent-length: 4363Last-modified: Tue, 24 Dec 1996 18:45:36 GMT Quester Tangent QTC VIEW Specifications - Digital Approach to Seabed Classification Specifications The QTC VIEW is an acoustic instrument providing digital real-time seabed classification for a broad range of applications in fisheries, hydrography, dredging, environmental sciences and mine countermeasures. Features: rugged, compact packaging easy installation and use enhanced graphical user interface automated calibration over any survey area Windows-based logging and display software included The QTC VIEW connects to the transducer cable of most echo sounders and sends seabed classification data to a PC using the included Windows-based software tools. Seabeds are classified by the shape of the first returning echo; different sea beds produce differently shaped returns. QTC VIEW digitizes the echo and uses advanced signal processing techniques to track the bottom and classify the seabed. System Specifications interfaces with most echo sounders outputs data to a PC running the supplied software or to chart plotters frequency range: 22 kHz to 250 kHz (nominal) depth range: to 1,000 metres provides accurate discrimination seabed characteristics Electronics low noise head amp with over 80 dB dynamic range Intel 486 DX2-66 processor and non-volatile memory DC to DC power supply Input/Output external control via PC/RS-232C port analogue signal input from transducer GPS input NMEA 0183 standard output via PC/RS-232C of depth and classification with confidence level Physical & Environmental high strength extruded aluminum case with military connectors and sealed status indicator lights RFI/EMI protection power consumption: 36 W @ 12 - 36 VDC weight: 4.5 kg size: 346 x 196 x 106 mm temperature: 0 to 40C operating -20 to 70C storage warranty: one year limited warranty, supported world-wide Software Specifications DACS - Data Acquisition Control provides interactive track-plot colour coded with bottom type includes 3-D display of echo shape parameters characteristics for Quality Assurance includes depth and seabed classification profile provides survey control and file management functionality logs data as comma-delimited ASCII string CAPS - Calibration and Processing installation and diagnostic utilities allows collection of calibration data over new survey area includes catalogue review and editing functionality exports to ASCII string suitable for GIS or mapping software Computer Requirements 486 DX2-66, 8 Mb RAM DOS 6+, Windows 3.1 or Windows '95 one dedicated serial port [Port of Harwich Survey Report] [QTC VIEW Details] Go to HOME PAGE How to reach us: Phone: 1-250-656-6677 Fax: 1-250-655-4696 E-mail: sales@questercorp.com Copyright  1996 by QUESTER TANGENT CORPORATION 9865 West Saanich Road, Sidney, B.C. Canada V8L 3S1WT02-B03-55IA002-000022-B023-238http://www.questercorp.com:80/harwich.html 204.174.117.37 19961231213822 text/html 8055HTTP/1.0 200 OKDate: Tue, 31 Dec 1996 21:38:30 GMTServer: Stronghold/1.3.2 Ben-SSL/1.3 Apache/1.1.1Content-type: text/htmlContent-length: 7855Last-modified: Tue, 24 Dec 1996 18:44:38 GMT Quester Tangent QTC VIEW at the Port of Harwich Port of Harwich The Port of Harwich is one of the largest container ports in the United Kingdom. The harbour floor is mapped regularly utilizing single and multibeam bathymetric surveys and seabed sampling techniques. Seismic profiling, subsurface sampling and bathymetric mapping are used to assist in managing large-scale dredging operations. A QTC VIEW trial was held as the Harwich Haven Authority wished to evaluate echosounder-based seabed classification technology to assist dredging programs and provide details for harbour-floor environmental monitoring. System Configuration The QTC VIEW seabed classification system was used for this trial. The survey platform was a 12m launch with an ODOM 208 kHz echosounder. The transducer was rigged to the vessel's side. The QTC VIEW was linked via a junction box located between the transducer and sounder to monitor the transmitted pulse and first returning echo. A 486DX laptop computer was connected to the QTC VIEW using a PCMCIA interface and a RS232 serial connection. GPS information was transmitted to the laptop via a RS232 serial connection, and utilized a NMEA 183 GGA format. The QTC VIEW system was powered by two car-sized batteries supplying 24 volts. Geological Setting The survey area was located adjacent to a jetty (Fig. 1). A dredged berthing basin along the face of the jetty had an average water depth of 10 - 12m and the basin's western boundary was marked by a small slope. Directly west of the basin was the main channel, a dredged trough approximately 12-15m deep. To the west of the trough was a shallow shelf approximately 8m below sealevel.Previous dredging and grab sampling data indicated the shelf was a mud veneer over boulders and cobbles in a matrix of medium to fine sand and mud. The toe of the slope leading from the shelf consisted of well-sorted fine to medium sand in a muddy matrix. Mud or fine sand was expected in the main channel or berthing basin. Figure 1. Schematic representation of the survey area showing the shelf, main channel, berthing basin and jetty. Circled numbers represent approximate locations of calibration sites. Calibration System calibration was completed by collecting approximately 200 echo's at sites representative of each bottom type to be mapped. Although calibration from the complete range of seabed types was ideal, it was not absolutely necessary as new seabed classes can be recognized and mapped during post-processing.Four calibration sites were identified from previous grab sampling and dredging operations including two sites on the shelf, one at the toe of the slope, and one in the main dredged channel. A total of six calibration samples were taken: one from each of the four basic areas, one extra sample at the toe of the slope, and one to the south of the survey area (Fig. 1). Grab samples were collected from each site, excepting site 6 south of the survey area.A catalogue of seabed classes was defined using the information collected during the calibration exercise (Table 1). Classes were defined based upon a visual estimate of grain size and sediment consolidation identified in the grab sample. Table 1 Class 1 Pebbles in a matrix of fine sand and mud Class 2 Mud, compacted Class 3 Mud, liquefied Class 4 Fine sand, mud, bioturbated Class 5 Mud, liquefied, over very well sorted medium to fine sand and 10% shell hash Class 6 N/A, (assumed sand and gravel) Survey Operations Fifteen east-west lines and 2 north-south tie-lines were completed. The main east-west lines were approximately 1300m long at 100m intervals. Seas were moderate with a strong tidal current. The survey speed was 7 knots. Results The initial assessment of the data indicated the shelf consisted of classes 1, 2, and 4 (areas of pebbles, sand, mud; compact mud; and fine sand). The main channel was highly variable and contained classes 3, 4, 5, and 6 suggesting a bottom of soft mud, fine sand and mud, soft mud over well-sorted sand, and sand and gravel (assumed). Class 3 was more abundant towards the eastern side of the main channel. The east end of the survey area (berthing basin) contained classes 4, 5, and 6 suggesting a seabed of fine sand, soft mud over fine sand, and sand and gravel (assumed). The calibration data was analyzed and the result indicated the acoustic signal from class 3 was similar to class 5. This was likely caused by limited penetration of the 200 kHz sounder in the soft mud deposited over the sand at site 5. As signals from sites 3 and 5 were likely the response from the liquefied mud, class 5 was merged into class 3. Sites 4 and 6 were acoustically similar, suggesting site 6 consisted primarily of sand instead of assumed sand and gravel. Class 6 was merged into class 4. The seabed classification result is shown in Figure 2. It indicates the shelf area is primarily fine sand with patches of compact mud and pebbles in a muddy sand matrix. The floor of the main channel is soft mud, and the berthing basin has soft mud and fine sand to the south grading to fine sand to the north. A patch of compacted mud and pebbles in a muddy sand matrix occurred in the northeast corner of the survey area. Figure 2. Map of seabed classification over a 3-D plot of the bathymetry. The seabed consists of four classes including mud, fine sand with silt and some pebbles, pebbles in a sandy mud matrix, and pebbles in a muddy sand matrix. Summary Seabed classification technology is well-suited to this type of application with the calibration and surveying exercise generating satisfactory real-time results. The QTC VIEW technology and classification method provides efficient post-processing of data. Analysis of the calibration data, specifically the acoustic signal from the various calibration sites, revealed similarities between classes and warranted the merging of these classes before producing a final plot. [Chesapeake Bay, Maryland Survey Report] [QTC VIEW Details] Go to HOME PAGE How to reach us: Phone: 1-250-656-6677 Fax: 1-250-655-4696 E-mail: sales@questercorp.com Copyright  1996 by QUESTER TANGENT CORPORATION 9865 West Saanich Road, Sidney, B.C. Canada V8L 3S1WT02-B03-56IA002-000022-B023-253http://www.questercorp.com:80/chesapea.html 204.174.117.37 19961231213829 text/html 4386HTTP/1.0 200 OKDate: Tue, 31 Dec 1996 21:38:38 GMTServer: Stronghold/1.3.2 Ben-SSL/1.3 Apache/1.1.1Content-type: text/htmlContent-length: 4186Last-modified: Tue, 24 Dec 1996 18:44:03 GMT Quester Tangent QTC VIEW at Chesapeake Bay Chesapeake Bay, Maryland Introduction The Maryland Geophysical Survey requested a QTC VIEW demonstration to evaluate digital technology for sediment classification in the coastal and estuarine environments of Chesapeake Bay. The trial was performed off Solomans Island where the Survey had previously completed extensive single and multibeam bathymetric studies and seabed sampling. Equipment Installed on the 16 m survey vessel R.V. Discovery, the QTC VIEW was connected in parallel with a Furuno FCV582 200 kHz sounder and 8 beam width transducer. The sounder had eight manual ranges with pulse durations from .1 ms to 1.4 ms and ping rates from 100 to 10 per second. Maximum output power was 500 watts RMS. As the survey area had depth ranges from 7 to 42 meters, the fourth range was selected with a pulse duration of .3 ms and a ping rate of 6 per second. A NMEA 0183, GGA navigation string was sent to the 486 DX2-66 laptop which logged and displayed both seabed classification information and GPS data. Area Chesapeake Bay is one of the largest inland coastal waterways in the United States. It covers approximately 14,000 square miles and has an average depth of 7 m. The Bay is predominately mud with areas of fine and medium grain sand. The survey area was located five miles east northeast from Solomans Island. Calibration The QTC VIEW was calibrated at four sites. Two grab samples were collected at each site to accurately characterize the seabed type. Site 1 was in 7.6 m of water and consisted of mud with 5% fine sand. Site 2 was in 14.7 m of water and consisted of a silty clay. The seabed at site 3 was a gas-charged mud in 36 m of water. When viewed on a colour echo sounder, there was little difference in the acoustic signature between sites 2 and 3. Site 4 was fine sand in 7 m of water. Operations A catalogue containing four classes was compiled and a survey line run from east-west over the various seabed types. The line was approximately 12 km in length and was run at vessel speeds from 3 to 14 knots. Seas were calm with little tidal action during the survey. Results From extensive surveys of the area, MGS personnel knew where the seabed transitions were located. The QTC VIEW showed the exact location of each transition and accurately distinguished between the four seabed types. During data acquisition, a number of grab samples were taken and confirmed the system's accuracy. Summary Two interesting aspects of the QTC VIEW operational abilities were observed during this trial. Firstly, the system was able to characterize gas-charged sediments. Secondly, the QTC VIEW was able to collect high quality data at vessel speeds of 14 knots without sacrificing data quality. [Grand Banks, Newfoundland Survey Report] [QTC VIEW Details] Go to HOME PAGE How to reach us: Phone: 1-250-656-6677 Fax: 1-250-655-4696 E-mail: sales@questercorp.com Copyright  1996 by QUESTER TANGENT CORPORATION 9865 West Saanich Road, Sidney, B.C. Canada V8L 3S1WT02-B03-57IA002-000022-B023-271http://www.questercorp.com:80/grdbanks.html 204.174.117.37 19961231213839 text/html 3929HTTP/1.0 200 OKDate: Tue, 31 Dec 1996 21:38:48 GMTServer: Stronghold/1.3.2 Ben-SSL/1.3 Apache/1.1.1Content-type: text/htmlContent-length: 3729Last-modified: Tue, 24 Dec 1996 18:44:25 GMT Quester Tangent QTC VIEW at the Grand Banks, Newfoundland Grand Banks, Newfoundland Introduction Canadian Marconi Company and Quinlan Brothers Seafoods invited Quester Tangent to install and operate the QTC VIEW aboard a working scallop dragger. The purpose was to identify scallop beds using digital seabed classification on the Grand Banks of Newfoundland, Canada. Equipment The QTC VIEW was installed on the bridge of the 22 m scallop dragger M.V. Cape Aaron. The system was connected to the 200 kHz transducer of a SI-TEX dual frequency 200/50 kHz echo sounder. A 486 DX2-66 MHz laptop computer displayed and stored data. Navigation information supplied by the vessels GPS, was logged in NMEA 0183 GGA, GLL formats. Area Situated at the toe of the Grand Banks, Lilly Canyon has a water depth range between 90 and 2000 m. Scallops were located near the head of the canyon (90 -150 m) and were associated with a substrate of sand, cobbles and bedrock bordered by finer sediments containing sand dollars. Calibration Sample echoes were collected at three sites enabling the system to recognize seabed types during the survey. The vessels drag was used for ground-truthing at the sites. The first site (water depth 100 m) consisted of gravel and cobbles. The second site (water depth 110 m) consisted of fine sands containing sand dollars. The third site (water depth 170 m) consisted of sands with scallops, starfish and crab. Results The vessel shot its drag and proceeded to fish in a north/south direction in moderate seas with heavy chop. A drag speed of one to two knots was maintained. The QTC VIEW provided the vessel with a good visual picture of the scallop bed boundaries (Figure 1). The grounds were oriented parallel to depth contours. The zone of high productivity was narrower to the north with seabeds of sand dollars to each side. It was important for the scallop dragger to avoid sand dollars to minimize bycatch. The QTC VIEW's track plot was used to steer the vessel over the areas of highest productivity, including the narrow part of the scallop zone. Figure 1. Track plot of QTC VIEW classification Summary The QTC VIEW demonstrated digital seabed classification is an effective tool for the scallop fishery. By training the system to identify seabeds containing target species, the QTC VIEW maximized the harvest and minimized bycatch. [QTC VIEW Details] Go to HOME PAGE How to reach us: Phone: 1-250-656-6677 Fax: 1-250-655-4696 E-mail: sales@questercorp.com Copyright  1996 by QUESTER TANGENT CORPORATION 9865 West Saanich Road, Sidney, B.C. Canada V8L 3S1WT02-B03-58IA002-000022-B023-289http://www.questercorp.com:80/infofax.html 204.174.117.37 19961231213847 text/html 4927HTTP/1.0 200 OKDate: Tue, 31 Dec 1996 21:38:56 GMTServer: Stronghold/1.3.2 Ben-SSL/1.3 Apache/1.1.1Content-type: text/htmlContent-length: 4727Last-modified: Tue, 24 Dec 1996 18:45:01 GMT Quester Tangent QTC VIEW Preliminary Information Request Preliminary Information Request To ensure proper integration to the QTC VIEW, please print and complete the following, and fax it to 1-250-655-4696. Client Information: Name _______________________________________________ Company _______________________________________________ Address _______________________________________________ E-Mail _______________________________________________ Telephone _______________________________________________ Fax _______________________________________________ Echo Sounder: Manufacturer _______________________________________________ Model _______________________________________________ Frequency _______________________________________________ For dual frequency sounders choose one frequency to which the QTC VIEW will be tuned. Contact Quester Tangent for more information on optimum frequencies. Transmit Power(s) _______________________________________________ Pulse Duration _______________________________________________ State minimum through maximum transmit power and pulse duration for the sounder. No automatic gain control (AGC) or automatic pulse duration settings can be used. Echo Sounder Transducer: Manufacturer _______________________________________________ Model _______________________________________________ Beam Width (circle one) 3-6 6-10 10-16 >16 QTC VIEW Requirements: Supply Voltage (circle one) 12-24 VDC 24-36 VDC 110 VAC 220 VAC Choose the supply voltage to be provided to the QTC VIEW. An AC voltage requires an optional converter available from Quester Tangent. Fax to: 1-250-655-4696 Notes: If the distance from the QTC VIEW to the computer and sounder exceeds 3 metres, additional cabling can be purchased at the time of order. The QTC VIEW requires one of two NMEA 0183 GPS strings through a DB9S connector: $GPGGA or $GPLL. Other sounders and sonars running at or near the frequency chosen for the QTC VIEW will affect its operation. Contact Quester Tangent for specific information. Computer Requirements (minimum): DX2-66 processor with 8 MB RAM DOS 6.0+ and Windows 3.1+ One dedicated serial (RS232) port Colour monitor [QTC VIEW Details] Go to HOME PAGE How to reach us: Phone: 1-250-656-6677 Fax: 1-250-655-4696 E-mail: sales@questercorp.com Copyright  1996 by QUESTER TANGENT CORPORATION 9865 West Saanich Road, Sidney, B.C. Canada V8L 3S1WT02-B03-59IA002-000022-B023-324http://www.questercorp.com:80/screen.htm 204.174.117.37 19961231213901 text/html 842HTTP/1.0 200 OKDate: Tue, 31 Dec 1996 21:39:11 GMTServer: Stronghold/1.3.2 Ben-SSL/1.3 Apache/1.1.1Content-type: text/htmlContent-length: 643Last-modified: Tue, 24 Dec 1996 18:45:50 GMT Quester Tangent QTC VIEW Full Screen - Digital Approach to Seabed Classification Click anywhere on the image to return to QTC VIEW Screen Display. Copyright  1996 by QUESTER TANGENT CORPORATION 9865 West Saanich Road, Sidney, B.C. Canada V8L 3S1WT02-B03-60IA002-000022-B023-87http://www.questercorp.com:80/ 204.174.117.37 19961231213707 text/html 1989HTTP/1.0 200 OKDate: Tue, 31 Dec 1996 21:37:14 GMTServer: Stronghold/1.3.2 Ben-SSL/1.3 Apache/1.1.1Content-type: text/htmlContent-length: 1789Last-modified: Tue, 24 Dec 1996 18:44:52 GMT Quester Tangent Marine Instrumentation Quester Tangent Corporation, a systems engineering andmanufacturing company, specializes in hydrographic survey equipment, seabedclassification products and electronics for rapid transit systems. QTC VIEW Seabed Classification Hydrographic Survey Systems Under Keel Clearance Guide Paper presented at Canadian Hydrographic Conference, 1996 Urban Transit Electronics How to reach us: Phone: 1-250-656-6677 Fax: 1-250-655-4696 E-mail: sales@questercorp.com Copyright  1996 by QUESTER TANGENT CORPORATION 9865 West Saanich Road, Sidney, B.C. Canada V8L 3S1WT02-B03-61IA072-000459-B006-47http://relay.dot.gov:80/ 152.120.130.100 19970121025738 text/html 1810HTTP/1.0 200 Document followsDate: Tue, 21 Jan 1997 02:57:11 GMTServer: NCSA/1.5.2Last-modified: Wed, 01 Jan 1997 05:00:38 GMTContent-type: text/htmlContent-length: 1627 The US Department of Transportation Welcome to the DOT WWW Home Page Thank you for visiting our Web site. You should be able to find most information under "General Information" or under a specific administration'shome page in "Browse The DOT Administrations". You can use the DOT Web site as a starting point to reach other DOT web sitesand other Federal, State, and International government and transportation related sites. Our server is continually updated, so check in under "Whats New" to see whatnew sections we've added since your last visit. DOT Web Server Quick Locator You are visitor of 1997. Text links for users with non-graphical browsers [Browse the DOT Admins]		  [Useful Internet Sites][DOT News And Information]	  [What's New][General Information]	 	  [Help & DOT Web Search] Last updated December 31, 1996 Send comments or bug reports to: webmaster@www.dot.govWT02-B03-62IA072-000459-B006-239http://relay.dot.gov:80/help/webmap.html 152.120.130.100 19970121030116 text/html 34385HTTP/1.0 200 Document followsDate: Tue, 21 Jan 1997 02:58:07 GMTServer: NCSA/1.5.2Last-modified: Wed, 01 Jan 1997 05:09:37 GMTContent-type: text/htmlContent-length: 34201 DOT Web Server Quick Locator DOT Web Server Quick Locator Updated December 31, 1996 This guide lists many of the major subsections that exist on the DOT Homeweb server and on other DOT servers. Some administrations have been expanded out to their topmost categories. More expansion to follow. DOT Homepage What's New Help and DOT Web Search DOT Web Search Form Answers to the Most Frequently Asked Questions Viewing and Downloading Files Tools and Utilities Contacting Someone at DOT How to Resolve a Transportation Problem Browse the DOT Administrations Office of the Secretary The Secretary of Transportation Office of Public Affairs Departmental Office of Civil Rights Office of Small and Disadvantaged Business Utilization Departmental Office of Human Resources Office of Acquisition and Grant Management - Procurement Information Office of Acquisition and Grant Management - Grant Information Office of The Chief Financial Officer Office of the Assistant Secretary for Transportation Policy Office of Intergovernmental Affairs Office of International Aviation Office of the Inspector General What You Can Expect from OIG OIG Regional Offices Selected IG Audit Reports Selected IG Inspections And Evaluations Reports OIG Semi-Annual Reports OIG Hotline OIG FOIA Contact OIG Personnel Transportation Administrative Service Center TASC Organizations Acquisition Services Information Technology Omnibus Procurement Learning And Development Federal Aviation Administration Hot Topics Web Site Map Search What's New About the FAA How Do I ...? Centers and Regions FAA Supported Sites Other Aviation Sites Headquarters Offices Airports Air Traffic Services Commercial Space Transportation Regulation and Certification Research and Acquisitions The Office of System Safety Federal Highway Administration Contents What's New Organization Programs Publications and Statistics Legislation and Regulations Conferences and Training Procurements Field Offices Related Sites and Resources Customer Service/Contacts Search Federal Railroad Administration Customer Service Plan Biographical Summary of the Administrator Biographical Summary of the Deputy Administrator Office of Public Affairs High Speed Ground Transportation Office of Safety Search the FRA Web Site Federal Transit Administration Introductory Information Briefing Room What's New Information by Subject - National Transit Library Information by Office Other Resources Maritime Administration National Highway Traffic Safety Administration Research and Special Programs Administration United States Coast Guard Bureau of Transportation Statistics Contents Site Map BTS Products and Services BTS Programs The Briefing Room Geographic Information Services National Transportation Library What's New Searchable Databases Other Transportation Information St. Lawrence Seaway Development Corporation About The Seaway Briefing Room 1994 Annual Report Contacts 1996 Toll Schedule Canadian Seaway Authority DOT News and Press Releases OST News Index FAA News Index FHWA News Index FRA News Index FTA News Index MARAD News Index NHTSA News Index RSPA News Index US Coast Guard News Index St. Lawrence Seaway News Index BTS News Index General Information About the Department The DOT Telephone Directory Research and Technology Activities Procurement Information and Policy Grant Information and Policy Electronic Commerce Proposals DOT Information Systems Security documents Budget & Financial Regulations, Orders, Policies, and Legislation Surface Transportation Board Orders Aviation Economic Orders Aviation Economic Rules Job Information & Vacancy Announcements DOT Newsletters The Transportation Link TranspoTopics DOT Talk National Quality Initiative Events and Announcements White House Commission on Aviation Safety and Security Accessible Transportation Services Transportation and Government Internet Sites US Government WWW Sites US State DOT WWW Sites International Transportation Resources WWW Sites concerning legal matters WT02-B03-63IA072-000459-B009-190http://relay.dot.gov:80/browse.html 152.120.130.100 19970121031735 text/html 2376HTTP/1.0 200 Document followsDate: Tue, 21 Jan 1997 03:15:43 GMTServer: NCSA/1.5.2Last-modified: Wed, 11 Dec 1996 20:54:45 GMTContent-type: text/htmlContent-length: 2193 DOT Operating Administrations The US Department of Transportation Office of the Secretary - OST Transportation Administrative Service Center Office of the Inspector General-OIG The Operating Administrations of DOT Bureau of Transportation Statistics - BTS Federal Aviation Administration- FAA Federal Highway Administration - FHWA Federal Railroad Administration - FRA Federal Transit Administration - FTA National Highway Traffic Safety Administration - NHTSA Maritime Administration - MARAD Research & Special Programs Administration - RSPA United States Coast Guard - USCG St. Lawrence Seaway Development Corporation - SLSDC Last updated December 11, 1996 Send comments or questions to: webmaster@www.dot.govWT02-B03-64IA072-000459-B009-240http://relay.dot.gov:80/useful.html 152.120.130.100 19970121031806 text/html 1212HTTP/1.0 200 Document followsDate: Tue, 21 Jan 1997 03:17:48 GMTServer: NCSA/1.5.2Last-modified: Wed, 18 Dec 1996 14:53:33 GMTContent-type: text/htmlContent-length: 1029 Useful Internet Sites Useful Internet Sites US Government WWW Sites US State DOT WWW servers International Transportation Resources WWW sites concerning legal matters Other Transportation Resources US DOT Gopher Server DOT Bulletin Board Systems - requires TELNET application Last updated December 18, 1996 Send comments or questions to: webmaster@www.dot.govWT02-B03-65IA072-000459-B009-483http://relay.dot.gov:80/affairs/index.htm 152.120.130.100 19970121032121 text/html 8230HTTP/1.0 200 Document followsDate: Tue, 21 Jan 1997 03:20:59 GMTServer: NCSA/1.5.2Last-modified: Fri, 17 Jan 1997 18:13:58 GMTContent-type: text/htmlContent-length: 8047  Public Affairs Information Page for U.S. Department ofTransportation Welcome to the U.S. Department of Transportation's Public Affairselectronic information page. From here, you can access currentnews and information from press releases, fact sheets and selectedspeeches given by Transportation Secretary Federico Pea. This web pagewas last updated January 17, 1997. Announcements and news items are posted on this page for approximately tendays. Any item older than this can be accessed from theappropriate DOT agency listed below. For example, public affairs informationdealing with railroads can be accessed byselecting the FederalRailroad Administration link; a speech by Secretary Pea onan auto safetyrecall can be accessed by selecting either Office of theSecretary (all Secretarialspeeches) or the National Highway Traffic Safety Administration(which containsauto safety recall information). To make searching for a specific document or subject easier, we have a searchable index. Enter the key word or words that you want to research and thedocumentswhichcontain that word will be retrieved. This should make findingspecific subjects easier for you. If you have any problems accessing any of the documents,please send an e-mail message to: dankers@ost.dot.gov CURRENT STATEMENTS & SPEECHES Remarksby Secretary Pea at Signing of FHWA & NPS Selma-MontgomeryMemorandum of Understanding(1/15/97) Remarksby Secretary Pea at U.S. Coast Guard TWA Flight 800 TributeCeremony; East Moriches, NY (1/13/97) Statement Regarding the Airbag Roundtable of Monday, Jan. 6, 1997 from theNHTSA Office of Public and Consumer Affairs (1/6/97) CURRENT PRESS RELEASES President Clinton Says Alameda Corridor Project Will Create Jobs andBuild Trade Links to Pacific Rim (1/17/97) FAAAppoints NewChair For Research, Engineering & Development Advisory Committee (1/16/97) New AirTraffic Computer On-Line at Chicago 10 Months Ahead of Schedule (1/16/97) VicePresident Gore Announces Initiatives Requiring Retrofit of 737 RudderComponents (1/15/97) Statement of Acting FAA Administrator Linda Daschle on Review of the Boeing737's Flight Control System (1/15/97) Background on Proposed Airworthiness Directives Affecting 737 RudderComponents (1/15/97) FactSheet on Ha-laska Free Flight Demonstration Project (1/15/97) FAAStatement on DoD Digital Data Action (1/15/97) DOTAnnounces $1.3 Million to Denver For Southwest Rail Project (1/15/97) FAAPublic Affairs To Distribute News Releases Via E-Mail (1/14/97) Transportation Continues Effort to Set Second Civil GPS Frequency (1/13/97) CoastGuard Final Rule Requires No New Structural Measures for Existing TankVessels WithoutDouble Hulls (1/13/97) VicePresident Announces Funds for Flood Relief in California (1/10/97) VicePresident Announces Funds for Flood Relief in Washington (1/10/97) VicePresident Announces Funds for Flood Relief in Idaho VicePresident Announces Funds for Flood Relief in Oregon (1/10/97) VicePresident Announces Funds For Flood Relief in Nevada (1/10/97) MajorU.S.airlines Report Continued Run of Prosperity During Third Quarter 1996(1/10/97) FRAIssuesFinal Rule On Two-Way End-of-Train Devices (1/10/97) Transportation's Inspector General Announces Guilty Verdict For DefraudingSnohomish County (Washington) Community Transit (1/9/97) DOTExtends Hazardous Materials Regulations to Intrastate Transportation (1/8/97) DOTRequires Improved Identification in Hazardous Materials Transportation (1/8/97) Consumers Cautioned on Super Bowl Air Travel Ticket Scams(1/8/97) NHTSAWarns about Risk of Fire While Filling Portable Gas Containers (1/6/97) FHWAOfficial Tours Flood-Damaged Areas (1/6/97) Pea, Babbitt Announce Ban on Air Tours over Rocky Mountain NationalPark (1/3/97) StaffingIncreases Planned for New York Metro Area Air Traffic Control Facilities(1/3/97) FAAIssues Airworthiness Directive Affecting 737 flight Procedures (1/2/97) To see additional DOT News & Information by individualagency, select from the items listed below. Office of the Secretary - Speeches by Secretary Pea & Deputy Secretary Downey arefoundhere. If you would like to see Secretary Pea's bio, click here if you would like to Deputy Secretary Downey's bio, click here. U. S.Coast Guard FederalAviation Administration FederalHighway Administration FederalRailroad Administration NationalHighway Traffic SafetyAdministration FederalTransit Administration St.Lawrence Seaway DevelopmentCorporation Maritime Administration Research & Special ProgramsAdministration Office ofthe Inspector General Bureau ofTransportationStatistics Go backto the DOT Home Page WT02-B03-66IA071-000457-B021-108http://relay.dot.gov:80/whatsnew.html 152.120.130.100 19970121032300 text/html 2584HTTP/1.0 200 Document followsDate: Tue, 21 Jan 1997 03:21:37 GMTServer: NCSA/1.5.2Last-modified: Fri, 03 Jan 1997 14:08:11 GMTContent-type: text/htmlContent-length: 2401 What's New New on the DOT WWW Here are the latest happenings on the DOT Web scene. January 3, 1997 We have replaced our search engine with Excite for Web Servers. Check outour new search form. Your search results will nowreflect the true location of the document on our web server rather than thedocument ID of a search database. January 1, 1997 Happy New Year. December 11, 1996 The Federal Railroad Admin is now located on their own web server. The newURL is "http://www.fra.dot.gov/". November 22, 1996 The National Highway Traffic Safety Administration announced a comprehensive strategy to improve air bag technology while minimizing the danger to children and at-risk adults. A press release details the steps announced Friday. Additional information on air bag issues can be obtained from the NHTSA web site at http://www.nhtsa.dot.gov. October 23, 1996 We've done some re-organization on our server directories. Most of the subdirectories (sections) have been moved up one level (getting rid of the"/dotinfo/" part of the URL. If you encounter any problems accessing pagesthat fall under the previous directory structure, please notify our webmaster. The "DOT Web Server Quick Locator" has beenupdated with more sections, as well as corrected links to reflect the newdirectory structure. October 21, 1996 The DOT along with the University of Tennessee is sponsoring a conferenceentitled "Building Transportation'sBridges to the 21st Century". More information is available under our Events and Announcements Section. October 8, 1996 The Departmental Office of Civil Rights is now online. October 1, 1996 The Office of Inspector General has gone on-line.Selected reports are soon to follow. Last updated January 3, 1997 Send comments or questions to: webmaster@www.dot.govWT02-B03-67IA071-000457-B023-312http://relay.dot.gov:80/general/geninfo.html 152.120.130.100 19970121033458 text/html 3895HTTP/1.0 200 Document followsDate: Tue, 21 Jan 1997 03:33:25 GMTServer: NCSA/1.5.2Last-modified: Tue, 14 Jan 1997 21:53:54 GMTContent-type: text/htmlContent-length: 3712 DOT General Information About the Department DOT Online Phone Directory Research and Technology Activities Human-Factors: Fatigue Resource Directory Procurement Information & Policy Grant Information & Policy Electronic Commerce Proposals DOT Information Systems Security documents Small Business Assistance Links for NonProfit Organizations Regulations, Orders, Policies, and Legislation Budget & Financial Events and Announcements Job Information & Vacancy Announcements DOT Newsletters Intelligent Transportation Systems DOT Travel Tips - For DOT government travel only National Quality Initiative DOT Bulletin Boards DOT GILS - Document Locator Service Last updated January 14, 1996 Send comments or questions to: webmaster@www.dot.govWT02-B03-68IA071-000457-B025-46http://relay.dot.gov:80/help/help.html 152.120.130.100 19970121034057 text/html 1532HTTP/1.0 200 Document followsDate: Tue, 21 Jan 1997 03:39:14 GMTServer: NCSA/1.5.2Last-modified: Tue, 14 Jan 1997 21:54:00 GMTContent-type: text/htmlContent-length: 1349 DOTWWW Help Page Welcome to the main help page for the Department of Transportation's World Wide Web Server. Search the DOT Web site. DOT currently maintains at least 7 different web servers. Most of the DOT administrations have their own independent server. Please be aware that this search engine can not locate documents on those servers. DOT Information Locator Service - GILS Answers to the Most Frequently Asked Questions. Viewing and Downloading Files. Tools and Utilities. DOT Telephone Directory How To Resolve A Transportation Problem - a few consumer tips Last updated January 13, 1997 Send comments or questions to: webmaster@www.dot.govWT02-B03-69IA071-000457-B025-249http://relay.dot.gov:80/help/searchform.html 152.120.130.100 19970121034311 text/html 2208HTTP/1.0 200 Document followsDate: Tue, 21 Jan 1997 03:41:14 GMTServer: NCSA/1.5.2Last-modified: Wed, 11 Dec 1996 20:56:13 GMTContent-type: text/htmlContent-length: 2025 DOT WAISgate Search Form Currently, most of the DOT administrations operate their own WWW servers. Please note that this search index only stores the documents at the server http://www.dot.gov/. Below is a list of known search pages on other serverswithin DOT: Other DOT Search Engines FAA BTS FTA NHTSA FRA How to use the search query Select the database to search from: Entire Database DOT Press/News releases Aviation Orders Search For: Limit to: 5 10 20 50 Documents Form updated December 11, 1996WT02-B03-70IA071-000457-B031-117http://relay.dot.gov:80/help/viewing.html 152.120.130.100 19970121040403 text/html 2405HTTP/1.0 200 Document followsDate: Tue, 21 Jan 1997 04:01:49 GMTServer: NCSA/1.5.2Last-modified: Mon, 05 Feb 1996 16:54:04 GMTContent-type: text/htmlContent-length: 2222 Viewing And Downloading Files Viewing And Downloading Files Most of the files on the DOT Web server are stored in one of the 3 following formats: Native HTML - These files are formated in HTML and are viewable only with a Web browser. With HTML we can format text and insert graphics in our documents. ASCII Text - These files have no formatting and can be viewed on any system. This of course is the simplest way to ensure that anybody can read a file, but it's the least attractive. Adobe Acrobat - Acrobat is an application that will take print output and save it in a format that can be recreated at will. Using the Acrobat reader, you can view, search, and print the document in it's original form complete with graphics, color, and original fonts. You can't view these documents on-line (yet) without having a seperate viewer program, but it's the best way to download really graphically intense documents. Click here to download the Adobe viewer for your system. Some of our documents (mostly found on our gopher links) are stored in native word processer (ie: MS Word or WordPerfect) or other application formats (ie: MS Excel, PK ZIP, etc). This is occasionally unavoidable. To download these files without attempting to load an associated program, press the <SHIFT> key then click on the document pointer. This should (on most browsers) force the browser to save that document to your local disk. Movies We have adopted Apple's Quicktime format for any digital movies we distribute.Why? It works better, and it's compatible with both Mac and DOS based systems.You will need to download Apple's Quicktime for Windows software in order toplay these movies on Windows. Mac systems should already have the Quicktimesoftware. Windows users will need the QuickTime for Windowssoftware from Apple. Last updated January 30, 1996 Send Questions or Comments to:webmaster@www.dot.govWT02-B03-71IA071-000453-B049-4http://relay.dot.gov:80/help/tools.html 152.120.130.100 19970121040650 text/html 1775HTTP/1.0 200 Document followsDate: Tue, 21 Jan 1997 04:04:29 GMTServer: NCSA/1.5.2Last-modified: Mon, 05 Feb 1996 16:54:03 GMTContent-type: text/htmlContent-length: 1592 Tools and Utilities Useful tools and utilties Here are some utilites that you may need to fully utilize some ofthe files we have available. Your browser can launch any of theseprograms as a "helper application". These links have been updated to reflect the changes made by the software developer(s). The adobe Acrobat reader can be downloaded from here. MicroSoft's Word Viewer - View MS Word documents without having MS Word. WordPerfect Envoy for Windows - View WP documents without WordPerfect. A Macintosh version is also available. Apple QuickTime Movie Player for MS Windows The RealAudio Player - plays audio streams in real time. (for Windows and Mac) giftrans - a Transparency tool for UNIX and DOS. PK Ware's PKZIP Package. Version 2.04G. WS Gopher v1.2 - A Winsock Gopher client. Really nice if all you need a gopher only client. Last updated October 23, 1995WT02-B03-72IA071-000454-B005-43http://relay.dot.gov:80/general/directory/ 152.120.130.100 19970121041834 text/html 2305HTTP/1.0 200 Document followsDate: Tue, 21 Jan 1997 04:17:33 GMTServer: NCSA/1.5.2Last-modified: Tue, 10 Dec 1996 17:02:11 GMTContent-type: text/htmlContent-length: 2122 Online DOT Phone Directory The information contained herein should not be considered official. Updates to the phone directory will be made when possible. DOT Services Directory On-line alpabetical directory (CSO) - Updated December 10, 1996 Office of the Secretary United States Coast Guard Federal Aviation Administration Federal Highway Administration Federal Railroad Administration National Highway Traffic Safety Administration Federal Transit Administration Saint Lawrence Seaway Development Corporation Maritime Administration Research And Special Programs Administration Bureau of Transportation Statistics If you would like to purchase a printed copy of the Official DOT Phone Directory, Contact: U.S. Government Printing Office Superintendent of Documents Mail Stop: SSOP Washington, DC 20402-9328 ISBN 0-6-4508-0 WT02-B03-73IA071-000454-B005-243http://relay.dot.gov:80/help/transtip.html 152.120.130.100 19970121042050 text/html 7353HTTP/1.0 200 Document followsDate: Tue, 21 Jan 1997 04:19:19 GMTServer: NCSA/1.5.2Last-modified: Mon, 05 Feb 1996 16:54:03 GMTContent-type: text/htmlContent-length: 7170 Resolving Transportation Problems You want your transportation to be safe whether you travel by your personal car or by public orprivate transportation. The U.S. Department of Transportation (DOT) makes every effort toassure that transportation is safe and secure. Each agency within the Department has regulatory jurisdiction over issues that affect consumersrather than individuals. In many cases when we are unable to resolve your complaint, we canstill help. We collect complaints from people like you. When a widespread problem clearlyexists, we can investigate, initiate a recall campaign (if the problem in a motor vehicle is a safetydefect), or revise a safety standard affecting the industry. In a complaint about airline service or a motor vehicle, we provide the carrier or manufacturerwith a copy of the complaint. When we send the complaints to the company, it may result in asatisfactory solution of individual problems. So, if you have a complaint about any mode oftransportation, you can contact DOT by calling the numbers on the back of this fact sheet. DOT encourages you to attempt to resolve your complaint and here are some tips to help youresolve your problem: Always start with the business that sold the item, performed the service, or agreed to perform the service. Most companies include instructions for resolving a problem on their paperwork. The instructions may include a telephone number (usually an 800 number), a mailing address, and a statement that you must write and telephone the company. Follow the company's instructions. Calmly and accurately describe the complaint. State clearly what you consider a fair resolution. Keep a file of all paperwork relating to your purchase or service. Your file should include copies of tickets, sales receipts, repair orders, warranties, cancelled checks, contracts, and all correspondence relating to the problem. (Keep the originals of all paperwork and copies of all letters you send.) Keep a record of your efforts to solve the problem. Your log should include dates and times, the person(s) you talked to, what was promised, and what was done. Contact the company's headquarters. If you have followed the company's procedures to resolve the complaint and have not obtained a satisfactory resolution, contact the company's headquarters. Many companies have an 800 number. You may find it on their official documents, the product, a directory of companies available in a library, or by calling 1-800-555-1212. When talking to the official, be sure to relate your previous efforts to resolve the problem. Follow up your phone conversation with a letter addressed to the president of the company (or the consumer affairs office). Keep a copy of this letter in your file. Include your name, address, and phone numbers in all correspondence. This information makes it easier for the company to respond to you. If you send any paperwork, always enclose a photocopy. If your paperwork includes an order number or customer identification number, be sure to include it in the letter. Seek help from local and state agencies. If you are still unable to resolve your complaint, contact your local or state consumer protection office, the city, county, or state's attorney for additional help. Again, we greatly appreciate the information you provide the U.S. Department ofTransportation. You, our consumer, are one of DOT's most valuable assets. FOR MORE INFORMATION Air Travel, Safety The Federal Aviation Administration (FAA) maintains a consumer hotline and a safety hotline. Consumers can call 1-800-332-7873 (1-800-FAA-SURE) to inquire about such topics as carry-on baggage, airport security procedures, and services provided by FAA, such as examinations and aircraft certification. Individuals who have knowledge of alleged violations of FAA regulations can make a confidential call to the safety hotline (1-800-255-1111). Both hotlines operate from 8 am to 4 pm Eastern time during the business week. Air Travel, Service You can report a complaint about service you were not able to resolve with the airline by writing to the U.S. Department of Transportation, Aviation Consumer Protection Division, C-75, Washington, D.C. 20590. Please state the problem, what you consider a fair resolution, and provide copies of documents. If you want to report your complaint with DOT by phone, you can call any time at 1-202-366-2220. Automobiles, Light Trucks, and Sport Utility Vehicles If you have a safety problem with your motor vehicle, you can call the National Highway Traffic Safety Administration's Auto Safety Hotline, 1-800-424-9393. (In the Washington, D.C. area, call 202-366-0123.) The teleprinter (TTY) number for the hearing impaired is 1-800-424-9153. (In Washington, D.C. area, call 202-366-7800.) Operators are on duty from 8 am to 10 pm Eastern time and voice mail is available 24 hours a day. You can also use this number to obtain safety information on a variety of subjects, such as child safety seats, antilock brakes, and proper safety belt use. To report a possible bicycle or bicycle helmet defect, contact the U.S. Product Safety Commission at 1-800-638-2772. Roadways and Bridges The Federal Highway Administration (FHWA) works in partnership with the States to maintain the safety and efficiency of our Nation's roads and bridges, and enforce Federal truck and bus safety standards. For more information, call FHWA's Office of Public Affairs at 202-366-0660. Watercraft & Waterways The U.S. Coast Guard maintains a customer infoline you can call if you have a safety problem with your watercraft, desire to report a possible defect in your boat, or comment on a Coast Guard boarding of your boat. To obtain information about boating safety classes, free marine examinations for your boat, and boat manufacturer recall campaigns, call 1-800-368-5647 (In Washington, D.C., call 202-267-0780.) The TDD number is 1-800-689-0816. (In Washington, D.C. area, call 202-267-6707.) For information on rules, regulations, tolls, traffic control, and safety while navigating the St. Lawrence Seaway, contact the Saint Lawrence Seaway Development Corporation at 1-800-785-2779. Public Mass Transportation The Federal Transit Administration (FTA) provides financial assistance to communities for the planning, development, and improvement of public transportation system. For more information on public mass transportation, call FTA's Office of Public Affairs at 202-366-4043. Return To Main Help PageWT02-B03-74IA071-000454-B007-30http://relay.dot.gov:80/ost/ 152.120.130.100 19970121042313 text/html 2595HTTP/1.0 200 Document followsDate: Tue, 21 Jan 1997 04:21:50 GMTServer: NCSA/1.5.2Last-modified: Mon, 16 Dec 1996 19:33:24 GMTContent-type: text/htmlContent-length: 2412 Office Of The Secretary The Secretary of Transportation Office of Public Affairs Departmental Office of Civil Rights Office of Small and Disadvantaged Business Utilization Departmental Office of Human Resource Management Office of Acquisition and Grant Management Procurement Information and Policy Grant Information and Policy Office of The Chief Financial Officer Office of the Assistant Secretary for Transportation Policy Office of the Assistant Secretary for Governmental Affairs Office of the Assistant Secretary for Aviation and International Affairs Last updated December 16, 1996 Send questions or comments to: Webmaster@www.dot.govWT02-B03-75IA071-000454-B011-53http://relay.dot.gov:80/ost/secretary.html 152.120.130.100 19970121043548 text/html 4577HTTP/1.0 200 Document followsDate: Tue, 21 Jan 1997 04:35:28 GMTServer: NCSA/1.5.2Last-modified: Fri, 25 Oct 1996 15:19:57 GMTContent-type: text/htmlContent-length: 4394 Federico F. Pea United States Secretary of Transportation Federico F. Pea, the 12th U.S. Secretary of Transportation, has in three-and-a-half years compiled an outstanding record of increasing the globalcompetitiveness of the transportation industry; improving the safety of travel;and streamlining the Department of Transportation, while investing more inAmerica's infrastructure than any Secretary in history. In the area of global competitiveness, the transportation sector is thehealthiest it has been in decades. Five hundred thousand of the 10 million jobscreated since President Clinton took office are in transportation services. Secretary Pea helped revitalize the U.S. airline industry and signedaviation agreements with 40 nations opening lucrative markets for Americanairlines and cargo carriers and promoting easier travel for Americans andtourists to the U.S. At the President's request, he has conducted commercialdiplomacy efforts around the world, and he is credited with helping Americanbusinesses sell billions of dollars in exports to Asia and the Middle East. He alsoorchestrated for President Clinton the revitalization of shipbuilding, leading tothe sale of the first American-made large vessels to foreign countries in 38 years. He is responsible for bringing airline consumers the same level of safetyfor all flights -- from jumbo jets to a 10-seater, and he has spurred the truck, busand rail industries to promote safety. As for streamlining his department, Secretary Pea downsized the workforce by 11,000 positions, while upsizing investments in America's infrastructureby 10 percent. He rewrote the rule book on financing highway projects, whichhas encouraged private financing, and speeded up construction of more than 75projects by two or three years at no cost to the federal taxpayer. He also is leading the way for cities to use new technologies to managetraffic congestion and has set a national goal to cut American's commute time by15 percent in a decade; and he has emphasized consumer protection, byimproving an auto safety hotline and ensuring proper airline ticketing andadvertising practices. As the Service Secretary for the U.S. Coast Guard, he has provided leadership for the nation's fifth armed service to save lives and protect ourenvironment. On his watch, the Coast Guard rescued 56,000 Haitian and Cubanboat people, fought devastating floods and hurricanes, and -- last winter --ensured the uninterrupted flow of commerce despite unprecedented iceconditions. From 1983-91, he was Mayor of Denver leading an urban and economicrenaissance, reversing Denver's mid-1980s decline through a series of boldinitiatives. Most notably, he won approval for the construction of one of thelargest and most technological advanced airports in the world, DenverInternational, which, as Secretary of Transportation, he dedicated in February1995. Pea also has served as a Colorado legislator and a civil rights lawyer. He has received many honors. In 1995, he was named Father of the Yearby the National Father's Day Committee. In 1994, the American SubcontractorsAssociation of Colorado named him Man of the Year; and he received the SeorInternacional Award from LULAC Council 12, the American Heritage Awardfrom the Mountain States Anti-Defamation League, the National Leadership andService Award from the Travelers Aid Society of Washington, and the Person ofthe Year Award from the American Association of Port Authorities. Secretary Pea did his undergraduate work at the University of Texas,where he also received his law degree. Florida International University awardedhim an Honorary Doctor of Public Service degree in 1995. Born in Laredo, Texas, in 1947, Secretary Pea is the third of six childrenof a cotton broker. He and his wife, world-class marathon runner and attorneyEllen Hart Pea, live with their two children in Alexandria, Virginia. ### July 1996 WT02-B03-76IA014-000152-B035-151http://rafos.gso.uri.edu:80/index.html 198.116.10.111 19970217131931 text/html 3548HTTP/1.0 200 Document followsDate: Mon, 17 Feb 1997 13:19:00 GMTServer: NCSA/1.5.2Content-type: text/html RAFOS University of Rhode Island Graduate School of Oceanography Physical Oceanography Narragansett, Rhode Island Welcome to the home page for the "RAFOS Float Group"in the Physical Oceanography Department at the University of Rhode Island'sGraduate School of Oceanography.Members of the group, headed by Dr. Tom Rossby,are listed below. Our research activities focus on the dynamics and kinematicsof ocean currents, mainly in the Gulf Stream and North Atlantic Current(NAC) regions, and on istrumentation development. Learn more about ourresearch activities by clicking below. This page is currently under construction,so is continually being revised. For comments or questions, please contactSandra Anderson-Fontana (sandy@yvette.gso.uri.edu). Research activities The North Atlantic Current Project The Oleander Project DynamicalAdjustment of the Gulf Stream Deep Convection inthe Labrador Sea Members of the group Dr. Tom Rossby Dr. Erik Gottlieb Sandra Anderson-Fontana Jim Fontaine George Schwartze Olga Sato Edward Kearns Paula Perez-Brunius Peter Lazarevich Other related URI WWW pages University of Rhode Island - GraduateSchool of Oceanography Numerical modeling group homepage Remote Sensing/Distributed DataSystems home page Other Web sites of interest Lots of sites organized by subject(Yahoo) Other Oceanographic and Earth Science Websites The World-WideWeb Virtual Library: Oceanography Accesses to this page: 53 Last Updated: January 22, 1997 WT02-B03-77IA014-000152-B033-249http://rafos.gso.uri.edu:80/tom.html 198.116.10.111 19970217131304 text/html 5366HTTP/1.0 200 Document followsDate: Mon, 17 Feb 1997 13:12:35 GMTServer: NCSA/1.5.2Content-type: text/html Tom's Home Document Tom Rossby's homepage. Not much here yet. Just a few key links... Oceanography related stuff Yahoo Thousands of sites on the Web. Organized by subject. Very nice. URouLette A great link. This will drop you SOMEWHERE on the Web, you just don't know where! Oceanography related stuff Links to Oceanographic Information. Lots of great links! University of Rhode Island - Graduate School of Oceanography University of Miami RSMAS Home Page NASA/GSFC Lab for Hydrospheric Processes USF Department of Marine Science A Hotlist for Oceanography and Atmospheric Science Supplements to Atmospheric & Oceanic Publications Oceanography Web Sites Weather Florida Institute of Technology Weather Page Short Range ETA Forecasts for North America Weather & Climate Images Sources of Meteorological Data FAQ Part 1/2 NHC's - PRODUCTS INDEX Satellite Images WeatherNet: Tropical Weather Products Macintosh Stuff The Best! hyperarchive.lcs.mit.edu/HyperArchive.html Unix and Unix Utilities for the Macintosh Directory of /tex-archive/systems/mac/cmactex Welcome to Macintosh The Well Connected Mac THE LIST Nathan's Everything Macintosh MacUserWeb SLiRP and MacPPP (Dameon D. Welch) SLiRP and PPP Chapter 20: Troubleshooting Your Connection MacWEEK Home Page The Well Connected Mac UTexas Mac archive Apple Computer Products for Apple Computers - by Company MacInTouch Catalog of Mac Resources Macintosh Shopping Directory MATLAB related stuff MathWorks Home Page Lots of MATLAB stuff. WT02-B03-78IA014-000152-B033-275http://rafos.gso.uri.edu:80/nac.html 198.116.10.111 19970217131312 text/html 3823HTTP/1.0 200 Document followsDate: Mon, 17 Feb 1997 13:12:42 GMTServer: NCSA/1.5.2Content-type: text/html The North Atlantic Current Project The North Atlantic Current Project: Observational Studies The North Atlantic Current is being studied by a group of observationalistsand modellers here at URI/GSO, with Dr. Tom Rossby andDr. Lew Rothstein as co-principalinvestigators. Among the observational studies are a multi-yearRAFOS float study and a regional climatology of the NewfoundlandBasin. A regional climatology of the Newfoundland Basin on neutral surfaces A climatological description of the North Alantic Current (NAC) regionhas been developed from the historical hydrographic record as providedby the National Oceanographic Data Center. The climatology is describedon specific volume anomaly surfaces which provide approximations to theneutral surfaces upon which water parcels are free to move and mix laterally.The median depth, temperature, salinity, potential density, potential vorticity,and Montgomery potential (an exact stream function on specific volume anomalysurfaces) are described on a 0.5 degree grid for the Newfoundland Basin.This regional climatology presents a fine scale neutral surface view ofthe waters of the Newfoundland Basin which allows a more detailed studyof the system than is afforded by other existing climatologies for theNorth Atlantic. A complete discussion of the climatology may be found in the following(gzipped) postscipt documents: Adescription of the North Atlantic Current system from historical hydrographyby Edward J. Kearns. A URI doctoral dissertation. Accepted April1996. An introductionto a regional climatology for the North Atlantic Current system on neutralsurfaces by Edward J. Kearns. Submitted for publicationAugust 1996. Preprint. Thehistorical position of the North Atlantic Current by EdwardJ. Kearns and H. Thomas Rossby. Submitted for publication August 1996.Preprint. Climatologicaltransports in the Newfoundland Basin by Edward J. Kearnsand H. Thomas Rossby. Submitted for publication August 1996. Preprint. This climatology is now available on-line! Through the NAC climatology page, usersmay gain access to the median climatological fields, their errors, streamfunctions,decadal and seasonal subsamples, and more. The data are available in netCDFand ASCII format as well as GIF89a images. Questions or problems concerning this climatology should be addressedto Dr. Ed Kearns at URI or atthe National Data Buoy Center. Related links North Atlantic CurrentDynamics from the modelling group This page was last modified on December 5, 1996. WT02-B03-79IA014-000152-B033-300http://rafos.gso.uri.edu:80/ole.html 198.116.10.111 19970217131320 text/html 3239HTTP/1.0 200 Document followsDate: Mon, 17 Feb 1997 13:12:51 GMTServer: NCSA/1.5.2Content-type: text/html The Oleander Project The Oleander Project TheOleander project has been a cooperative effort involving Dr.Tom Rossby, Dr.Peter Cornillon, Dr. Erik Gottlieb, Dr.Charlie Flagg (Brookhaven National Laboratory),George Schwartze and SandraAnderson-Fontana, and the M/V Oleanderoperators (Bermuda Container Lines)and crew. Since August 1992 the container vessel M/V Oleander, which transitsweekly between New Jersey and Bermuda, has been collecting upper oceancurrent velocity and surface temperature data using an acoustic Dopplercurrent profiler (ADCP) automated by special software (AutoADCP). Alongits transit the ship crosses the Slope Water, Gulf Stream, and part ofthe Sargasso Sea, and thus offers the unprecedented opportunity to measurethe local flow of these waters on a repeated long-term basis. The project'sgoal is to establish a multi-year dataset that will permit detailed studiesof seasonal and interannual variability of the upper ocean velocity andtemperature fields. The difficulties of operating an ADCP on a container vessel, such asbubble attenuation, electrical problems, and navigational errors, are describedin Flagg et al. (J. Atmos. Oceanic Tech., 1996 submitted). Combiningdata from attitudinal GPS (AGPS) and ADCP `bottom tracking' mode has yieldedtransducer misalignment angle and speed scaling factor to within 0.07 degand 0.3%, respectively. The velocities collected using AGPS have most navigationalerrors removed, and have produced information on the magnitude and extentof gyrocompass errors in the pre-AGPS (pre-June 1995) data. The data are being processed using the publicly available CODAS (CommonOceanographic Data Access System) data processing software developed atthe University of Hawaii by Dr.Eric Firing, Julie Ranada, Ramon Cabrera and others. An example of velocity vector plots, from an outbound cruise duringthe first week of January 1997, can be seen by clicking here.Vectors are plotted at depths of 25m, 50m, 100m and 200m. The locationof the Gulf Stream is obvious from the strong vectors, up to nearly 200cm/sec to the northeast.WT02-B03-80IA014-000152-B033-324http://rafos.gso.uri.edu:80/erik.html 198.116.10.111 19970217131328 text/html 644HTTP/1.0 200 Document followsDate: Mon, 17 Feb 1997 13:12:59 GMTServer: NCSA/1.5.2Content-type: text/html Erik Gottlieb's Home Document Erik Gottlieb Marine Scientist 229 Watkins URI/GSO Narragansett, RI 02882 401-874-6519 erik@pogo.gso.uri.edu WT02-B03-81IA014-000152-B033-343http://rafos.gso.uri.edu:80/sandy.html 198.116.10.111 19970217131337 text/html 745HTTP/1.0 200 Document followsDate: Mon, 17 Feb 1997 13:13:07 GMTServer: NCSA/1.5.2Content-type: text/html Sandy Fontana's Home Document Sandra Anderson-Fontana Marine Research Specialist 227 Watkins URI/GSO Narragansett, RI 02882 401-874-6520 sandy@yvette.gso.uri.eduWT02-B03-82IA014-000152-B033-364http://rafos.gso.uri.edu:80/jim.html 198.116.10.111 19970217131344 text/html 632HTTP/1.0 200 Document followsDate: Mon, 17 Feb 1997 13:13:15 GMTServer: NCSA/1.5.2Content-type: text/html Jim Fontaine's Home Document James Fontaine Marine Research Specialist 217 Watkins URI/GSO Narragansett, RI 02882 401-874-6946 jim@rafos.gso.uri.eduWT02-B03-83IA014-000152-B033-389http://rafos.gso.uri.edu:80/george.html 198.116.10.111 19970217131351 text/html 661HTTP/1.0 200 Document followsDate: Mon, 17 Feb 1997 13:13:22 GMTServer: NCSA/1.5.2Content-type: text/html George Schwartze's Home Document George Schwartze Marine Research Specialist 229 Watkins URI/GSO Narragansett, RI 02882 401-874-6519 george@pogo.gso.uri.edu WT02-B03-84IA014-000152-B033-409http://rafos.gso.uri.edu:80/olga_html/hpage/pubhome2.html 198.116.10.111 19970217131358 text/html 1342HTTP/1.0 200 Document followsDate: Mon, 17 Feb 1997 13:13:29 GMTServer: NCSA/1.5.2Content-type: text/html My Home Document Olga Sato This page is under construction. My current interest is to investigate the causes of the low frequency (decadal scale) fluctuations in the heat flux through the North Atlantic Ocean. The term decadal has been used to refer to low frequency fluctuations with periods of 10-30 years. This task requires a long temporal series of repeated trans-Atlantic sections. As far as I know, such data are not available. If you know about theexistence of such a data set, please, contact me. I'll be forever grateful. So, to be able to proceed with my study, I had to ... Well, if you are interested why don't you read my thesis proposal? Please, feel free to express any comments.WT02-B03-85IA014-000152-B033-473http://rafos.gso.uri.edu:80/edk.html 198.116.10.111 19970217131429 text/html 24172HTTP/1.0 200 Document followsDate: Mon, 17 Feb 1997 13:13:36 GMTServer: NCSA/1.5.2Content-type: text/html Ed's Home Document Edward J. Kearns Why do I have a page here? I received my Ph.D. at GSO, and my dissertation investigated thepathways of transport and exchange of waters in the North Atlantic Current.As part of this work, I constructed ahigh-resolution neutral-surface climatology ofthe North Atlantic Current region. It is publicly available at the NAC climatology page . I'm currently working at the National Data Buoy Center in Mississippi,feel free to contact me there . Want to see my son Danny? There will be morepictures soon at my personal home page . Oceanography related stuff Links to Oceanographic Information. Lots of great links! University of Rhode Island - Graduate School of Oceanography University of Miami (my alma mater) RSMAS Home Page NASA/GSFC Lab for Hydrospheric Processes Advanced Marine Systems Laboratory USF Department of Marine Science A Hotlist for Oceanography and Atmospheric Science Florida Marine Research Institute Supplements to Atmospheric & Oceanic Publications Oceanography Web Sites Reference dictionary and thesaurus. When you don't have one handy... Virtual Reference Desk. A little of everything. Hypertext Webster Interface CCSO Server - Oxford English Dictionary AT&T 800 Directory on the Internet Dryden Research Aircraft Photo Archive Neat photos! NASA/Kennedy Space Center Home Page How to do a searchable database Xenon Labs: The Universal Currency Converter List of USENET FAQs WQAM SPORTSNET gopher://gopher.enews.com:2100/11/showroom/edmunds/usedmake Webfoot's Loan Payment Calculator MotorCity Auto Loan Calculator The English Server at CMU Welcome to USA TODAY(August 16, 1995) MPEG Movie Archive Poker Frequently Asked Questions Central Intelligence Agency The World Factbook 1995 MONEY & INVESTING UPDATE -- WELCOME Declassified Satellite Photographs UNIX Software MathWorks Home Page Lots of MATLAB stuff. Numerical Recipes Home Page GMT - The Generic Mapping Tools (GMT) The GAWK Manual - Table of Contents SAGA HomePage : MATLAB stuff Elm - Electronic Mail for UNIX University of Oregon Network Services Perl Meta-FAQ GNU's Bulletin June, 1994 MexCDF page MexCDF page Solaris 2 Porting FAQ SunSoft Support Services - Answer Center Gateway - Solaris Web Tools WWWW - the WORLD WIDE WEB WORM Will find anything! Yahoo Thousands of sites on the Web. Organized by subject. Very nice. URouLette A great link. This will drop you SOMEWHERE on the Web, you just don't know where. Food Recipe Archive Index FATFREE: The Low Fat Vegetarian Archive The Recipe Archive The Chile Head page If you like chile peppers as much as I do... Recipes Hungry? The CHILE-HEADS home page The Beer Page Sports Ed Kearns's SCORE A motorcycle home page that will do until I write a little page of my own, featuring my '82 Honda GL500i Silverwing. ESPNET SportsZone Bike'alog's Complete Bike Specs '95 Links to Other Bike Pages VeloNews Eric's Biking Related WWW Directory Welcome to Nashbar http://www.worldmedia.fr/tour The Sporting Green - Landay's Sports Page The 19th Hole GolfData Web Rec.Sports.Soccer - The WEB Page Soccer on US TV Tour de France 1995 Winning Online Mark Wheeler's US Soccer Page Copa America Team NFL The Miami Heat Miami Dolphins Home Page Soccer Features Team Internet Information Bike Pro SteveC's Home (Bicycling) Page Weather Florida Institute of Technology Weather Page Short Range ETA Forecasts for North America Weather & Climate Images Sources of Meteorological Data FAQ Part 1/2 NHC's - PRODUCTS INDEX Satellite Images WeatherNet: Tropical Weather Products Misc. recreation Jasper Home Page The Dilbert Zone The Alternative Dictionaries The Internet Movie Database at Mississippi US : VERY complete Jimmy Buffett Web Page All things Buffett -- tunes, lyrics, pictures, and general Parrothead information. The Kearns List A page devoted to those of Kearnsian heritage. The Capt. James T. Kirk Sing-a-long Page - it must be seen (and heard) to be believed... Justin's Links from the Underground -- lots of wild stuff Aircraft Homepage Jane's Information Group - Home page PBS Homepage Plymouth Neon Mutant Asylum Wheeler Kearns Architects Home Page Commerce Noteworthy Music Main Menu Want some CD's? REI marketplaceMCI Macintosh Stuff The Best! hyperarchive.lcs.mit.edu/HyperArchive.html Unix and Unix Utilities for the Macintosh Directory of /tex-archive/systems/mac/cmactex Welcome to Macintosh The Well Connected Mac THE LIST Porting Linux and NetBSD to the Mac Nathan's Everything Macintosh MacUserWeb SLiRP and MacPPP (Dameon D. Welch) SLiRP and PPP Chapter 20: Troubleshooting Your Connection MacWEEK Home Page www.amug.org/index.html mirror.apple.com/ files/ ici.proper.com/mac/files/ tornado.rfx.com/ uiarchive.cso.uiuc.edu/ wuarchive.wustl.edu/systems/mac/info-mac/ globe1.csuglab.cornell.edu/ www.pht.com/ftp.html The Well Connected Mac UTexas Mac archive Apple Computer MacLinux@IBG NetBSD/mac68k 1.0 Information Products for Apple Computers - by Company Direct Connections - HARD DRIVES Products for Apple Computers - - DAYSTAR DIGITAL MacInTouch Catalog of Mac Resources Macintosh Shopping Directory Job Jobs Jobs The Chronicle of Higher Education -- Academe This Week (updated Tuesday at noon) SUS Position Vacancies - State of Florida educational jobs Department of the Interior Automated Vacancy Announcement System (AVADS, updated Thursday) State of Florida Vacancy Locator FSU Job Board NOAA's RDC home page UCAR News The University of South Florida USF gopher server Center for Coastal and Land-Margin Research Yahoo's Jobs Lots of links... Employment Opportunities on the Internet--Intro Physics Job Announcements by thread FedWorld Beta Home Page The Catapult - leads to much else... Texas A&M jobs Florida WWW Servers ODU's Department of Oceanography American Institute of Physics HomePage College Employment Directory FEDWORLD JOBS Library Oceans and Ice Branch Home Page Questions About Careers in Oceanography Job Announcenements Jobs posted to the YSN gopher://cfrvm.cfr.usf.edu/11%2FUSF%20Administrative%20Departments%2FUSF%20Personnel%20Services Science JOBNET Employment Edge - Daily Comics gopher://walleye.forestry.umn.edu/11/gopher/rsgisinfo/gisjobs Science JOBNET Online Career Center State University System Position Vacancy Listing Welcome To The Monster Board! gopher://info.asu.edu.:70/11/asu-cwis/education/other/jobs College Employment Directory Job Announcenements Science Global Career Network Chicago Tribune Career Finder gopher://iq-occ.iquest.net:70/11/occ/sjobs WT02-B03-86IA014-000152-B033-499http://rafos.gso.uri.edu:80/paula.html 198.116.10.111 19970217131440 text/html 635HTTP/1.0 200 Document followsDate: Mon, 17 Feb 1997 13:14:11 GMTServer: NCSA/1.5.2Content-type: text/html Paula Perez-Brunius' Home Document Paula Perez-Brunius Graduate Student 223 Watkins URI/GSO Narragansett, RI 02882 401-874-6518 paula@rafos.gso.uri.eduWT02-B03-87IA014-000152-B034-43http://rafos.gso.uri.edu:80/ocean_links.html 198.116.10.111 19970217131458 text/html 29555HTTP/1.0 200 Document followsDate: Mon, 17 Feb 1997 13:14:26 GMTServer: NCSA/1.5.2Content-type: text/html Other Oceanographic and Earth Science WWW sites Note: this is basically an edited version of the ocean and earth sciences directory found at SIO. DATA SERVICES: NOAA Environmental Info Services National Climatic Data Center archives & distributes global data in meteorology & climatology. National Geophysical Data Center archives & distributes global data in marine geology and geophysics, paleoclimatology, solid earth geophysics, glaciology, & solar-terrestrial physics. Includes World Data Center-A for Paleoclimatology National Oceanographic Data Center archives & distributes global physical, chemical & biological oceanographic data. Global Change Master Directory, NASA's comprehensive source of information about worldwide earth science data holdings. Information on field experiments such as FIRE, FIFE, TOGA-COARE, GALE, ERICA, & OTTER as well as global projects such as ISCCP, COADS, GTE, JGOFS, ALE/GAGE, & FGGE/GARP. Information on international satellite data holdings such as SPOT, METEOSAT, GMS, & MOS. US data descriptions include NASA, NOAA, NCAR, USGS, DOE (CDIAC), EPA entries, along with universities & research centers. Descriptions of non-US data through the International Directory Network. Carbon Dioxide Information Analysis Center archives & distributes data on atmospheric CO2 & other radiative active trace gases. US Global Change Data & Information System interconnects Federal agency data & information systems making global change data accessible to researchers, policy-makers, educators, industry, & the public. NOAA Global Climate Perspectives System is a joint effort of CDC's Global Climate Laboratory, NOAA ERL's Climate Diagnostics Center, & NOAA's Climate Analysis Center offering global climatological datasets. EOSDIS DAACs: (Earth Observing System Data & Information System Distributed Active Archive Centers) EOS Program. JPL Physical Oceanography DAAC archives & distributes data on ocean circulation & air-sea interactions including TOPEX/Poseidon & AVHRR Ocean Pathfinder. Langley Research Center DAAC archives & distributes data on radiation budget, clouds, aerosols, & tropospheric chemistry including ERBE, SAGE, & SRB missions, ISCCP data & climate products, & FIRE project. Goddard Space Flight Center DAAC archives & distributes data on upper atmosphere, atmospheric dynamics, global biosphere, and geophysics including AVHRR Land Pathfinder, CZCS, TOMS & UARS missions. Alaska SAR Facility DAAC archives & distributes data relating to the role of the polar regions in global change/warming including ERS-1 & JERS-1 synthetic aperture radar (SAR) and derived products. Marshall Space Flight Center DAAC archives & distributes data on all aspects of hydrologic cycle including SSMI Pathfinder, SSMI, SMMR & MSU products Oak Ridge National Lab DAAC archives & distributes data on earth's biogeochemical dynamics including RIFE, OTTER & BOREAS as well as DOE CDIAC. National Snow & Ice Data Center DAAC (NSIDC) archives & distributes data on snow cover, avalanches, glaciers, ice sheets, floating ice, ground ice, permafrost, atmospheric ice, extra-terrestrial ices, paleoglaciology & ice cores. USGS EROS Data Center DAAC archives & distributes land imagery. CIESIN SEDAC (Consortium for International Earth Science Information Network Socio-Economic Data and Applications Center) archives & distributes socio-economic data related to global change. AFFILIATED: NOAA/NESDIS Satellite Active Archive offering data from NOAA's satellites. US JGOFS: Joint Global Ocean Flux Study for carbon & associated biogenic elements. Includes Equatorial Pacific Process Study and Hawaii Ocean Time-Series Program. HOTS has been observing hydrography, chemistry & biology at a station north of Hawaii since October 1988 to comprehensively describe the ocean at a site representative of the central North Pacific. OCEANIC: Ocean Information Center at Univ of Delaware. OCEANIC provides data on WOCE (World Ocean Circulation Experiment) & TOGA-COARE (Tropical Ocean Global Atmosphere Coupled Ocean-Atmosphere Response Experiment). TOGA COARE International Project Office: Tropical Ocean Global Atmosphere, Coupled Ocean-Atmosphere Response Experiment. Also summary images & Climatology of the TOGA-COARE and Adjacent Regions 1985-1990 Volume 1: KinematicVariables TOGA-TAO buoys provide oceanographic & meteorological data from approx 70 ATLAS & current meter moorings in tropical Pacific Ocean. Includes realtime graphics and data delivery. USGS Earth Resources Observation System Data Center (EROS). NCAR's Data Support Section offers atmospheric, geophysical & oceanographic data. UCAR Office of Field Project Support archives & distributes field project data. Includes WWW browsing & ordering. Pacific Marine Environmental Laboratory Climate Data provides browsing, visualization, & retrieval of climate data. National Operational Hydrologic Remote Sensing Center Data Services (NOHRSC), a branch of the National Weather Service & NOAA, measures snow cover in US & Canada, using satellite data, ground observations, airborne sensors & hydrologic modeling. SeaWiFS Project monitors global ocean color. International Arctic Buoy Program has a network of automatic data buoys for monitoring synoptic-scale fields of pressure, temperature, & ice motion throughout the Arctic Basin. Univ of Rhode Island AVHRR XBrowse for browsing satellite AVHRR imagery. NASA/JPL Imaging Radar: access data and info on capabilities, applications, & data characteristics of airborne & spaceborne imaging radar used for remote sensing of Earth. NASA AVHRR Land Pathfinder for browsing global multichannel land surface satellite data. Space Science & Engineering Center, Univ of Wisconsin, Madison. SSEC offers current satellite images & backfiles; current satellite images include global sea surface temperature, Antarctic infrared, GOES visible, GOES infrared, & GOES-METEOSAT-GMS global composite. Also info on the McIDAS program. Unidata Integrated Earth Information Server HAPEX Sahel (Hydrologic Atmospheric Pilot Experiment Sahel) Project studies the continent/atmosphere interactions (H2O, CO2 & energy fluxes) in the Sahel Area. Files of ground data & quicklook Spot Images. Scripps Institution of Oceanography data servers including CalCOFI from 1949+, temperature & salinity from US West Coast shore stations, weather, & Center for Coastal Studies' Data Zoo. Lamont Doherty Climate Group Data Catalog TOPEX/POSEIDON the Ocean Topography Experiment observes earth's oceans by satellite. Offers global ocean images & animations of wave height, wind speed, water vapor & dynamic ocean topography. Related pages include GSFC, NOAA, Colorado Center for Astrodynamics Research, Delft Univ of Technology Altimetry Atlas and Univ of Texas Center for Space Research. UTCSR offers monthly gridded dynamic ocean topography heights observed by TOPEX/POSEIDON altimeter & corresponding sea level anomalies. These solutions appear in Climate Diagnostics Bulletin but may be revised due to additional data. Permanent Service for Mean Sea Level maintains monthly & annual mean sea level measurements from over 1600 tide gauge stations around the world. Australian Oceanographic Data Centre Current Offshore Data, updated hourly, for Eastern Pacific, Western Atlantic, Gulf of Mexico & Great Lakes (compiler: Bob Hart, Penn State Univ). Unidata, a national program governed by universities & funded by NSF Division of AtmosphericSciences. Provides computing & networking technologies that empower universities to acquire & use atmospheric & related data, much of it in real time. The World-Wide Earthquake Locator is an interface developed by Bruce Gittings of the Dept ofGeography at Univ of Edinburgh, using USGS National Earthquake Information Center data to provide information about earthquakes within hours of the events. In reponse to a query, the data is dynamically accessed from a USGS server in Colorado, processed into an appropriate format in Edinburgh, and displayed using the Xerox PARC Map Viewer in California. Model Evaluation Consortium for Climate Assessment (MECCA) quantifies plausible ranges of predicted climate change available from simulations with current climate models. Earth Observation Guide & Directory Service [ESA ESRIN] Ionia 1km Net Browser of ESA ESRIN allows browsing of data collected through the 1 km AVHRR Global Land Data Set project, submission of server queries, visualization of quick-look images of satellite passes, & ordering of SHARP data products to be processed. El Nino Southern Oscillation Diagnostic Advisory: Climate Analysis Center & National Meteorological Center. Periodic Table of Elements DATA RELATED: TIDES: Edward Wallner's tide prediction software, v3.04, for Intel/DOS. TIDES predicts tide height or tidal current strength at any time. The predictions' method & format are generally those used by the National Ocean Service (NOS) in its published tide & current tables. Subordinate station constants are created by correcting reference station constants using NOS Tide Tables' Table 2 values. TIDES may be used for non-commercial purposes for a $15 registration fee. Documentation for TIDES. Meteorological, Oceanographic and Geophysical Internet Data Sources FAQ Meteorological, Oceanographic and Geophysical Tape & CDROM Data Sources FAQ NASA Software Support Laboratory, a software repository & distribution center for public domain scientific software. The Oceanography Society's Distributed Ocean Data System project to define the structure of a client-server based distributed system for access to oceanographic data over the Internet & to develop & test a prototype. The intent is that individual scientists as well as national archives will become providers of data. Scientific Data Format FAQ Hierarchical Data Format (HDF) Information Server US INSTITUTIONS: Scripps Institution of Oceanography Woods Hole Oceanographic Institution Marine Biological Laboratory NOAA Global Climate Perspectives System Geosciences Laboratory Hydrologic Information Center National Geodetic Survey National Data Buoy Center Office of Ocean Resources Conservation and Assessment National Ocean Service Office of Coastal Resource Management Coastal Programs Division Sanctuaries & Reserves Division Global Ocean Observing System Center for Coastal Ecosystem Health Environmental Research Laboratories Climate Diagnostics Center Climate Monitoring & Diagnostics Laboratory including Carbon Cycle Group Geophysical Fluid Dynamics Laboratory National Operational Hydrologic Remote Sensing Center Pacific Marine Environmental Laboratory National Marine Fisheries Service including Northwest Fisheries Science Center USGS Global Change & Climate History Program National Marine & Coastal Geology Program Pacific Marine Geology Branch Atlantic Marine Geology Branch Geophysics Branch Water Resources NASA Earth Sciences Directorate Earth Observing System (EOS) Project Goddard Space Flight Center Physical Oceanography Group NASA JPL Southern California Integrated GPS Network US Navy Office of Naval Research Naval Oceanographic Office NRaD (formerly NOSC), a division of NCCOSC, Naval Command, Control & Ocean Surveillance Center. Hydromechanics Directorate of Carderock Division, Naval Surface Warfare Center (formerly David Taylor Model Basin) Naval Research Laboratory including Ocean & Atmospheric Science & Technology Directorate Naval Postgraduate School Meteorology and Oceanography Departments US Army Corps of Engineers including Waterways Experiment Station and Coastal Engineering Research Center EPA including National Estuary Program University Corporation for Atmospheric Research & its principal activity, the National Center for Atmospheric Research. Also NCAR Atmospheric & Oceanic Science Group. US Fish & Wildlife Service including National Wetlands Inventory. UNIVERSITIES Univ of California campuses including UCD Atmospheric Science Group and UCSC marine sciences. Stanford Univ School of Earth Sciences Univ of Washington Dept of Atmospheric Sciences, Polar Science Center, & College of Ocean & Fishery Sciences including School of Oceanography Oregon State Univ College of Oceanic & Atmospheric Sciences Coastal Imaging Lab and R/V Wecoma Univ of Alaska Institute of Marine Science Univ of Hawaii School of Ocean & Earth Science & Technology including Satellite Oceanography Laboratory Univ of Colorado Program in Atmospheric & Oceanic Sciences National Snow & Ice Data Center Univ of Wisconsin Madison Space Science & Engineering Center and Cooperative Institute for Meteorological Satellite Studies Univ of Chicago Dept of the Geophysical Sciences Byrd Polar Research Center Texas A&M Univ Dept of Oceanography and Ocean Engineering Program. Univ of Texas, Medical Branch, Marine Biomedical Inst., National Resource Center for Cephalopods Rosenstiel School of Marine & Atmospheric Science Florida State Univ Dept of Oceanography, Dept of Meteorology, and Center for Ocean-Atmospheric Prediction Studies Skidaway Institute of Oceanography Univ of NC-Asheville Atmospheric Sciences Dept Old Dominion Univ Dept of Oceanography Duke Univ Dept of Geology Rutgers Univ Dept of Meteorology & Physical Oceanography Lamont-Doherty Earth Observatory State Univ of New York at Stony Brook Marine Sciences Research Center Univ of Rhode Island Graduate School of OceanographyLI>MIT Earth Resources Laboratory National Science Foundation National Academy of Sciences US Global Change Research Program Consortium for International Earth Science Information Network (CIESIN). DOE Earth and Environmental Sciences Center at Battelle's Pacific Northwest Laboratory. Southern California Integrated GPS Network SeaSpace Corporation Center for Ocean-Land-Atmosphere Studies Los Angeles County Museum of Natural History Santa Barbara Museum of Natural History Smithsonian National Museum of Natural History California Academy of Sciences California Dept of Water Resources Peabody Museum of Natural History Incorporated Research Institutions for Seismology (IRIS) Virginia Institute of Marine Science NON-US INSTITUTIONS: Australia Macquarie Univ, School of Earth Sciences Atmospheric Science Monash Univ Dept of Earth Sciences CSIRO Marine Laboratories, Australia Canada Canadian Global Change Program Atlantic Geoscience Center, Geological Survey of Canada Environment Canada, Atmospheric Environment Service Pacific Biological Station Dalhousie Univ Dept of Earth Sciences and Dept of Oceanography Bedford Institute of Oceanography McGill Univ Centre for Climate & Global Change Research and Dept of Earth & Planetary Sciences France IFREMER ORSTOM Univ of Nantes Maritime & Oceanic Law Center Germany Alfred-Wegener-Institut fur Polar- und Meeresforschung Deutsches Klimarechenzentrum Freien Universitat Berlin Institut fuer Meterologie Japan JAMSTEC Univ of Tokyo Ocean Research Institute United Kingdom Institute of Oceanographic Sciences, Deacon Laboratory James Rennell Centre for Ocean Circulation Cambridge Univ Centre for Atmospheric Science Univ of Reading Meteorology Department Univ of East Anglia School of Environmental Sciences Open Univ Dept of Earth Sciences Natural History Museum, London Universidad Nacional Autonoma de Mexico, Geophysics Institute, Seismology Dept Utrecht Univ Institute for Marine & Atmospheric Research Institute of Oceanology, PAS, Sopot, Poland Geophysical Institute, Univ of Bergen, Norway Bermuda Biological Station for Research Marine Research Institute, Iceland National Taiwan Univ Global Change Center Joint Research Centre, Ispra, Institute for Remote Sensing Applications, Marine Environment Unit Dept of Oceanology and Environmental Geophysics, Osservatorio Geofisico Sperimentale, Trieste UNIVERSITIES worldwide. IGOs & NGOs Ocean Drilling Program World Meteorological Organization GCRIO Global Change Research Information Office European Centre for Earth Observation International Council for the Exploration of the Sea (ICES) World Conservation Monitoring Centre NATO SACLANT Undersea Research Center International Antarctic Centre UN Food & Agriculture Orgn UN Environment Programme including Geneva office and Information Unit on Climate Change WT02-B03-88IA014-000152-B034-79http://rafos.gso.uri.edu:80/floats.html 198.116.10.111 19970217131522 text/html 4719HTTP/1.0 200 Document followsDate: Mon, 17 Feb 1997 13:14:52 GMTServer: NCSA/1.5.2Content-type: text/html The North Atlantic Current Project North Atlantic Current Project: RAFOS Float Studies The objective of the RAFOS float program, jointly supported by the Officeof Naval Research and the National ScienceFoundation, was to study the structure of the currents in the NorthAtlantic Currrent (NAC) region and the exchange of waters between the subtropicaland subpolar gyres in the Newfoundland Basin. One hundred RAFOSfloats were deployed on two density surfaces corresponding to sigma-theta= 27.2 and 27.5, respectively. All floats were designed to cycle once ortwice a day to density surfaces 0.1 sigma-t units above and below theirnominal level to determine changes in stratification and temperature alongthe trajectories. Three separate float deployments took place: July-August1993, November-December 1993 and October-November 1994. Most float missionshad a duration of ten months, with the final floats surfacing in the summerof 1995. At the end of its mission, each float releases its ballast weight,returns to the surface, and telemeters data to Argos,a French satellite-based data collection and platform location system.Once all the data are downloaded and processed, the trajectory of the floatcan be reconstructed from the time series of acoustic travel times. Thepressure and temperature time series are also included in the telemetereddata. The floats were tracked using four mooredsound sources developed by Spartonof Canada, energized by power modules from Webb Research Corp. of EastFalmouth, Massachusetts. We present hear a summary of the float trajectories on each densitysurface. For additional information or a copy of our data report, pleasecontact Dr. Tom Rossby or Ms.Sandra Anderson-Fontana at the GraduateSchool of Oceanography. Spaghetti Plots of Float Trajectories: Summer 1993, sigma-t=27.2 Summer 1993, sigma-t=27.5 Fall 1993, sigma-t=27.2 Fall 1993, sigma-t=27.5 Fall 1994, sigma-t=27.2 Fall 1994, sigma-t=27.5 All on sigma-t=27.2 All on sigma-t=27.5 References Anderson-Fontana, S., M. Prater and T. Rossby. RAFOS float data report   of the North Atlantic Current study, 1993-1995. GSO Technical Report   No. 96-4, September 1996, 241 pp. Carr, M. E., E. J. Kearns and T. Rossby, 1995. Isopycnal RAFOS floats as    roving hydrographers in the North Atlantic Current region. ACCP Notes,   II(2), NOAA Atl. Oceanogr. and Meteorol. Lab., Miami, Fla. Rossby, T., 1996. The North Atlantic Current and surrounding waters: at    the crossroads. Rev. Geophys., 34, 463-481. Rossby, T., D. Dorson, and J. Fontaine, 1986. The RAFOS system. J. Atmos.   Oceanic Technol., 3, 672-679. Rossby, T., J. Ellis and D. C. Webb, 1993. An efficient sound source for   wide-area RAFOS navigation. J. Atmos. Oceanic Technol., 10, 397-403. Rossby, T., J. Fontaine and E. C. Carter, Jr., 1994. The f/h float -    measuring stretching vorticity directly. Deep-Sea Res., 41, 975-992. Related Links Mark Prater's NorthAtlantic and Labrador Sea research North Atlantic Current climatology page North Atlantic CurrentDynamics from modelling group Back to the RAFOS group's home page.WT02-B03-89IA014-000152-B034-102http://rafos.gso.uri.edu:80/nac_clim.html 198.116.10.111 19970217131530 text/html 2569HTTP/1.0 200 Document followsDate: Mon, 17 Feb 1997 13:15:01 GMTServer: NCSA/1.5.2Content-type: text/html  North Atlantic Climatology Interface North Atlantic Climatology Interface This climatology is presented as a service to researchers who are working inthe Newfoundland Basin and the North Atlantic Ocean. Please notify Ed Kearns if you intend to usethe products from this page; in this way any important information concerningthis climatology may be passed on to you in a timely fashion. Upon selecting the appropriate variables below, you will be presented with anin-line GIF89a image of your selection as well as links to the ASCII andnetCDF format data. Select Variable Type: Depth Temperature Salinity Potential_Vorticity Sigma_Theta Montgomery_Potential Number_Obs Number_Years Select Time Period: All Spring Summer Fall Winter 1950-1959 1960-1969 1970-1979 1980-1988 1955-1959 1970-1974 Select Specific Volume Anomaly Surface Value (referenced to 4.9 C 34.6 PSU): 34.3 (approx 27.0 sigma-theta) 24.8 (approx 27.1 sigma-theta) 15.3 (approx 27.2 sigma-theta) 5.8 (approx 27.3 sigma-theta) -3.5 (approx 27.4 sigma-theta) -12.7 (approx 27.5 sigma-theta) -21.9 (approx 27.6 sigma-theta) -31.4 (approx 27.7 sigma-theta) -43.7 (approx 27.8 sigma-theta) Select Type of Gridded Field: Median Standard_deviation When you are ready, click to submit or reset: Related links North Atlantic Current Observational Studies North Atlantic Current Dynamics from the modelling group This page was last modified on December 5, 1996. WT02-B03-90IA014-000152-B033-223http://rafos.gso.uri.edu:80/ 198.116.10.111 19970217131257 text/html 3548HTTP/1.0 200 Document followsDate: Mon, 17 Feb 1997 13:12:25 GMTServer: NCSA/1.5.2Content-type: text/html RAFOS University of Rhode Island Graduate School of Oceanography Physical Oceanography Narragansett, Rhode Island Welcome to the home page for the "RAFOS Float Group"in the Physical Oceanography Department at the University of Rhode Island'sGraduate School of Oceanography.Members of the group, headed by Dr. Tom Rossby,are listed below. Our research activities focus on the dynamics and kinematicsof ocean currents, mainly in the Gulf Stream and North Atlantic Current(NAC) regions, and on istrumentation development. Learn more about ourresearch activities by clicking below. This page is currently under construction,so is continually being revised. For comments or questions, please contactSandra Anderson-Fontana (sandy@yvette.gso.uri.edu). Research activities The North Atlantic Current Project The Oleander Project DynamicalAdjustment of the Gulf Stream Deep Convection inthe Labrador Sea Members of the group Dr. Tom Rossby Dr. Erik Gottlieb Sandra Anderson-Fontana Jim Fontaine George Schwartze Olga Sato Edward Kearns Paula Perez-Brunius Peter Lazarevich Other related URI WWW pages University of Rhode Island - GraduateSchool of Oceanography Numerical modeling group homepage Remote Sensing/Distributed DataSystems home page Other Web sites of interest Lots of sites organized by subject(Yahoo) Other Oceanographic and Earth Science Websites The World-WideWeb Virtual Library: Oceanography Accesses to this page: 52 Last Updated: January 22, 1997 WT02-B03-91IA008-000090-B019-352http://www.gerson.com:80/index.html 207.158.200.123 19970222123007 text/html 3272HTTP/1.1 200 OKDate: Sat, 22 Feb 1997 12:30:30 GMTServer: Apache/1.2b4Connection: closeContent-Type: text/htmlLast-Modified: Mon, 09 Dec 1996 22:51:35 GMTETag: "83e3d1-bd7-32ac97f7"Content-Length: 3031Accept-Ranges: bytes  The Gerson Institute The Gerson Therapy The Gerson Therapy is an intensive, nutrition-based and detoxifying medicaltreatment for cancer, heart disease, diabetes and other chronic, degenerative diseases. It worksclosely with nature to help the sick body to rid itself of disease through the supportive effects ofsimple foods, juices, and non-toxic medication. Its successes in curing the dread diseases of ourtimes for the past 75 years have no parallel in the conventional medical context. The Gerson Institute is a non-profit organization dedicated to the holistic treatment of degenerative diseases. We strive to educate the public on the benefits of holistic healing through worldwide lectures and seminars, publication and distribution of literature on the Gerson Therapy, Training programs for Physicians, Healthcare practitioners, and home care assistants, and through establishing ties to approved clinics and treatment centers. This site is our mirror site, containing the exact information as our primary site, www.gerson.org, but with a little less formatting. The Therapy Information on the Therapy Events Upcoming Gerson Therapy Conventions and Lectures Care Centers About the Therapy Centers Histories Case Histories and Survival Rates Training Gerson Practitioner Training programs News Gerson News and Announcements Information Gerson Books, Audio Tapes and Video Tapes Newsletters Selections from the Gerson Healing Newsletter Resources Suggested Resources from the Gerson Institute Links Related Internet Resources and Organizations We welcome all comments. Please contact us at: The Gerson Institute and Cancer Curing Society Box 430 Bonita, CA 91908 Please direct email to: info@gerson.org tel: (619) 585 7600 Toll Free: (888) 4-GERSON fax: (619) 585 7610 Copyright 1994,1995,1996 (c) The Gerson Institute. All rights reserved. This page v3.6, last updated 12/6/96. Questions, comments or problems with this page? Please send to email to webmaster@gerson.org WT02-B03-92IA008-000090-B018-319http://www.gerson.com:80/one.html 207.158.200.123 19970222122732 text/html 872HTTP/1.1 200 OKDate: Sat, 22 Feb 1997 12:27:55 GMTServer: Apache/1.2b4Connection: closeContent-Type: text/htmlLast-Modified: Mon, 09 Dec 1996 22:56:58 GMTETag: "83e45e-278-32ac993a"Content-Length: 632Accept-Ranges: bytes The Therapy and its Author The Gerson Therapy and its Author Dr. Max Gerson A Synopsis of the Therapy The Gerson Institute Mission Statement A Biography of Max Gerson A Gerson Therapy Bibliography A Short History of the Gerson Therapy The Gerson Therapy Copyright 1994,1995, 1996 (c) The Gerson Institute, All rights reserved.WT02-B03-93IA008-000090-B018-342http://www.gerson.com:80/schedule.html 207.158.200.123 19970222122739 text/html 3134HTTP/1.1 200 OKDate: Sat, 22 Feb 1997 12:28:03 GMTServer: Apache/1.2b4Connection: closeContent-Type: text/htmlLast-Modified: Fri, 14 Feb 1997 04:47:16 GMTETag: "837760-b4d-3303ee54"Content-Length: 2893Accept-Ranges: bytes Gerson(tm) Therapy Seminar and Lecture Schedule-1997 Gerson Therapy Seminar and Lecture Schedule, 1997 Please Note: The convention in Seattle has beenpostponed, and Memphis has been cancelled. Seattle, WA , Memphis, TN Events are free, unless otherwise noted; someconventions require purchase of a pass to enter the exhibitand lecture halls. All information was accurate at presstime. We suggest you call the Gerson Institute's Toll-freenumber at (888) 4 GERSON for an updated schedule, or theGerson Institute at (619) 585 7600 for information. The schedule of events for all Gerson (tm) One-daySeminars, unless otherwise noted, is as follows: 10:30 amCuring "Incurables": The Gerson Therapy,including presentation of Cured"Incurables" 12:00 noon Lunch Break 1:30-5:30pm Workshop: How to Do the Gerson Therapy $35 (perperson)/$60 (per couple) Seattle, WA (note new date) Saturday, May 17, 1997 (was scheduled forFebruary 22, 1997) Gerson Therapy One-Day Seminar Location: Demaray Hall, Seattle PacificUniversity, 3307 3rd Ave. West, Seattle, WA 98119 Tel.:(206)281 2187. Directions: From the north or south on I-5,take the N. 50th Street exit (#169) marked "SeattlePacific University". Turn west onto N. 50th and proceedto Fremont Avenue N. Turn left onto Fremont and cross theFremont Bridge. Turn right immediately after the bridge ontoFlorentia Street. Go one block and turn right onto NickersonStreet. Continue on Nickerson to Third Avenue W. and turnleft. You are now on campus. Remain on Third for threeblocks, then turn right onto W. Dravus Street and turn rightagain into the tiered parking lot. To get to Demaray Hall,walk north to W. Bertona Street. Demaray Hall is the buildingwith the clock tower on your left hand side. For moreinformation, please call the Gerson Institute, Tel: (619) 5857600. A Gerson exhibit table will offer Gerson Therapyinformation, books and video tapes Memphis, TN (Cancelled) was scheduled for Saturday, March 8th,1997 The Gerson Institute Box 430 Bonita, CA91908-0430 Tel: (619) 585 7600 Fax: (619) 585 7610 Toll-free:(888) 4-GERSON email: mail@gerson.org Return to the Gerson Institute homepage WT02-B03-94IA008-000090-B019-12http://www.gerson.com:80/three.html 207.158.200.123 19970222122748 text/html 635HTTP/1.1 200 OKDate: Sat, 22 Feb 1997 12:28:11 GMTServer: Apache/1.2b4Connection: closeContent-Type: text/htmlLast-Modified: Mon, 09 Dec 1996 22:59:34 GMTETag: "86f12b-18b-32ac99d6"Content-Length: 395Accept-Ranges: bytes About the Therapy Center About the Therapy Center Location and Management The Treatment Arrangements and Cost The Gerson Therapy Copyright 1994,1995, 1996 (c) The Gerson Institute, All rights reserved. WT02-B03-95IA008-000090-B019-33http://www.gerson.com:80/two.html 207.158.200.123 19970222122756 text/html 723HTTP/1.1 200 OKDate: Sat, 22 Feb 1997 12:28:18 GMTServer: Apache/1.2b4Connection: closeContent-Type: text/htmlLast-Modified: Mon, 09 Dec 1996 23:00:09 GMTETag: "83e466-1e3-32ac99f9"Content-Length: 483Accept-Ranges: bytes Case Histories and Other Information Case Histories and other Information Five Year Survival Rates of Melanoma Patients Treated by Diet Therapy after the Manner of Gerson: A Retrospective Review Case Histories: Cured "Incurables" The Gerson Therapy Copyright 1994,1995 (c) The Gerson Institute, All rights reserved.WT02-B03-96IA008-000090-B019-61http://www.gerson.com:80/train1.html 207.158.200.123 19970222122807 text/html 21230HTTP/1.1 200 OKDate: Sat, 22 Feb 1997 12:28:26 GMTServer: Apache/1.2b4Connection: closeContent-Type: text/htmlLast-Modified: Fri, 13 Dec 1996 18:45:40 GMTETag: "83032c-51fb-32b1a454"Content-Length: 20987Accept-Ranges: bytes Gerson InstituteTraining Programs Through Spring, 1997 As part of its outreach and education goals, the Gerson Instituteholds training seminars periodically for Healthcare Practitionersseeking certification to manage patients using the Gerson (tm) Protocol. The Institute is also sponsoringtraining programs for home healthcareproviders seeking to assistpatients pursuing the therapy at home or inan assisted livingsetting. For an Enrollment Application, please call theGerson Institute at (619) 585-7600 or email us at mail@gerson.org. Table of Contents: An Overview of the Gerson TherapyPhysician Training Program Phase I ProgramDescription Registration and TuitionInformationfor the Phase I Training, February 2-8, 1997, San Marcos,CA Gerson Therapy PhysicianTraining Program For many physicians, managing the care of patients with chronicdebilitating illness can be a time-consuming and unfulfilling task.Conventional protocols in treatment of degenerative diesases canoften offer limited benefit to the patient and can severelycompromise the quality of life during and after the treatmentperiod. The Gerson (tm) Therapy providesan answer to the physician who seeks a holistic, scientificallyproven treatment for life-threatening illness. Originally developedin the 1930s by Max Gerson, M.D., thetherapy offers the health care professional a safe, viable andpractical method of treating many degenerative diseases. The Gerson Therapy is an integratedholistic protocol developed by Max Gerson, M.D. for standalone andadjunctive use in the treatment of degenerative diseases. Over 200 articles in the peer reviewed medicalliterature document its effectiveness, and provide furtherunderstanding of the tissue damage syndrome (intracellular edema),supplementing nutritional deficiencies through the use of fresh,organic fruit and vegetable juices. Providing an intensive, nutritionbased, high-fluid, micronutrient, salt and water management, theGerson Therapy is rich in phytochemicals, supplements potassium, andrestricts dietary fat, protien, and sodium. Extensive mechanicaldetoxification through enemas combined with stimulation ofglutathione production systems dramatically improve elimination ofcell wastes. Because of the non-specific nature of the protocol, it is ofteneffective in treatment of a wide range of cancers, autoimmune,collagen, and degenerative diesases. The Gerson Therapy has beenshown in the medical literature to be extraordinarily effective inachieving long-term remission in Stage I-IV melanomas, exceedingsurvival rates achieved with conventional managements by as much as40%. [This study is available for viewing here.] Dramatic long-term recoveries havebeen observed with lymphoma, Duke's-C colorectal cancer, ovariancancer, and oat cell and adenocarcinomas of the lung. Biopsy-verifiedfull remissions have been observed in astrocytoma and cancers of thebreast, liver, pancreas and prostate, including some cases withextensive metastases. Full remission of symptoms has been documentedin a number of cases of systematic lupus erythematosus, rheumatoidarthritis, and multiple sclerosis. Relatively unique about the Gerson management is that it does notuse any proprietary medications. All medications and supplements areclassed as biologicals, and are supplied in therapeutic amounts. Allare approved by the U.S. Food and Drug Administration. All of theprocedures, medications, and techniques used in the protocol havebeen fully tested and effectively used for many years, and arecompletely safe when used according to the protocol. Why The Gerson Therapy is a Sensible Choice for yourPractice There are many paths to wellness, and many different philosophiesabout appropriate treatment of life-threatening degenerativediseases. Why choose the Gerson Therapy over the many othertreatments available? We believe the answer lies in the combination of results, patientsatisfaction, scientific approach, and our philosophy of coordinationand partnership with practitioners and treatment centers. We believe the Gerson protocol itself to be the most complete,all-encompassing approach to wellness available anyhwere. The GersonTherapy incorporates dietary and lifestyle modification,sophisticated biochemical managements, intensive, multi-faceteddetoxification, psychological and mind/body approaches, and attentionto symptomatic relief through non-toxic means. When appropriate, theGerson protocol is combined with other proven managements to providethe most complete, powerful approach to cancer and other degenerativediseases available anywhere. We constantly review the medicalliterature, seeking new ways of reaching even the most advanced casesof cancer and disease. The Gerson Institute approaches modificationsand additions carefully, with great consideration, and sound testingbefore inclusion in the Gerson protocol, ensuring both thepractitioner and patient of the safest, most efficacious treatmentavailable. Adding the Gerson protocol to your practice will give you thesatisfaction of seeing rapid improvement in health and outlook inotherwise "terminal" patients. Since patients are activelyinvolved in restoring and maintaining their own health, they tend todevelop self-reliance, decreasing "emergency" and paniccalls, and increasing satisfaction with their medical treatment. As acertified Gerson practitioner, you will participate in case reviewwith the Gerson Institute, providing us with valuable statisticaldata, and ensuring that you have appropriate expertise available forthe treatment of difficult or unusual cases. Financially, working with Gerson patients is rewarding, aspatients will require consultations and follow-up care on a regularbasis for twenty-four months or longer. Also, since they become verydedicated to their treatment, patients often discuss their treatmentwith friends, co-workers, family, and others, resulting inword-of-mouth referrals, the most effective form of advertising. As a certified Gerson practitioner participating in our referralprogram, you will benefit from our national advertising, outreach, andeducation efforts. Patients seeking outpatient treatment in your areawill be referred to your practice. The Gerson Institute will alsocoordinate with you and endeavor to schedule educational seminars andlectures with Gerson Institute staff in your area, further helping tobuild your clientele of Gerson Therapy patients. Training Patients in the GersonProtocol The responsibilities of the physician managing a patient on theGerson Therapy will vary with the condition of the patient anddiagnosis, but typically includes the regular monitoring of patientstatus and disease staging through interpretation of pathology andother appropriate means. Modifications in diet, medications, and other protocols must beprescribed based on both traditional and non-traditional indications.The physician must also be prepared to assist the patient in managingacute healing reactions with dietary and/or medication modifications,and emotional support. We have found that the psychological aspect oftreatment is important, particularly during this reaction period.Access to the treating physician is vital, as many of the healingresponses are unfamiliar, and can therefore be frightening to thepatient and his or her family members or care providers. In addition to the medical interventions required, it should beunderstood that the Gerson protocol is a complex combination ofdietary restrictions, medication and enema administration, andlifestyle and environmental changes. We recommend that practitionersprovide patients with complete instruction and followup in thespecifics of the treatment, either through the distribution of GersonInstitute publications and videos, or through individualized patienttraining and ongoing consultation. Gerson Therapy Certification: A Partnership forSuccess The new era of managed care, limited resources, and tight costcontrols in medical treatment have opened the door for broadacceptance of treatment such as the Gerson protocol. Gerson carecosts are significantly lower than conventional cancer managements,benefiting insurance providers. Practitioners benefit by establishinga health partnership with their patients, improving thedoctor/patient relationship, and reducing the likelihood ofdissatisfaction that can lead to costly legal actions. Patientsbenefit by developing self-confidence, improving their outlook, andtaking responsibility for their well-being. Public demand for the scientifically proven Gerson Therapytreatment is skyrocketing. In 1995, in response to the increasingdemand for Gerson Therapy treatment, the Gerson Institute began todevelop medical education and certification programs to increaseaccess to the Gerson Therapy, and to protect the reputation forexcellence and high quality care that the Gerson name has come torepresent. Practitioners seeking to use the Gerson Therapy intheir practices achieve certification through a four-phase process.Completion of the Level I training described below is the first phase.The second phase is completion of a two-week internship at a Gersoninpatient treatment center. Intern practitioners will work directlywith patients and experienced Gerson physicians. In phase three,practitioners will treat patients in their own practice,with assistance and supervision from Gerson Institute staff andGerson-trained physicians. The last phase is a three-day training,review, and skill-assessment program. To maintain certification,practitioners must maintain a high standard of patient care andappropriate treatment, follow Gerson Institute guidelines regardingpatient management and treatment, provide data tothe Gerson Institutefor research, case management, and statistical purposes, and completeapproved continuing education units. We anticipate thatpractitioners who work diligently will be able to complete thecertification process in twelve to eighteen months. A complete,detailed description of the certification program will be available inearly 1997. The certified practitioner will be eligible for anumber of benefits, including the following: Ongoingconsultation and support from Gerson Institute staff andGerson-trained physicians Access to a network of other Gersonpractitioners Gerson Institute patient referrals seekingtreatment and long-term follow-up Permission to use theGerson name in connection with treatment of patients and marketing fornew patients Support with local publicity and outreach todevelop your practice We invite you to work with us. Through the efforts of ourorganization and a group of talented, dedicated medicalpractitioners, we can achieve our vision of making this safe,effective treatment available to patients worldwide. Treating Degenerative Diseaseswith the Gerson Therapy: Phase I Training Program Thisprogram is designed to introduce the health care practitioner to thepractice of the Gerson protocol as originally described in Gerson'sMonograph, "A CancerTherapy" (Historic Edition, Gerson Institute, 1996), withcurrent enhancements and additions. The six day intensive trainingwill offer direct instruction from Charlotte Gerson, experiencedGerson-trained physicians, and other senior Gerson Institutestaff. Practitioners attending the program will gain afundamental understanding of the Gerson Therapy treatment,assessment, follow-up and monitoring protocols, and will have accessto resources for ongoing training, support, and consultation from theGerson Institute. The nature of interactions between variouselements of the Gerson protocol require serious study andconsiderable clinical experience before full understanding of theprotocol will be gained. For this reason, the training program isintended as a starting point for practitioners seeking to incorporateGerson protocols into their practice. Presentations Includedin the Phase I Training Program: Intrepretation of Blood, Urine, andother Indicators Clinical Practice of the GersonTherapy Non-toxic Interventionsin Pain Management Biological Basis of the Gerson Therapy Adaptations for Specific Populations Intake, assessment, and contraindications Dietary Considerations andFood Preparation Addictions,Non-Cancer Diseases and other Applications Modifications in pre-treatedPatients Long Term Follow-Upand Protocol Changes Managing Healing Reactions Clinical Intervention in Crisis Situations Common Errors made by TreatingPhysicians Common Errors madeby Patients Gerson Medications and Adjuvant Therapies Healthy Eating to Prevent Illness Herbal and NutritionalSupplements PsychologicalConsiderations for Gerson Patients Toxins in the home and workplace Surgery, Radiation, Chemotherapy and the Gersonprotocol TheGerson Therapy at Home CaseManagement, Clinical Data Collection and Research Registration Information for PhaseI Practitioner's Training February2-8, 1997 San Marcos, California Eligibility The Training Program for MedicalPractitioners is limited to licensed medical professionals andprofessional health care workers with one of the following degrees:MD, HMD, ND, DO, DC, DDS, DMD, RN, RNP, LVN/LPN or Ph.D degrees inmedicine, chemistry, biology, or nutrition. Also included are personscurrently enrolled full time in an accredited school pursuingone of the listed degrees. Physician's Assistants are also welcome.If you are a medical professional or health care worker whosecredentials or scope of practice is not listed above, contact theCertification Coordinator at the Gerson Institute at (619) 585-7600or email us at mail@gerson.orgfor further information Tuition, Housing and Meals All tuition plans include the following: 6 days, nearly 40 hours of instruction 18 organic, vegetarian Gerson meals with fresh organic juice at eachmeal one full day of Gerson Therapy Juices complete set of Gerson Therapy Publications (books A Cancer Therapy,Gerson Primer, The Gerson Therapy and Home TherapyVideo Set) A Practitioner's handbook specially prepared for this seminar Round-trip transportation to the Meridien hospital for clinical observation Lodging including six night accommodations and use of all facilitiesat the conference center Tuition Costs Fees are based on two variables; when payment is recieved and what accommodations are chosen: Type of Lodging plan Early(before 12/13/96) Regular(12/14/96 - 1/24/97) Late (After 1/24), subject to availability Tuition, Meals, Shared Double Room $1695 $1995 $2150 Tuition, Meals, Private Room $1950 $2295 $2450 Tuition, Meals, Deluxe Lakve View Rm. $2095 $2495 $2650 Tuition and Meals only, no Lodging $1495 $1750 $1895 A limited number of work-study positions are available for those currentlyenrolled full time in an accredited school of medicine or other healingarts. Housing may be off site. Call the Gerson Institute at (619) 585-7600for details. Two or more applicants, applying at the same time, may take an additional20% off the second tuition and meal fee. An attending spouse mayparticipate in meals (but not training) for a fee of $495 for the week. You may opt out of the meal plan and deduct $300. The above rates include a non-refundable $75 registration fee.This training program is open only to licensed medical professionalsor currently enrolled students. To register, please call the Gerson Instituteat (619) 585-7600 for an application, complete it, and return it to usvia fax or mail. A $500 deposit is required to hold your reservation. Payment may bemade by check, money order, or Credit Card. Full Payment or Credit Cardinstallment agreement must be completed prior to January 24th, or yourreservation will be cancelled and your deposit forfeited. If registration is cancelled prior to January 3rd, 1997, your depositwill be refunded minus the $75 registration fee. For cancellations afterJanuary 3rd but prior to January 24th, your deposit will be refunded minusa $300 cancellation fee. Participants cancelling after January 24th willbe liable for the full tuition fee, and will not be eligible for refundof tuition. Cancellation fees (excluding the registration fee) maybe applied toward tuition charge for a future training at any time within2 years. For Questions, Comments, or Suggestions on this program, pleasecall the Gerson Institute at (619) 585-7600, or email us. Copyright 1996 The Gerson Institute P.O. Box 430 Bonita, CA 91908-0430 Fax: (619) 585 7610 Toll Free: (888) 4-GERSON Return to the Gerson homepage.WT02-B03-97IA008-000090-B019-86http://www.gerson.com:80/news.html 207.158.200.123 19970222122817 text/html 876HTTP/1.1 200 OKDate: Sat, 22 Feb 1997 12:28:40 GMTServer: Apache/1.2b4Connection: closeContent-Type: text/htmlLast-Modified: Mon, 09 Dec 1996 22:56:09 GMTETag: "8ea7da-27c-32ac9909"Content-Length: 636Accept-Ranges: bytes New and Noteworthy Gerson Institute Information Last updated 12/5/96 Watch this page for upcoming information about new Gerson publications,center announcements, and important news. Copyright 1996 The Gerson Institute P.O. Box 430 Bonita, CA 91908 (619) 585-7600WT02-B03-98IA008-000090-B019-104http://www.gerson.com:80/four.html 207.158.200.123 19970222122837 text/html 666HTTP/1.1 200 OKDate: Sat, 22 Feb 1997 12:28:56 GMTServer: Apache/1.2b4Connection: closeContent-Type: text/htmlLast-Modified: Mon, 09 Dec 1996 22:50:43 GMTETag: "86f127-1aa-32ac97c3"Content-Length: 426Accept-Ranges: bytes Gerson Information for Sale Gerson Therapy Books, Audio Tapes and Video Tapes Books Available Audio Tapes Available Video Tapes Available The Gerson Therapy Copyright 1994,1995, 1996 (c) The Gerson Institute, All rights reserved. WT02-B03-99IA008-000090-B019-140http://www.gerson.com:80/five.html 207.158.200.123 19970222122849 text/html 2266HTTP/1.1 200 OKDate: Sat, 22 Feb 1997 12:29:10 GMTServer: Apache/1.2b4Connection: closeContent-Type: text/htmlLast-Modified: Mon, 09 Dec 1996 22:50:40 GMTETag: "8339e0-7e9-32ac97c0"Content-Length: 2025Accept-Ranges: bytes Articles From the Gerson HealingNewsletter Articles From the Gerson Healing Newsletter Online Selections from current and past Gerson HealingNewsletters We find one of Dr. Gerson's patients ... Are Soy Products Dangerous? Mad Cow Disease: The approaching era of BSE ... Revenge of the Cannibal Cows Cure of a Small Cell Lung Cancer 11 Frequently Asked Questions about the Gerson Therapy Root Canal Cover-Up, Are your teeth killing you? Cure and Prevention of Diabetes Healing Modern Diseases with the Gerson Therapy Chemotherapy and the Gerson Patient Clinical Depression: A Biochemical Problem Alternate Therapies: Gaining Mainstream Acceptance Patient Story: Recovery from Brain Cancer Medical Professors Cure Own Cancers with Gerson Therapy ... Colon Cancer with Liver metastases, Breastcancer About the Gerson Healing Newsletter. Subscribe to the Newsletter return to The Gerson Therapy homepage email: mail@gerson.org The Gerson Institute Post Office Box 430 Bonita,CA 91908-0430 Tel: 619 585 7600 Fax: 619 585 7610 Copyright (c) 1994, 1995, 1996 The Gerson Institute,All rights reserved. This page last updated November 21, 1996 - hds. WT02-B03-100IA008-000090-B019-160http://www.gerson.com:80/six.html 207.158.200.123 19970222122903 text/html 939HTTP/1.1 200 OKDate: Sat, 22 Feb 1997 12:29:21 GMTServer: Apache/1.2b4Connection: closeContent-Type: text/htmlLast-Modified: Mon, 09 Dec 1996 22:58:23 GMTETag: "89e77b-2bb-32ac998f"Content-Length: 699Accept-Ranges: bytes Gerson Institute suggested Resources Gerson Institute Suggested Resources Juicer Information Source for Organic Coffee Gerson Therapy Bread Source for Flax Oil Source for Water Distiller Rainshow'r - Chlorine Shower Filter Alpine Ozone Generator The Gerson Therapy Copyright 1994,1995 (c) The Gerson Institute, All rights reserved.WT02-B03-101IA008-000090-B019-191http://www.gerson.com:80/links.html 207.158.200.123 19970222122911 text/html 2231HTTP/1.1 200 OKDate: Sat, 22 Feb 1997 12:29:34 GMTServer: Apache/1.2b4Connection: closeContent-Type: text/htmlLast-Modified: Fri, 20 Dec 1996 23:13:01 GMTETag: "83031b-7c6-32bb1d7d"Content-Length: 1990Accept-Ranges: bytes  Links to related Organizations Links to other holistic resources on the Internet The following is a list of links to other holistic healing organizations.If you know of an organization's webpage that you think we should add,please contact us atwebmaster@gerson.org Please note: The following list of pages does notconstitute a list of endorsed organizations or products. We offer this listin the intrest of mutual promotion and education of the public in otherHolistic Internet resources. The Christian Health and Lifestyle Center Homepage The Health Action Network Society Worldwide Wellness Homepage HealthWorld Online MedWeb The AlternativeNews Center SANTELAlternative Medicine links RosalieVincent Association The American Apitherapy Home Page. COSE (Center for SomaditianOrthobiology) Homepage. The Planet Wellness HomePage, a compendium of Internet wellness sites. The Alternative Health Email site Medmarket.com The Alternative HealthDigest Home Page. Copyright 1994,1995,1996 (c) The Gerson Institute. All rights reserved. WT02-B03-102IA008-000090-B019-210http://www.gerson.com:80/treatmnt.html 207.158.200.123 19970222122919 text/html 2364HTTP/1.1 200 OKDate: Sat, 22 Feb 1997 12:29:43 GMTServer: Apache/1.2b4Connection: closeContent-Type: text/htmlLast-Modified: Mon, 09 Dec 1996 22:59:56 GMTETag: "86f12c-84b-32ac99ec"Content-Length: 2123Accept-Ranges: bytes The Treatment The Treatment Thirteen glasses daily of various fresh raw juices prepared hourlyfrom organically grown fruits and vegetables. Three full vegetarian meals, freshly prepared from organically grownvegetables, fruits, and whole grains. Individual medications including:     a.  potassium compound,    b.  thyroid hormone,    c.  Lugol's Solution    d.  injectable crude liver extract with B-12,    e.  pancreatic enzymes,    f.  enemas of coffee and/or chamomile tea,    g.  castor oil The Gerson Therapy is an intensive, nutrition-based, medicaltreatment. It works closely with nature to help the sick body to riditself of disease through the supportive effects of simple foods,juices, and non-toxic medication. The main features of the diet are:     1) sodium restriction,    2) potassium supplementation,    3) extreme fat restriction,    4) periodic (temporary) protein restriction,    5) high vitamin,    6) high mineral,    7) fluid rich,    8) high micronutrient. Although the diet allows for some cooked foods, emphasis is placed onthe consumption of unaltered foods. Fresh, raw fruits and vegetablesare the source materials of all micronutrients in their pristineorganic composition. Beyond supplying adequate quantities of allknown nutrients, the use of specific raw fruits and vegetables andtheir juices ensures that patients receive even those healthpromoting factors not yet appreciated by science. Medications used in the Gerson Therapy are classed as biologicals,materials of organic origin which are found in the body and aresupplied in therapeutic amounts. An important treatment employed as part of the Gerson Therapy isfrequent detoxification of tissues and blood by coffee enemas whichcause stimulation of enzyme systems of the gut wall and liver andpromote excretion of toxic bile. Copyright 1995, 1996 (c) The Gerson Institute, All rights reserved.WT02-B03-103IA008-000090-B019-235http://www.gerson.com:80/mission.html 207.158.200.123 19970222122927 text/html 2517HTTP/1.1 200 OKDate: Sat, 22 Feb 1997 12:29:50 GMTServer: Apache/1.2b4Connection: closeContent-Type: text/htmlLast-Modified: Mon, 09 Dec 1996 22:55:56 GMTETag: "83b228-8e4-32ac98fc"Content-Length: 2276Accept-Ranges: bytes  The Gerson Institute Mission Statement The Gerson Institute and Cancer Curing Society Mission Statement The Gerson Institute is a nonprofit organization dedicated to healing and preventing chronic and degenerative diseases, based on the vision, philosophy, and the successful work of Dr. Max Gerson. We teach people worldwide to take responsibility for their health, and we offer a proven method for achieving and maintaining wellness. These are the principles that guide our actions as a Group and our attitudes toward our clients, members, donors, employees and the general public: We maintain the highest level of integrity and ethical standards. We achieve our purpose by worldwide lectures and seminars, publication and distribution of works by and about Dr. Max Gerson and his therapy, as well as supporting literature in every possible medium and language to reach diverse populations. We utilize every means of media to educate and spread the word about the Gerson Therapy. We donate books, videotapes, and audiotapes to libraries, non-profit organizations and community groups. We train and certify medical professionals in the practice of the Gerson Therapy. We provide referrals to treatment centers, practitioners, and other services. We share information and offer assistance to patients seeking a community of support. We will track patient records for the purpose of long-term results analysis by our own and other researchers, and will maintain a research staff with the goal of publishing the available results. We promote environmental responsibility. We encourage self-empowerment in clients, staff and the public. Respect for our employees is of highest importance, for their personal growth, individual development and advancement in the organization. We will employ the best people without regard to race or gender or any other differences unrelated to performance. We raise funds necessary to sustain the Institute's goals through corporations, foundations, individuals, marketing, and other sources. The Gerson Therapy Copyright 1994,1995, 1996 (c) The Gerson Institute, All rights reserved.WT02-B03-104IA008-000090-B019-264http://www.gerson.com:80/maxbio.html 207.158.200.123 19970222122936 text/html 3859HTTP/1.1 200 OKDate: Sat, 22 Feb 1997 12:29:59 GMTServer: Apache/1.2b4Connection: closeContent-Type: text/htmlLast-Modified: Mon, 09 Dec 1996 22:54:31 GMTETag: "83e454-e22-32ac98a7"Content-Length: 3618Accept-Ranges: bytes Gerson Therapy-Dr. Max Gerson's Biography       Max Gerson, M. D. 1881 - 1959 Dr. Max Gerson's Biography Dr. Max Gerson, M. D. was born in 1881 in Wongrowitz, Germany. Heattended the Universities of Breslau, Wuerzburg, Berlin and Freiburg.He was the director of a special department of tuberculosis at theMunich University Hospital under the sponsorship of Dr. FerdinandSauerbruch, a world famous thoracic surgeon and tuberculosisauthority. As a young German medical student, Gerson suffered from severemigraine headaches. He had been told that they were untreatable, andthat he would have to learn to live with them. To his joy, Gersonfound that by restricting his diet, by avoiding salt, fats, pickledand smoked foods, and by eating fresh fruits and vegetables, he couldcontrol them. Soon, he was sharing this new "migraine diet" with hispatients. One of Gerson's patients insisted that the migraine diet had cured hisskin tuberculosis. Gerson listened, carefully weighing thepossibility that the diet might somehow be enhancing immunity. Hedecided that it might be true, and set out to validate it. In theprocess, his work came to the attention of Sauerbruch. A new era inmedicine was born. In 1929, Sauerbruch announced Gerson's dietarytherapy as a cure for skin TB, publishing simultaneously in a dozen ofthe world's leading peer-reviewed scientific journals. Sauerbruch toldof a clinical trial of Gerson's dietary treatment in which 446 of 450TB patients achieved lasting cures (also mentioned in Sauerbruch'sautobiography, "Master Surgeon"). Gerson lectured in the principalcities of Europe until the pre-war political climate forced him toemigrate in 1933. During this time, Gerson attracted the friendship of Nobel Prizewinner Albert Schweitzer, M. D., by curing his wife of lungtuberculosis after she had failed to respond to all conventionalmanagements. 1934 saw the publication of "Diet Therapy for LungTuberculosis" (pub. Franz Deuticke, Leipzig and Vienna) in whichMrs. Schweitzer is documented case 45. Gerson and Schweitzer remainedfriends for life, and maintained a regular correspondence. Schweitzerfollowed Gerson's progress as the diet therapy was appliedsuccessfully to a wide variety of pathologies, including heart andkidney failure, and finally cancer. Schweitzer's own adult onsetdiabetes responded to Gerson's dietary treatment. In 1946, Gerson demonstrated recovered cancer patients before thePepper-Neely Congressional Sub-Committee, during hearings on S. 1875,a bill to authorize the President to wage war on cancer. Although onlya few peer-reviewed journals were receptive to his revolutionaryideas, Gerson continued to publish in the U. S. and abroad. Gerson died in 1959. He was eulogized by Albert Schweitzer: "I see in him one of the most eminent geniuses in the history ofmedicine. Many of his basic ideas have been adopted without havinghis name connected with them. Yet he has achieved more than seemedpossible under adverse conditions. He leaves a legacy which commandsattention and, which will assure him his due place. Those whom hecured will now attest to the truth of his ideas." The Gerson Therapy Copyright 1994,1995 (c) The Gerson Institute, All rights reserved. WT02-B03-105IA008-000090-B019-289http://www.gerson.com:80/biblio.html 207.158.200.123 19970222122944 text/html 15971HTTP/1.1 200 OKDate: Sat, 22 Feb 1997 12:30:07 GMTServer: Apache/1.2b4Connection: closeContent-Type: text/htmlLast-Modified: Mon, 09 Dec 1996 22:47:07 GMTETag: "83e3d7-3d70-32ac96eb"Content-Length: 15728Accept-Ranges: bytes Translation of the Titles of Scientific Works by Max Gerson, M.D. Translation of the Titles of Scientific Works by Max Gerson, M.D. 1907    Dissertation Article:  Influence of Artificial Hyperemia and Blood 		Transfusions in the Treatment of Fractures in the Hip Joint.1910    Bromocol Poisoning. Aerztliche Sachverstaendigen-Zeitung.1916    Myasthenic Bulbar Paralysis. Berliner Klinische Wochenschrift, 		No. 53.1918    Reflex Hyperesthesia. Zeitschrift fuer die gesamte Neurologie und 		Psychiatrie.1919    Paralysis Found in Diphtheria Carriers. Berliner Klinische        Wochenschrift, No. 12.1921    Concerning the Etiology of Multiple Sclerosis. Deutsche Zeitschrift 		fuer Nervenheilkunde.1924    Constitutional Basis for Nervous Symptoms. Fortschritte der Medizin, 		No. 1, p.9.1926    Experiments Attempting to Influence Severe Forms of Tuberculosis 		Through Dietetic Treatment. Muenchener Medizinische Wochenschrift, 		No. 2 and 3.1929    Origin and Development of the Dietetic Treatment of Tuberculosis. 		Die Medizinische Welt 1929, No. 37.1929    Treatment of Rickets and Tuberculosis, Deutsche Medizinische 		Wochenschrift, No. 38.1930    Several Experiments with the Gerson Diet in Tuberculosis.        Medizinische Welt.1930    Salt Association with Migraine (An early factor in dietetic        treatment).  Verhandlungen der Deutschen Gesellschaft fuer Innere		Medizin, No 23, p. 129.1930    Basic approaches to the Gerson Diet. Muenchener Medizinische 		Wochenschrift, No. 23, p. 967.1930    Phosphorus, Cod Liver Oil and the Gerson Diet in the Treatment of		Tuberculosis, Deutsche Medizinsche Wochenschrift No. 12.1930    Several Factors in Dietetic Treatment of Pulmonary Tuberculosis. 		Zeitschrift fuer Aerztliche Fortbildung, No. 11.1931    Nicotine as a Deterrent Factor in the Treatment of Lupus.        Verhandlungen der Deutschen Gesellschaft Fuer Innere Medizin.1931    Several Experiments in the Dietary Treatment of Tuberculosis. V		Verhandlungen der Deutschen Gesellschaft fuer Innere Medizin.1931    Resume of Varying Sensory Factors in the Treatment of Lupus.  		Verhandlungen der Deutschen Gesellschaft fuer Innere Medizin.1931    Basis Underlying Discontinuance of Salt Free Diet in Tuberculosis 		Sanitariums. Deutsche Medizinische Wochenschrift, No 8.1931    The Dietetic Problems of the Present Day in the Treatment        of Tuberculosis. The Journal of State Medicine Vol. XXXIX 		No. 8, London.1931    Sedimentation in the Dietetic Treatment of Lung Tuberculosis.         Zeitschrift fuer Tuberculose, Bd.63 Heft 5.1932    The Gerson Diet in Chronic Pulmonary Spastic Diseases        and Hypertension. Wiener Klinische Wochenschrift, No. 13.1932    Observations on the Gerson Diet.  Wiener Klinische Wochenschrift, 		No. 37.1932    The Gerson Diet in Practice - Technisch - Pharmazeutische         Aerztezeitung, Wien, No. 20.1932    Dietary Treatment of Migraine and Pulmonary Tuberculosis.         Wiener Klinische Wochenschrift 45:744-748, June 10, 1932.1932    Gerson Diet on Pulmonary Tuberculosis and Migraine.        Mitteilungen des Volksgesundheitsamtes, Wien, Heft 9.1932    Some Results of Diet Therapy in ((Kavernen)) after 		((vorausgegangener)) Surgical Treatment, Verhandlungen der Deutsche		Gesellschaft fuer Innere Medizin, Kong. 44, pp. 222-2241934    Psychic Reactions During the Gerson Diet in Pulmonary        Tuberculosis. Psychotherapeutische Praxis. Vol. 1, Heft 4.1935    High Fluid and Potassium Diet as Treatment in Cardiorenal          Insufficiency. Muenchener Medizinische Worhenschrift, 82(15),		571-574, Apr. 11, 1935.1935    Feeding of the Tubercular.  Wiener Klinische Wochenschrift, No. 9.1935    Nonspecific Desensitizations by Means of Diet in Allergic        Skin Diseases. Dermatologische Wochenschrift, 100:441, Apr. 20, 		1935; Dermatologische Wochenschrift, 100:448, Apr. 27, 19351935    The Recession of Inflammation in Gerson Diet with Special        Reference to Tubercular Inflammations.  Wiener        Klinsche Wochenschrift, No. 25.1935    The Administration of Liver Extract in Relation to Diet in        the Treatment of Chronic Diseases. Wiener Medizinische        Wochenschrift, No. 40.1935    The Gerson Diet in Home Practice, Der Oesrerreichische Arzt. 		Folge 2, Jahrgang 2.1941    Feeding the German Army. New York State Journal of Medicine, No. 41.1943    Some Aspects of the Problem of Fatigue. The Medical        Record, New York, Vol. 156, No. 6.1945    Dietary Considerations in Malignant Neoplastic Disease.        Review of Gastroenterology. 12(6), 419-425, Nov.-Dec., 1945.1948    The Significance of the Content of Soil to Human Disease.1949    Effect of a Combined Dietary Regime on Patients with Malignant Tumors.		Experimental Medicine and Surgery, New York, 7: 299-317, Nov., 1949.1954    No Cancer in Normal Metabolism. Medizinische Klinik, Munich, No. 5, 		page 175-179.1954    Cancer a Problem of Metabolism. Medizinische Klinik, Munich, No. 26.1955    Cancer is a Problem of Soil, Nutrition, Metabolism.1955    Are Soil, Food and Metabolic Disturbances Basically Responsible for		Cancer Development?1955    The Gerson Therapy and Practice in the Prevention of and Treatment		for Cancer.1955    Five Case Histories.1955    Cancer Development and Treatment.  Lecture  at the        Academy of Applied Nutrition (Pasadena).1956    Rehabilitation of the Cancer Patient.1956    The Problem of Cancer Based upon the Law of Totality.1956    The Historic Development of the Combined Dietary Regime in Cancer.1957    Can Cancer be Prevented? Prevention Magazine1957    New Therapeutical Approach to Cancer,1957    Cancer - Reflected Symptoms of Abnormal Metabolism.1978	The Cure of Advanced Cancer by Diet Therapy: A Summary of 30		Years of Clinical Experimentation", (Lecture given in 1956), 		Physiological Chemistry and Physics 10:449-463, 1978.  Books by Max Gerson, M. D. 1934    Diet Therapy of Lung Tuberculosis. Franz Deuticke, Vienna        and Leipzig (with monographs and X-ray pictures of the cases).1936    My Diet. - Edited - Berlin 1930.1954    Diet Therapy in Malignant Diseases (Cancer). Scala,        Handbuch der Diaetetik, Vienna, Franz Deuticke.1958    A Cancer Therapy - Results of Fifty Cases. Gerson Institute. References Urbach, E. & Lewinn, E. B - "Skin Disease, Nutrition and Metabolism", 	published by Grunn & Stratton, New York, 1946Cope, F. W. - "A Medical Application of the Ling Association-Induction 	Hypothesis: the High Potassium, Low Sodium Diet of the Gerson	Cancer Therapy", Physiological Chemistry and Physics, 10(5): 465-468, 1978Cone, C. D. - "Unified Theory on the Basic Mechanism of Normal Mitotic Control	and Oncogenesis", Journal of Theoretical Biology, 30, 151-181, 1971Zs.-Nagy, I., Lustyik, G., Zs.-Nagy, V. and Balazs, G. - "Correlation of 	Malignancy with Intracellular Na:K Ratio in Human Thyroid Tumors", 	Cancer Research 43, 5395-5402, November 1983.Cope, F. W., - "Pathology of Structured Water and Associated Cations in Cells	(the Tissue Damage Syndrome) and its Medical Treatment", Physiological	Chemistry and Physics, 9(6), 547-553, 1977.Ling, G. N., - "The Association-Induction Hypothesis: A Theoretical Foundation	Provided for the Possible Beneficial Effects of a Low Na, High K Diet	and Other Similar Regimens in the Treatment of Patients Suffering from	Debilitating Illnesses", Agressologie, 24(7), 293-302, 1983.Good, R. A., - "Zinc and Immunity", Clinical Immunology Today, 12, Jan., 1985.Kramer, T. and Good, R. A., - "Increased In Vitro Cell-Mediated Immunity in	Protein Malnourished Guinea Pigs", Clin. Immunol. Immunopathol. 11, 212-	228, 1978.Robbins, S. L. - "Pathology", Published by W. B. Saunders, Philadelphia and 	London, 1967.Fernandes, G., Alonso, D. R., Tanaka, T., Thaler, H. T., Yunis, E. J., and 	Good, R. A., - "Influence of Diet on Vascular Lesions in Autoimmune-prone	B/W Mice", Proceedings of the National Academy of Science, 80, 874-877,	Feb., 1983.Friend, P. S, Fernandes, M. S., Good, R. A., Michael, A. F., Yunis, E. J.,	"Dietary Restrictions Early and Late: Effects on the Nephropathy of the 	NZB x NZW Mouse", Lab. Investigations 38(6), 629-632, 1978.Fernandes, G., Friend, P., Yunis, E. J., and Good, R. A., - "Influence of 	Dietary Restriction on Immunologic Function and Renal Disease in (NZB 	x NZW)Fl Mice", Proceedings of the National Academy of Science, 75(3), 	1500-1504, 1978.Fernandes, G., Yunis, E. J., Miranda, M., Smith, J., & Good, R. A., - 	"Nutritional Inhibition of Genetically Determined Renal Disease and 	Autoimmunity with Prolongation of Life in kdkd Mice", Proceedings of	the National Academy of Science, 75(6), 2888-2892, June, 1978.Fernandes, G. & Good, R. A., - "Inhibition by Restricted Calorie Diet of	Lymphoproliferative Disease and Renal Damage in MRL/lpr Mice", 	Proceedings of the National Academy of Science, 81, 6144-6148, Oct., 1984.Good, R. A., West, A., Day, N. K., Dong, Z-W., Fernandes, G., - "Effects of	Undernutrition on Host Cell and Organ Function", Cancer Research (Suppl.)	42, 737s-746s, Feb., 1982.Good, R. A., Fernandes, G., and Day, N. D., "The Influence of Nutrition on	Development of Cancer Immunity and Resistance to Mesenchymal Diseases", 	Molecular Interrelations of Nutrition and Cancer, M.S. Arnott, J. van Eys,	and Y. M. Wang (eds.) (New York: Raven Press, 1982).Sarkar, N. H., Fernandes, G., Talang, N. T., Kourides, I. A., & Good, R. A.	"Low Calorie Diet Prevents the Development of Mammary Tumors in C3H Mice	and Reduces Prolactin Level, Murine Mammary Virus Expression, and Pro-	liferation of Mammary Alveolar Cells", Proceedings of the National Academy	of Science, 79, 7758-7762, Dec., 1982.Good, R. A., Fernandes, G. & Day, N. K., - "The Influence of Nutrition on 	Development of Cancer Immunity and Resistance to Mesenchymal Diseases, 	Molecular Interrelations of Nutrition and Cancer", published by Raven 	Press, New York, 1982.American Cancer Society, "The Gerson Method", Unproven Methods of Cancer	Management (New York: American Cancer Society, 1961 ).Beeson, Paul B., "Changes in Medical Therapy During the Past Half Century",	Medicine 59:79-99, 1980.Bonner, Thomas Neville, American Doctors and German Universities: A Chapter in	International Relations 1870- 1914 (Lincoln, Nebraska: University of	Nebraska Press, 1963).Cairns, John, "The Treatment of Diseases and the War Against Cancer",	Scientific American 253:51-59, 1985.Cone, Clarence D., Jr., "Unified Theory on the Basic Mechanism of Normal	Mitotic Control and Oncogenesis", Journal of Theoretical Biology	30:151 - 181, 1971.Cope, Freeman W., "A Medical Application of the Ling Association-Induction	Hypothesis: The High Potassium, Low Sodium Diet of the Gerson Cancer	Therapy", Physiological Chemistry and Physics 10:465-467, 1978.Council on Pharmacy and Chemistry, American Medical Association, Report of the	Council, "Cancer and the Need for Facts", JAMA 139:93-98, Jan. 8, 1949.Crile, Geo., Jr., "Factors Influencing the Spread of Cancer", Surgery,	Gynecology and Obstetrics 103:342-352, Sept. 1956.Hoffman, Frederick L., Cancer and Diet: With Facts and Observations on Related	Subjects (Baltimore, MD: Williams and Wilkins Co., 1937).Journal of American Medical Association, "Gerson's Cancer Treatment",	editorial, JAMA 132:645-646, Nov. 16, 1946.Keusch, Gerald T., Wilson, Carla S., and Waksal, Samuel D., "Nutrition, Host	Defenses, and the Lymphoid System", Advances in Host Defense Mechanisms, 	John I. Gallin and Anthony S. Fauci (eds.) (New York: Raven Press, 1983), 	Vol. 2.Lai, Chiu-Nan and Becker, Frederick F., "Potassium-induced Reverse	Transformation of Cells Infected With a Temperature sensitive	Transformation Mutant Virus", Journal of Cellular Physiology 125:259-262, 	1985.Lechner, Peter, "Dietary Regime to be Used in Oncological Postoperative Care",	translated from the German as presented at Graz, Austria, June 21-23,	1984.Ling, G. N., "The Association-induction Hypothesis: A Theoretical Foundation	Provided for the Possible Beneficial Effects of a Low Sodium, High	Potassium Diet and Other Similar Regimens in the Treatment of Patients	Suffering From Debilitating Illnesses", Agressologie 24:293-302, 1983.Lowell, James, "The Gerson Clinic", Nutrition Forum 3:9-12, Feb. 1986.Lurie, Max B., "The Reticuloendothelial System, Cortisone, and Thyroid	Function: Their Relation to Native Resistance to Infection", Annals	of the New York Academy of Science 44:43-94, 1960.  McCarty, Mark F., "Aldosterone and the Gerson Diet - A Speculation", 	Medical Hypotheses 7:591-597, 1981.Moss, Ralph W., The Cancer Syndrome (New York: Grove Press, Inc., 1980,	176-178.  Natenberg, Maurice, The Cancer Blackout: A History of Denied and Suppressed	Remedies (Chicago: Regent House, 1959), 136-145.Neuburger, Max, Die Lehre von der Heilkraft der Natur in Wandel der Zeiten	(Stuttgart, 1926).Neuburger, Max, "An Historical Study of the Concept of Nature from a Medical	Viewpoint", Isis 35:16-28, 1944.Newell, Guy R., and Ellison, Neil M. (eds.), Nutrition and Cancer: Etiology	and Treatment (New York: Raven Press, 1981).Regelson, William, "The 'Grand Conspiracy' Against the Cancer Cure"	(Commentary), JAMA 243:337-339, Jan.  25, 1980.Rorty, James, American Medicine Mobilizes (New York: W. W. Norton & Co., Inc.,	1939).Sauerbruch, Ferdinand, Master Surgeon, trans. Fernand G. Renier and Anne Cliff	(New York: Thomas Y. Crowell, 1953), 167-171.Seifter, Eli, and Weinzweig, Jeffrey, "Contributions of Dr. Max Gerson to	Nutritional Chemistry", paper presented at 1985 meeting of American	Chemical Society, History of Chemistry Division (abstract supplied by	Gar Hildenbrand).Shimkin, Michael B., "Neoplasia," Advances in American Medicine: Essays at the	Bicentennial, John Z. Bowers and Elizabeth F.  Purcell (eds.)  (New York:	Josiah Macy Foundation, 1976), Vol. 1, 210-250.Siguel, Eduardo N., "Cancerostatic Effect of Vegetarian Diets", Nutrition and	Cancer 4:285-289, 1983.Simone, Charles B., Cancer and Nutrition (New York: McGraw-Hill Book Co.,	1983), 64.Tannenbaum, Albert, and Silverstone, Herbert, "Nutrition in Relation to	Cancer", Advances in Cancer Research 1:452-505, 1953.Thorbecke, G.J., and Benacerraf, B., "The Reticulo-Endothelial System and	Immunological Phenomena" Progress in Allergy 6:559-598, 1962.United States Congress, Senate, Subcommittee of the committee on Foreign	Relations, Cancer Research, hearings July 1, 2, and 3, 1946 (Washington, 	DC: U.S.  Government Printing Office, 1946).Warner, John Harley, "'The Nature-Trusting Heresy': American Physicians and	the Concept of the Healing Power of Nature in the 1850's and 1860's"	Perspectives in American History 11:291-324, 1978. The Gerson Institute Copyright 1995, 1996 (c) The Gerson Institute, All rights reserved.WT02-B03-106IA008-000090-B019-322http://www.gerson.com:80/history.html 207.158.200.123 19970222122954 text/html 39932HTTP/1.1 200 OKDate: Sat, 22 Feb 1997 12:30:15 GMTServer: Apache/1.2b4Connection: closeContent-Type: text/htmlLast-Modified: Mon, 09 Dec 1996 22:51:23 GMTETag: "83e3cf-9b09-32ac97eb"Content-Length: 39689Accept-Ranges: bytes History of the Gerson Therapy History of the Gerson Therapy by Dr. Patricia Spain Ward It is one of the least edifying facts of recent American medical history thatthe profession's leadership so long rejected as quackish the idea thatnutrition affects health (JAMA 1946 1949, 1977; Shimkin, 1976). Ignoring boththe empirical dietary wisdom that pervaded western medicine from thepre-Christian Hippocratic era until the late nineteenth century and apersuasive body of modern research in nutritional biochemistry, thepolitically minded spokesmen of organized medicine in the U.S. remained long committed to surgery and radiation as the sole acceptable treatments forcancer. This commitment persisted, even after sound epidemiological datashowed that early detection and removal of malignant tumors did not "cure"most kinds of cancer (Crile, 1956; updated by Cairns, 1985). The historical record shows that progress lagged especially in cancerimmunotherapy - including nutrition and hyperthermia - because power overprofessional affiliation and publication (and hence over practice andresearch) rested with men who were neither scholars nor practitioners norresearchers themselves, and who were often unequipped to grasp the rapidlyevolving complexities of the sciences underlying mid-twentieth-centurymedicine. Nowhere is this maladaption of professional structure to medicine's changingscientific context more tragically illustrated than in the American experienceof Max B. Gerson (1881- 1959), founder of the best-known nutritional treatmentfor cancer of the pre-macrobiotic era. A scholar's scholar and a superlativeobserver of clinical phenomena, Gerson was a product of the German medicaleducation which Americans in the late 19th and early 20th centuries consideredso superior to our own that all who could afford it went to Germany to perfecttheir training (Bonner, 1963). As a medical graduate of the University ofFreiburg in 1909, Gerson imbibed all of the latest in scientific medicine,with the emphasis on specificity which bacteriology had brought into westernmedical thought in the preceding decades. Gerson subsequently worked withleading German specialists in internal medicine, in physiological chemistry,and in neurology (U.S. Congress, 1946, 98). The historical record does nottell us whether his medical education in Germany (where much of the early workin nutritional chemistry took place) included a study of diet, a subjectneglected in American medical schools after the germ theory gained acceptance. We do know that by 1919, when Gerson set up a practice in internal and nervousdiseases in Bielefeld, he had devised an effective dietary treatment for themigraine headaches which frequently disabled him, despite the best efforts ofhis colleagues. In 1920, while treating migraine patients by this salt-freevegetarian diet, he discovered that it was also effective in lupus vulgaris(tuberculosis of the skin, then considered incurable) and, later, in arthritisas well (U.S. Congress, 1946, 98). Trained in the theories of specific disease causation and treatment that beganto dominate western medicine - for the first time in history - asbacteriological discoveries multiplied in the late nineteenth century, Gersonwas at first uneasy about using a single therapy in such seemingly disparateconditions. But he was committed to the primacy of clinical evidence, whichhe liked to express in Kussmaul's dictum: "The result at the sick-bed isdecisive" (quoted in Gerson, 1958, 212). In later years, after research beganto provide explanations for Gerson's clinical observations, he quotedChurchill on the mistaken course of action he had thus avoided: "Menoccasionally stumble over the truth, but most pick themselves up and hurry offas if nothing had happened" (Gerson, 1958, 212). Gerson persisted. In 1924his success in treating tuberculosis of the skin brought an invitation fromthe noted thoracic surgeon, Ferdinand Sauerbruch, to test Gerson's diet in aspecial lupus clinic to be provided by the Bavarian government at theUniversity of Munich. As Sauerbruch recounts it in his autobiography, 446patients out of 450 recovered - once he had discovered and put an end to thesmuggling of sausages, cream and beer to the patients in the late afternoons (Sauerbruch, 1953, 167- 171 ). Later extended to pulmonary tuberculosis aswell, this Gerson-Sauerbruch-Hermannsdorfer diet was widely used in Germanyand became the subject of Gerson's first book in 1934 (Gerson, 1934;Hildenbrand, 1987 communication). During the late twenties and early thirties Gerson had several experienceswhich informed his later thinking on diet and degenerative disease. As amember of the State Board of Health, appointed by the Prussian government, hewas given extraordinary laboratory support for a clinical trial of diet inpulmonary tuberculosis. Besides the physiological parameters customarilymonitored in such work, Gerson was able to track minute fluctuations in thepatients' mineral metabolism and also in the chemical composition of the foodshe prescribed (Gerson, 1958, 183). At this same period he served as consultantto the Prussian Ministry of Health on the best ways to restore to agriculturalusefulness the exhausted soil around several major German cities (Gerson,1958, 183). When he learned that modern farming methods often rob plant foodsof their natural mineral and vitamin riches, while increasing their sodiumcontent, he began to think of the earth's well-being as central to our own.Eventually he began to refer to the soil, which nourishes the food we eat, asour "external metabolism" (Gerson 1958, 175). It was in 1928 that Gerson first used his diet in cancer, at the insistence ofa woman who had jaundice, high fever and two small liver metastases afterunsuccessful surgery for cancer of the bile duct (Gerson, 1958, 31). On thestrength of reports she had heard of Gerson's work with tuberculosis, thiswoman insisted that he write out a diet for the treatment of her cancer.Gerson reluctantly agreed - after he obtained her signed statement that shewould not hold him responsible for the outcome! As he recalled it many yearslater, this same patient had him read aloud to her a chapter called "TheHealing of Cancer" from a big book of about 1200 pages on folk medicine, "edited by three schoolteachers and one physician, none of them practitioners.It was from this source that Gerson first learned of the special soup whichHippocrates supposedly gave to cancer patients and which Gerson made a fixtureof his cancer Therapy (Gerson, 1958, 31, 403-404; Gerson, 1978, 449-450).Having taken up this challenge against his will, with no hope of success,Gerson was astounded when his patient seemed fully recovered within six months(Gerson, 1958, 405). In quick succession he had the same good results with twopatients with inoperable stomach cancer, both referred by this first patient.Late in life he continues to marvel at these apparent recoveries under hisdiet treatment (Gerson, 1958, 404- 405). (These notable histories, whichGerson recounted in some detail, have prompted one recent researcher tosuggest the possible involvement of aldoslerone as the mechanism ofmineral-corticoid sensitivity in gastrointestinal tumors. See McCarty, 1981). In Vienna, where he lived for a time after the rise of Hitler, Gerson'streatment failed in all seven patients he attempted to treat in this manner -a failure which, in later years, he attributed to inadequate dietaryprovisions in the sanitarium where he then worked (Gerson, 1958, 31-32, 405).In Paris, where he lived in 1935-36, the diet produced good results in threeout of seven cases (Gerson, 1958, 32, 405; Gerson, 1978, 451), inspiring himto pursue such treatment further after he emigrated to the United States in1938. Gerson constantly sought explanations for his observations in the scientificliterature, where he read widely in several languages (Gerson, 1958). In 1954,in "Cancer, a Problem of Metabolism," he credited J. Maisin (1923) and B.Fischer-Wasels (1929) with advancing physiological explanations of generalpredisposition toward tumor formation and abandoning the theory of cancercausation by local irritation. For the next few decades (according toGerson's account of the evolution of cancer concepts) there was a tendency tointerpret cancer in terms of constitution and diathesis, as was done withdiabetes, gout and tuberculosis. It was Caspari (Nutrition and Cancer, 1938)who turned to metabolic explanation of the kind Gerson ultimately favored(Gerson, 1954, 1). He devoted an entire chapter of his book to a review ofefforts, largely by German researchers, to alter metabolism by diet (Gerson,1958, 89-104). He found special appeal in Otto Warburg, The Metabolism ofTumors, (London, 1930), in G. von Bergmann's Funktionelle Pathologie (Berlin,1932), and in Frederick Hoffman's massive compilation, Cancer and Diet(Baltimore, 1937). Gradually, out of his bedside experience and his reading,he formed a unitary theory of degenerative disease (including cancer) whichrested on one of the oldest and most pervasive concepts in the history ofmedicine: the vis medicatrix naturae or healing power of nature (Neuburger,1926 and 1944; Warner, 1978). Endlessly seeking out the latest researches andtheories in physiology, biochemistry, and - increasingly - immunology, Gersonrapidly integrated these massive bodies of new detail into the largerframework of what he called "the physician within", that is, the natural powers of resistance,which we today call the immune system. Gerson believed that cancer changes the body's normal sodium/potassiumbalance, already disturbed by modern diet. Thus his therapy used foods low insodium (no salt added), high in potassium, and rich in vitamins A and C andoxidizing enzymes. He excluded fats and dairy products for the first four tosix weeks, considering them dangerously burdensome to the digestion in theextremely sick patients who usually came to him only after having exhaustedconventional measures. Above all it was essential for patients to eliminateexcess sodium, which Gerson believed responsible for altering cellularelectrochemistry in favor of cancerous growth. There is now a great deal of research suggesting possible mechanisms for theefficacy of Gerson's high potassium/low sodium diet. As he suspected and wenow know, hypokalemia often accompanies cancer of the colon, and alterationsin electrical and mineral states occur often in cancer patients (Newell, 1981,87). Cone has furnished experimental proof of a correlation between the levelof electrical potential across somatic cell membranes and the intensity ofmitotic activity (Cone, 1971 ), a finding supported by Zs.-Nagy and hiscolleagues in studies so human thyroid cancer (Zs. -Nagy, 1983) . Ling'sassociation/induction hypothesis is based on laboratory studies which showthat damaged cells partially return to their normal configuration in highpotassium/low sodium environments (Ling, 1943), perhaps explaining theremarkable tissue repair which Gerson sometimes saw in his formerlydebilitated patients (Cope, 1978). Lai has suggested that intracellular sodiumand potassium levels may furnish the mechanism for regulating cellulardifferentiation and transformation (Lai, 1985) . To supply active oxidation enzymes and potassium-rich minerals, Gerson'spatients drank hourly glasses of freshly prepared vegetable and fruit juices.As early as 1933-34, while living in Vienna, Gerson had begun givinginjections of liver extract, as another means of stimulating the patient'sliver (Gerson, 1958, 31 -32). In later years he had patients drink two tothree glasses daily of the juice of calves' liver pressed with carrots. Inaddition to beta-carotene/vitamin A, this would supply iron and copper, bothof which affect peripheral T cell functions and other peripheral lymphocytesubpopulations (Keusch, 1983, 345- 347). Although the AMA Council on Pharmacy and Chemistry labeled as a "false notion"the idea that diet can affect cancer, recent researchers have found that"nutritional status plays a critical role in immunological defense mechanismsat a number of important levels" (Keusch, 1983, 345) and that nutritionalfactors "can have profound influences on ... the development andmanifestations of cancers" as well as other diseases (Good, 1982, 85). In "TheCancerostatic Effect of Vegetarian Diets" ( 1983), Siguel describes as theideal way to strengthen bodily defenses against neoplastic cells a dietsimilar to Gerson's: high in carbohydrates and vegetables, low in protein. Like von Bergmann, Gerson believed that "every defense and healing power ofthe body depends on the capacity of the body to produce a so-called 'allergicinflammation'"- a truth long recognized by surgeons, but somehow forgotten bymedicine during the heyday of microbiology. To Gerson this capacity toproduce inflammation was "the decisive part of the body's 'weapon of healingpower'" (Gerson, 1958, 127-28). Noting that fluid from a normal inflammation metabolism kills cancer cells,but that blood serum does not, von Bergmann concluded that a cancer metabolismoccurs when the body can no longer produce this healing inflammatory reaction(Gerson, 1958, 120- 121 ). Gerson agreed, but in contrast to von Bergmann andmost of his contemporaries, Gerson believed it was often possible for thephysician to help restore the vital power of inflammation, even in anergicpatients with advanced cancer. If cancer was a degenerative disease caused bythe cumulative effect of inadequate nutrition with foods grown in soilsdepleted by artificial fertilizers and poisoned by toxic insecticides andherbicides, doctors must respond by replenishing the entire human organism.For a condition that represented an ultimate failure of equilibrium in apoisoned metabolism, removal of tumors by surgery or radiation was merelysuperficial, symptomatic treatment. "Medicine," Gerson said, "must be able toadapt its therapeutic methods to the damages of the processes of our moderncivilization" (Gerson, 1958, 199). Gerson set about doing this by altering the basic diet he had used earlier inother conditions. Through meticulous observation of his patients in New York(where he passed state boards in 1939), he perfected a regimen of detoxicationand diet requiring a high degree of compliance by the patient, heroic devotionby the patient's family, and close attention and frequent adjustment by thephysician. His therapy aimed to detoxify the body and restore its healingapparatus, especially the liver, the visceral nervous system, and thereticulo-mesenchymal system. Gerson first encountered the idea of detoxication in cancer in the version ofHippocratic regimen which he read with his first cancer patient in Bielefeldin 1928 (Gerson, 1958, 404). After losing several cancer patients to hepaticcoma rather than to direct effects of the disease (Gerson, 1958, 191 ), herealized that "The digestive tract is very much poisoned in cancer'. Theliver and pancreas failed to function: "nothing is active" (Gerson, 1958,407). To stimulate the liver, he began to use coffee enemas, which 0.A. Meyerof Goettingen had found effective in opening the bile ducts in animals andwhich American surgeons in that period were using in acute adrenalinsufficiency and in shock from postoperative hemorrhage and bleeding pepticulcer (Beeson, 1980, 90, 96; Rothstein, 1987, 124). As he watched the progressof his patients, he found that he could accelerate detoxication by givingcoffee enemas more frequently, with the addition of castor oil, by mouth andby rectum (Gerson, 1958, 81). Although Gerson used caffeine enemas primarily to facilitate excretion oftoxic wastes, especially from necrosing tumors, we now realize that theseenemas also promoted the absorption of vitamin A, a process requiring theaction of bile acids (Simone, 1943, 64). Thus the enemas that brought ridiculefrom Gerson's enemies actually enabled his patients to use the enormousamounts of vitamin A which his diet provided (recently estimated at about100,000 IU daily: see Seifter, 1988). Vitamin A, in turn, plays a vital rolein immune function, perhaps by causing the helper cells to induce theproduction of interleukin-2, or by causing killer cell precursors to activatecytotoxic mechanisms, or by causing suppressor T cells to eliminate downregulation (Keusch, 1983, 330-331 ). Gerson also found that caffeine enemas greatly reduce pain, a particular boonin his regimen, which avoids the use of opiates and other painkilling drugsthat might overtax the liver at a time when its limited capacity is needed forimmune functions and for eliminating the toxic products of tumor breakdown. Although the AMA Council on Pharmacy and Chemistry labeled as a "false notion"the idea that diet can affect cancer, recent researchers have found that"nutritional status plays a critical role in immunological defense mechanismsat a number of important levels" (Keusch, 1983, 345) and that nutritionalfactors "can have profound influences on ... the development andmanifestations of cancers" as well as other diseases (Good, 1982, 85). In "TheCancerostatic Effect of Vegetarian Diets" ( 1983), Siguel describes as theideal way to strengthen bodily defenses against neoplastic cells a dietsimilar to Gerson's: high in carbohydrates and vegetables, low in protein. Gerson gradually added a few medications to his diet. One of these wasniacin, which he believed would help restore proper intracellular potential,raise depleted liver stores of glycogen and potassium, and aid in proteinmetabolism (Gerson, 1958, 32, 99- 100, 209). Another was iodine, which Gersoninitially used only in cases of low metabolic rates. When he found that "Thebest range of healing power" was a BMR of +6 to +8 (monitored by organiciodine in blood serum), and that iodine seemed to counteract the neoplasticeffect of hormones, he incorporated iodine into the basic regimen, at first inthe form of thyroid extract, later as inorganic Lugol's solution (iodine pluspotassium iodide) (Gerson, 1958, 32, 409; U.S. Congress, 1946, 114). Severalresearchers have showed that thyroid raises natural resistance to infection byaugmenting the power of reticuloendothelial cells and by increasing antibodyformation - thus supporting Gerson's hunch that iodine was a decisive factorin the normal differentiation of cells (Lurie, 1960; Thorbecke, 1962). Despite the fact that he had no inpatient facility until 1946, when he openeda clinic in Nanuet, New York, Gerson managed, through his thriving Park Avenuepractice and an affiliation at Gotham Hospital, to amass enough data topublish a preliminary report in 1945. He presented his rather remarkable casehistories modestly, concluding that he did not yet have enough evidence to saywhether diet could either influence the origin of cancer or alter the courseof an established tumor. He claimed only that the diet, which he described inconsiderable detail, could favorably affect the patient's general condition,staving off the consequences of malignancy and making further treatmentpossible (Gerson, 1945). Gerson may have struck an Establishment nerve with his statement that manyphysicians use surgery and/or radiation "without systematic treatment of thepatient as a whole" (Gerson, 1945, 419). But it seems more likely that it washis growing success in practice, or perhaps even his opposition to tobacco,that first drew the wrath of organized medicine. ( Philip Morris was thenJAMA's major source of advertising revenue: see Rorty, 1939, 182 - 194). In any case the AMA did not openly attack Gerson until November 1946, a fewmonths after he testified in support of a Senate bill to appropriate $100million to bring together the world's outstanding cancer experts in order tocoordinate a search for the prevention and cure of cancer. At hearings beforeSenator Claude Pepper's sub-committee in July 1946, Gerson demonstratedrecovered patients who had come to him after conventional methods could nolonger help. Dr. George Miley, medical director of the 85-bed GothamHospital, where Gerson had treated patients since January, 1946, gave strongsupporting medical testimony (U.S. Congress, 1946). In a surly editorial response, JAMA said it was "fortunate" that this Senateappearance received little newspaper publicity; the AMA was clearly outragedthat Gerson's appearance had become the subject of a favorable radiocommentary, broadcast nationwide by ABC's Raymond Gram Swing (U.S. Congress,1946, 31-35; JAMA, 1946). The JAMA editorial focused on Gerson, even though itwas not Gerson but a lay witness, immune to AMA retaliation, who had calledGerson's successes "miracles" and urged the Senators to secure their futurecancer commission against control by any existing medical organization (U.S.Congress, 1946, 96,97). It was not Gerson, but Dr. Miley, who told the Senators that a long-termsurvey by a well-known and respected physician showed that those who receivedno cancer treatment lived longer than those who received surgery, radiation orX-ray (U.S. Congress, 1946, 117). Perhaps because Miley was a Northwesternmedical graduate, an established physician licensed in four states, and afellow of the AMA and state and county societies of Pennsylvania and New York,Morris Fishbein did not attack him personally. Instead, he limited himself tointimations of fiscal impropriety in the Robinson Foundation, which ownedMiley's Gotham Hospital, and to the scandalous revelation that the director ofthe section on health education of this Foundation (which was promoting "anunestablished, somewhat questionable method of treating cancer") was not anM.D. at all, but a Yale University professor of economics! Compared to Miley's testimony, Gerson's was innocent, concentrating on thehistories of the patients he brought with him and on the likely mechanismswhereby his diet caused tumor regression and healing. Only under pressurefrom Senator Pepper did Gerson state that about 30% of those he treated showeda favorable response ( U.S. Congress, 1946, 115). Nonetheless, JAMA devotedtwo pages to undermining Gerson's integrity (JAMA, 1946). Showing no restraintwhere Gerson was concerned, Fishbein, contrary to fact, alleged that successeswith the Gerson-Sauerbruch-Hermannsdorfer diet "were apparently notsusceptible of duplication by most other observers. " He also falsely claimedthat Gerson had several times refused to supply the AMA with details of thediet. (Fishbein said he could provide them in this editorial only because"there has come to hand through a prospective patient" of Gerson a dietschedule for his treatment.) Fishbein emphasized, without comment, Gerson'scaution about the use of other medications, especially anesthetics, becausethey produced dangerously strong reactions in the heightened allergic state ofhis most responsive patients. Fishbein attempted to tie together this strange patchwork of slurs againstGerson and against research supported by lay-dominated industrial corporationswith his accustomed mastery of innuendo: "The entire performance, includingthe financial backing, the promotion and the scientific reports, has apeculiar effluvium which, to say the least, is distasteful and, at its worst,creates doubt and suspicion" (JAMA, 1946, 646). Through no fault of his own, Gerson was again portrayed favorably in the newsin 1947, when John Gunther, in Death Be Not Proud, credited Gerson withextending the life of Gunther's son during the boy's ultimately unsuccessfulstruggle with brain cancer. Beginning that same year the New York CountyMedical Society staged five "investigations" of Gerson and eventuallysuspended him for "advertising" his "secret" methods. At this point Gerson's life took on a nightmare quality. The Pepper-Neely billmet defeat and, with it, the hope for coordinated cancer research free ofprior restraints against investigations of anything other than "established"methods. In 1949 the AMA Council on Pharmacy and Chemistry, in a reportentitled "Cancer and the Need for Facts", rehashed material from the earliereditorial, adding that the Gerson diet was "lacking in essential protein andfat" and that Gerson's concern about the dangers of anesthesia was "whollyunfounded and apparently designed to appeal to the cancer victim alreadyfearful of a surgical operation which might offer the only effective means foreradication of the disease". Without benefit of either a literature search ornew clinical or laboratory research, the Council labeled as a "false notion"the idea that "diet has any specific influence on the origin or progress ofcancer". They concluded that "There is no scientific evidence whatsoever toindicate that modifications in the dietary intake of food or other nutritionalessentials are of any specific value in the control of cancer" (Council onPharmacy and Chemistry, 1949, 96). Gerson lost his hospital affiliation andfound that young doctors who wanted to assist him and learn from him could notdo so, for fear of incurring Society discipline. He was denied malpracticeinsurance, because his therapy was not "accepted practice" (Moss, 1980, 178;Natenberg, 1959, 136). In the early fifties Gerson submitted five case histories to the NCI,requesting an official investigation. He was told that they would need 25cases, which he promptly supplied, with full documentation. More than a yearlater the NCI demanded 125 case histories, saying that the 25 they hadpreviously requested were insufficient to justify investigation. According to a 1981 publication of the Gerson Institute, headed by hisdaughter, Charlotte Gerson, a manuscript for a book he was writing about histherapy disappeared from his files in 1956 (Healing, 1981, 19) At the age of75, isolated from medical colleagues and unable to find assistants, Gersonundertook the work of rewriting the entire manuscript in order to show "thatthere is an effective treatment of cancer, even in advanced cases" (Gerson,1958, 3). It was published in 1958, as A Cancer Therapy: Results of FiftyCases. Gerson died of pneumonia the following year, before finishing a secondvolume. His ideas have gained wide distribution through subsequent editions ofhis book (1975, 1977, and 1986); through a 1962 publication called Has Dr. MaxGerson a True Cancer Cure?, which had reportedly sold more than 250,000 copiesby 1980 (Moss, 1980, 178); and through the publications and physician-trainingprograms of the Gerson Institute in Bonita, California, and the Hospital deBaja California. In 1980 a reformed JAMA carried a commentary called "The 'Grand Conspiracy'Against the Cancer Cure" by William Regelson of the Department of Medicine ofthe Medical College of Virginia. Surveying a series of "inappropriatejudgments [that] have resulted in injury to good observations," Regelson said,"We may shortly have to ask if Gerson's low-sodium diet, with its bizarrecoffee enemas and thyroid supplementation, was an approach that altered themitotic regulating effect of intracellular sodium for occasional clinicalvalidity in those patients with the stamina to survive it" (Regelson, 1980,338). Disregarding such suggestions and resting its case instead on the claim thatthe NCI had "found no convincing evidence of effectiveness" during a review often Gerson cases some forty years earlier, the American Cancer Society in 1987stated that "The Gerson method of cancer treatment is not considered a provenmeans of cancer treatment, and on the basis of available information, theInstitute does not believe that further evaluation of this therapy is calledfor at this time" (American Cancer Society, February 5, 1987). Testing is underway, however, outside of the U.S. Since 1984 a modified formof Gerson's therapy has been in use at the Second Department of Surgery of theKrankenhaus in Graz, Austria. Omitting liver juice and niacin, using thyroidonly in hypothyroid patients, and limiting caffeine enemas to two per day,Peter Lechner and his colleagues, all of them surgeons, have been testing theGerson method as an adjunct, often with chemotherapy or radiation, in 60post-operative cancer patients, male and female, ranging in age from 23 to 74,and representing many different forms of cancer. By pairing each patient whowas willing to use the Gerson method (GP) with one of similar age andcondition who chose not to try it (NGP) and observing the comparative progressof the disease in the two groups over a four-year period, Lechner and hiscolleagues have approximated a controlled study of admittedly imperfectstructure (Lechner, 198 7). Their findings show that the Gerson therapy made a notable difference inseveral forms of cancer. Although GPs with bone metastases had no bettersurvival or tumor response than NGPs, their relief from pain and absence ofhypercalcemia made for a better quality of life. GPs with lung metastasesrequired fewer procedures to relieve pleural effusion. GPs with brainmetastases experienced decreased edema and lived four months longer than theirpaired NGPs. Premenopausal and perimenopausal breast cancer GPs toleratedconventional treatments better, with fewer side effects; showed better liverand kidney function and blood counts; and had fewer local recurrences and nometastases. Breast cancer GPs with liver metastases tolerated chemotherapybetter, and one of three has been in a steady state for more than a year,while the remaining five have died. GPs with colorectal carcinoma seemed togain weight and recover better after surgery, but showed no significantdifference in incidence of secondaries or local recurrence. The bestresponders to date are GPs with liver metastases, with two GPs showingimproved hepatic enzyme profiles compared to two NGPs; in four other pairs,although profiles remained similar, the GPs lived twice as long as the NGPs(Lechner, 1987). It is an irony of both history and geography that the first comparative studyof Max Gerson's therapy should take place at the hands of surgeons, in thatpart of the world which Gerson fled as a Jewish refugee half a century ago andthat the results, while not so outstanding as those he seemed able to produce,are most encouraging in patients with severe damage to the liver, the organ heconsidered central to recovery. American Cancer Society, "The Gerson Method", Unproven Methods of CancerManagement (New York: American Cancer Society, 1961 ).Beeson, Paul B., "Changes in Medical Therapy During the Past Half Century",Medicine 59:79-99, 1980.Bonner, Thomas Neville, American Doctors and German Universities: A Chapter inInternational Relations 1870-1914 (Lincoln, Nebraska: University of NebraskaPress, 1963).Cairns, John, "The Treatment of Diseases and the War Against Cancer",Scientific American 253:51-59, 1985.Cone, Clarence D., Jr., "Unified Theory on the Basic Mechanism of NormalMitotic Control and Oncogenesis", Journal of Theoretical Biology 30:151-181,1971 .Cope, Freeman W., "A Medical Application of the Ling Association-InductionHypothesis: The High Potassium, Low Sodium Diet of the Gerson Cancer Therapy",Physiological Chemistry and Physics 10:465-467, 1978.Council on Pharmacy and Chemistry, American Medical Association, Report of theCouncil, "Cancer and the Need for Facts", JAMA 139:93-98, Jan. 8, 1949.Crile, Geo., Jr., "Factors Influencing the Spread of Cancer", Surgery,Gynecology and Obstetrics 103:342-352, Sept. 1956.Gerson, Max B., Diaettherapie der Lungentuberkulose (Leipzig and Vienna: FranzDeuticke, 1934).Gerson Max, M. D., "Dietary Consideration in Malignant Neoplastic Disease: APreliminary Report", Review of Gastroenterology 12:419-425, Nov.-Dec. 1945.Gerson, Max, "Cancer, A Problem of Metabolism", translated from MedizinischeKlinik, No. 26, Munich, Germany, June 25, 1954, and published by GersonInstitute, Bonita, CA.Gerson, Max, A Cancer Therapy: Results of Fifty Cases (Gerson Institute,Bonita, CA, 1958).Gerson, Max, "The Cure of Advanced Cancer by Diet Therapy: A Summary of 30Years of Clinical Experimentation", (Lecture given in 1956), PhysiologicalChemistry and Physics 10:449-463, 1978.  Good, Robert A., Fernandes, Gabriel, and Day, Noorbibi D., "The Influence ofNutrition on Development of Cancer Immunity and Resistance to MesenchymalDiseases", Molecular Interrelations of Nutrition and Cancer, M.S. Arnott, J.van Eys, and Y.M.Wang (eds.) (New York: Raven Press, 1982).Healing: The Gerson Journal (Special Information Issue), The Gerson Institute,Bonita, CA 1981.Hildenbrand, Gar, "Protein-Calorie Restriction in Therapeutic Nutrition",Healing Newsletter, No.*, July-August, 1985.Hildenbrand, Gar, "Let's Set the Record Straight: A survey of the U.S.  PeerReviewed Medical Literature Regarding the Developmental Gerson Diet Therapy",Healing Newsletter, No. 14 (July-Aug 1986), No.  15 (Sept-Oct 1986), No. 16(Nov-Dec 1986), No. 17 (Jan-Feb 1987), and No. 14-15 (Mar-June 1987).Hildenbrand, Gar, communication of Nov. 17, 1987, "The Gerson Diet Therapy asRepresented by the Peer Reviewed Literature Referenced in the Cumulated IndexMedicus", typescript in process of compilation: partial listing as of October1987.  Hoffman, Frederick L., Cancer and Diet: With Facts and Observations on RelatedSubjects (Baltimore, MD: Williams and Wilkins Co., 1937).Journal of American Medical Association, "Gerson's Cancer Treatment",editorial, JAMA 132:645-646, Nov. 16, 1946.Keusch, Gerald T., Wilson, Carla S., and Waksal, Samuel D., "Nutrition, HostDefenses, and the Lymphoid System", Advances in Host Defense Mechanisms, JohnI. Gallin and Anthony S. Fauci (eds.) (New York: Raven Press, 1983), Vol. 2.Lai, Chiu-Nan and Becker, Frederick F., "potassium-induced ReverseTransformation of Cells Infected With a Temperature sensitive TransformationMutant Virus", Journal of Cellular Physiology 125:259262, 1985.Lechner, Peter, "Dietary Regime to be Used in Oncological Postoperative Care",translated from the German as presented at Graz, Austria, June 21 -23, 1984.Ling, G.N., "The Association-induction Hypothesis: A Theoretical FoundationProvided for the Possible Beneficial Effects of a Low Sodium, High PotassiumDiet and Other Similar Regimens in the Treatment of Patients Suffering FromDebilitating Illnesses", Agressologie 24:293-302, 1983.Lowell, James, "The Gerson Clinic", Nutrition Forum 3:9-12, Feb. 1986.Lurie, Max B., "The Reticuloendothelial System, Cortisone, and ThyroidFunction: Their Relation to Native Resistance to Infection", Annals of the NewYork Academy of Science 44:43-94, 1960.  McCarty, Mark F., "Aldosterone and the Gerson Diet - A Speculation", Medical Hypotheses 7:591 -597, 19a 1.Moss, Ralph W., The Cancer Syndrome (New York: Grove Press, Inc., 1980,176-178.  Natenberg, Maurice, The Cancer Blackout: A History of Denied and SuppressedRemedies (Chicago: Regent House, 1959), 136-145.Neuburger, Max, Die Lehre von der Heilkraft der Natur in Wandel der Zeiten(Stuttgart, 1926).Neuburger, Max, "An Historical Study of the Concept of Nature from a Medicalviewpoint", Isis 3s: 16-28, 1944.Newell, Guy R., and Ellison, Neil M. (eds.), Nutrition and Cancer: Etiologyand Treatment (New York: Raven Press, 1981).New York Times, "Dr.  Max Gerson, 77, Cancer Specialist", New York Timesobituary, p.29, col. 5, Mar. 9, 1959.Regelson, William, "The 'Grand Conspiracy' Against the Cancer Cure"(Commentary), JAMA 243:337-339, Jan.  25, 1980.Rorty, James, American Medicine Mobilizes (New York: W.W.Norton & Co., Inc.,1939).Sauerbruch, Ferdinand, Master Surgeon, trans. Fernand G. Renier and Anne Cliff(New York: Thomas Y.  Crowell, 1953), 167-171.Seifter, Eli, and Weinzweig, Jeffrey, "Contributions of Dr. Max Gerson toNutritional Chemistry", paper presented at 1985 meeting of American ChemicalSociety, History of Chemistry Division (abstract supplied by Gar Hildenbrand).Seifter, Eli, personal communication.Shimkin, Michael B., "Neoplasia," Advances in American Medicine: Essays at theBicentennial, John Z. Bowers and Elizabeth F.  Purcell (eds.)  (New York:Josiah Macy Foundation, 1976), Vol. 1, 210-250.Siguel, Eduardo N., "Cancerostatic Effect of Vegetarian Diets", Nutrition andCancer 4:285-289, 1983.Simone, Charles B., Cancer and Nutrition (New York: McGraw-Hill Book Co.,1983), 64.Tannenbaum, Albert, and Silverstone, Herbert, "Nutrition in Relation toCancer", Advances in Cancer Research 1:452-505, 1953.Thorbecke, G.J., and Benacerraf, B., "The Reticulo-Endothelial System andImmunological Phenomena" Progress in Allergy 6:559- 598, 1962.United States Congress, Senate, Subcommittee of the committee on ForeignRelations, Cancer Research, hearings July 1, 2, and 3, 1946 (Washington, DC:U.S.  Government Printing Office, 1946).Warner, John Harley, "'The Nature-Trusting Heresy': American Physicians andthe Concept of the Healing Power of Nature in the 1850's and 1860's"Perspectives in American History 11:291-324, 1978.Zs.-Nagy, Imre, Lustyik, Gyorgy, Lukacs, Geza, et al., "Correlation ofMalignancy with the Intracellular Na+:K+ Ratio in Human Thyroid Tumors",Cancer Research 43:5395-5402, Nov. 1983.  WT02-B03-107IA008-000090-B019-372http://www.gerson.com:80/center.html 207.158.200.123 19970222123014 text/html 2074HTTP/1.1 200 OKDate: Sat, 22 Feb 1997 12:30:38 GMTServer: Apache/1.2b4Connection: closeContent-Type: text/htmlLast-Modified: Mon, 09 Dec 1996 22:48:43 GMTETag: "84cb81-729-32ac974b"Content-Length: 1833Accept-Ranges: bytes  Hospital Meridian The Facility Located in the beach area of Playas de Tijuana in Baja California, Hospital Meridian is a fully accredited intensive care hospital providing care by licensed physicians and graduate registered nurses. All doctors involved in patient care are fluent in English. Experienced Gerson (tm) Therapy; physicians and nurses are on duty 24 hours a day. Although many patients come from the United States, Meridian has treated patients from all over the world. As a Gerson Therapy Center, we utilize the full Gerson protocol as defined by the Gerson Institute as the basis for all of our treatments. Hospital Meridian is the only hospital currently approved by the Gerson Institute. Hospital Meridian is licensed by the state of Baja California and the Mexican Department of Health. Medical Director Cesar Garcia, M.D. Our physicians are trained in both traditional and naturopathic medicine. As a patient, you will always receive the finest in safe, time-tested, holistic methods of treatment, pain control, and healing. By avoiding the use of powerful, invasive, and often toxic procedures and pharmaceuticals, we will help you achieve an improved state of health and well-being without the risk of harmful side effects often associated with conventional treatments. In those rare cases where more traditional methods or procedures are necessary, you can rest assured that Meridian physicians have the experience to employ conventional medicine in such a way as to minimize the adverse side-effects and maximize wellness. Basic programs and charges at Hospital Meridian Copyright 1995, 1996 (c) The Gerson Institute, All rights reserved.WT02-B03-108IA008-000090-B019-398http://www.gerson.com:80/infoshee.html 207.158.200.123 19970222123022 text/html 4421HTTP/1.1 200 OKDate: Sat, 22 Feb 1997 12:30:45 GMTServer: Apache/1.2b4Connection: closeContent-Type: text/htmlLast-Modified: Mon, 09 Dec 1996 22:51:39 GMTETag: "8450df-1053-32ac97fb"Content-Length: 4179Accept-Ranges: bytes Hospital Meridian Visit Arrangements Arranging Your Visit to HospitalMeridian Travel Plans and Arrival Scheduling: Call theGerson Institute at 619-585-7600 toarrange admission to the hospital. Occasionally there is a waitinglist for admission, so please call as soon as you know your intendedarrival date. If possible, please have your flight informationavailable when you call. Book your flight to arrive at the SanDiego airport in the morning. You can arrive any weekday. ExperiencedGerson Therapy (tm) physicians are available at Hospital Meridianseven days a week to provide the best possible care. If a restrictedticket will reduce airfare costs, in most cases a letter from yourphysician will allow you to make a change in the return date withoutpenalty. (Check with your airline to confirm.) You will be pickedup either by Meridian staff or by a local transportation service atthe Travelers Aid desk about 15 minutes after your scheduled arrivaltime. After loading your bags, the driver will transport youdirectly to Hospital Meridian. The transportation cost is $60.00 for2 people, $70.00 for 3 people or $75.00 for 4 people. If you missyour flight, or need to make changes in your arrival time, pleasecall the Car and Driver at619-278-9441. After hours or on weekends, pleasecall Meridian directly, at 011-52-66-80-13-58. HOME SET UP COSTS: 3 months' supplyof Gerson medications - $550 (Does NOT include adjuvantmedications) Norwalk(TM) juicer (purchased from outside agent) -$1995 - $2095 Champion(TM) juicer (purchased from outside agent) -$240 A "K&K press" will help the Champion to produce more and betterjuice - $425. Note: You may use either of the above juicers. Bothare approved for the Gerson Therapy. PLANNINGAHEAD Your ongoing food costs may be considerably higher thanyou might guess, ranging from $200 to $500 per WEEK (depending onwhere you live, seasonal supplies, and the costs of shipping). Pleaseinvestigate BEFORE coming: Local and regional suppliers oforganically grown foods. Food Coops. Health food stores withorganic produce sections Shipping houses. SPECIALHELPERS If you are non-ambulatory and are unable to feed orbathe yourself,you must bring your SPECIAL HELPER with you. Privatenursing is NOT supplied by the treatment center and cannot substitutefor your personal special helper who must learn the Gerson Therapyfrom the patient's point of view. In such cases, it is wise to thinkof having BOTH a companion AND a special helper since both will beneeded at home. If the above applies, please discuss your case withthe Gerson Institute. TAX All services may be subject toall applicable local taxes. PATIENT CHECK LIST - WHAT TO BRINGWITH YOU Medical records. Please hand carry. (If records are notavailable, do not delay your trip. Gerson physicians will send forthem.) Pathology reports Current lab lest results Surgicalsummaries Discharge summaries Radiology results (X-ray, CT,MRI, etc. - written reports only - films not necessary) Cassetterecorder, fresh tapes & batteries. Blank notebooks, pens andpencils. Envelopes and U.S. postage stamps Clock-radio ortravel alarm. Personal toilet/grooming articles. Pajamas, robe,slippers, and informal clothing for pleasant days. Passport, visa,and other documents are NOT required for U.S. and Canadian citizens.Others may potentially need these for entry and re-entry into theU.S. Supplies of your current prescription medications andmedical supplies. Some medications (e.g.: pain killers, especiallymorphine and Demerol) and supplies (e.g.: colostomy fittings) are notinternationally standard. Colostomy patients, please bring colostomy"sleeves" far irrigation. Please bring quantities adequate for yourstay. Prices are subject to change withoutnotice. Copyright 1995, 1996 (c) The Gerson Institute, Allrights reserved.WT02-B03-109IA008-000090-B019-430http://www.gerson.com:80/melanoma.html 207.158.200.123 19970222123041 text/html 45014HTTP/1.1 200 OKDate: Sat, 22 Feb 1997 12:30:54 GMTServer: Apache/1.2b4Connection: closeContent-Type: text/htmlLast-Modified: Mon, 09 Dec 1996 22:55:01 GMTETag: "83e458-aee3-32ac98c5"Content-Length: 44771Accept-Ranges: bytes Gerson Therapy - Melanoma The following article is reproduced from Alternative Therapies, September 1995, pages 29-37. FIVE YEAR SURVIVAL RATES OF MELANOMA PATIENTS TREATED BY DIET THERAPY AFTER THE MANNER OF GERSON: A RETROSPECTIVE REVIEW Objective - Compare 5-year melanoma survival rates to rates in medical literature Design - Retrospective. Setting - Hospital in Tijuana, Mexico. Patients - White adult patients (N=153) with superficial spreading and nodular melanoma, aged 25-72 years. Intervention - Gerson's diet therapy: lactovegetarian; low sodium, fat and (temporarily) protein; high potassium, fluid, and nutrients (hourly raw vegetable/fruit juices). Metabolism increased by thyroid; calorie supply limited to 2600-3200 calories per day. Coffee enemas as needed for pain and appetite. Main Outcome Measure - 5-year survival rates by stage at admission. Results - Of 14 patients with stages I and II (localized) melanoma, 100% survived for 5 years, compared with 79% of 15,798 reported by Balch. Of 17 with stage IIIA (regionally metastasized)melanoma, 82% were alive at 5 years, in contrast to 39% of 103 from Fachklinik Hornheide. Of 33 with combined stages IIIA + IIIB (regionally metastasized) melanoma, 70% lived 5 years, compared with41% of 130 from Fachklinik Hornheide. We propose a new stage division: IVA (distant lymph, skin, and subcutaneous tissue metastases), and IVB (visceral metastases). Of 18 with stage IVA melanoma, 39% were alive at 5 years, compared with only 6% of 194 from the Eastern Cooperative Oncology Group. Survival impact was not assessed for stage IVB. Male and female survival rates were identical for stages I-IIIB, but stage IVA women had a strong survival advantage. Conclusions - The 5-year survival rates reported here are considerably higher than those reported elsewhere. Stage IIIA/B males had exceptionally high survival rates compared with those reported by other centers. (Alternative Therapies in Health and Medicine. 1995;1(4):29-37) This article summarizes the clinical outcomes of melanoma patients treated with the nutrition-based cancer therapy proposed by the German physician Gerson[1] (who conducted research at the Universityof Munich in the 1930s) and contrasts them with rates reported in the literature. To our knowledge, this report is the most thorough retrospective analysis to date of the potential survival benefit of this, or any other, well-known alternative method of cancer management. The genesis of this inquiry occurred during a landmark study by the US Congressional Office of Technology Assessment (OTA)[2] to which one of us (GH) was an advisor. In its report, OTA put forward a protocol for best-case reviews based on the premise that, no matter how many patients failed, as few as 10 or 12 cases with objective evidence of tumor response would be enough to propel an investigation by the National Cancer Institute (NCI). Because we had proposed the original best-case review protocol to OTA, we were eager to construct such a review. However, we found OTA's (and later NCI's) protocol to have a serious shortcoming when used retrospectively: its focus on tumor regression only. Adequate documentation of tumor regression is unlikely to be collected in most alternative medical practices. We abandoned the best-case review for the more informative retrospective review. In contrast to the best-case review, the retrospective review describes all patients, including nonresponders, giving a more adequate impression of the outcomes of treatment. Our efforts to complete a best-case review, however, were not without some rewards. Practitioners at Centro Hospitalario Internacional del Pacifico, SA (CHIPSA) in Playas de Tijuana, Baja California, Mexico suggested cases with different types of cancer they believed had unusually positive outcomes. Of the 27 cases cataloged, 33% were long-term melanoma survivors, which underscored the need to do a more complete evaluation of melanoma per se. In the process, we determined that the institutions at which the patients were originally diagnosed were reliable. We requested histological specimens for the above 27 cases, and forwarded the numbered slides, without clinical histories, to the Armed Forces Institute of Pathology (AFIP). AFIP pathologists' findings agreed with those reported by the original institutions with the exception of one specimen, which had been destroyed by improper handling and storage. In a related exercise, original diagnostic scans were read by contemporary UCLA physicians, whose interpretations were in virtually complete agreement with those of the original readers. METHODS Over 15 years, from 1975 through July 1990, 249 patients presented for treatment of melanoma; however, 53 (21%) were lost to follow-up. Survival outcomes were learned for the other 196, but 14were excluded because they did not have verified nodular or superficial spreading melanoma. Of the remaining 182, 29 (19%) charts could not be assessed for stage at admission. Therefore, this paper is based on the outcomes of 153 adult melanoma patients treated with Gerson's nutrition-based cancer therapy. All assessable patients were white. Almost all were hospitalized by CHIPSA physicians, but several were treated by physicians in private practice. Medical charts supplied by CHIPSA were consolidated from three predecessor facilities, Hospital la Gloria, Hospital Jardines la Mesa, andHospital del Sol, all from the Tijuana metropolitan area. Gerson is credited with the introduction and development of therapeutic sodium (Na+) restriction[3] in the context of a high potassium (K+) diet, which was first broadly tested in refractory cutaneous tuberculosis (lupus vulgaris)[4] According to eminent dermatologist Erich Urbach[5], the majority of authors of note investigated and approved Gerson's diet therapy for lupus. Emerson[6] was the first US author to refer to the diet as a metabolic therapy. Gerson's tuberculosis diet became the basis of a number of quite different dietotherapies he developed for conditions as diverse as pulmonary tuberculosis and cardiorenal insufficiency. The cancer management employed by CHIPSA was developed empirically by Gerson over the course of 30 years of clinical experimentation[7]. Gradually, by trial and error, Gerson evolved an integrated set of medical treatments, which he last published in a 1958 monograph along with 50 cases presented in clinical detail[8]. Although Gerson's method was published several times in US[9] and German[10-12] refereed journals, it is not well known by most practitioners and researchers. Therefore, a brief description of the development and nature of the therapy may be useful. During the 1930s, Gerson's research at the University of Munich was afforded extraordinary laboratory support through funding provided by both the Bavarian and Prussian federal governments[13]. Gerson focused on the experimental use of diet and medications to improve tissue edema occurring in a variety of pathologies. Edema is characterized by salt and water changes that Cope[14] has defined as tissue damage syndrome--decreased cell K+, increased cell Na+, and increased cell water (cell swelling) --changes that are also observed after death[15]. Nutritional treatment to provide cells with a high K+, low Na+ environment improved edema and led to enhanced tissue resistance and immunities, and therefore better outcomes[16]. This rationale can be traced through all of Gerson's subsequent efforts in cancer management. [8(pp164, 166, 184, 197)] The cancer diet is individualized to meet the needs of every patient, but it does have uniform components. For most patients, it is restricted in salt, fat, and (temporarily) protein. It supplies very high quantities of many nutrients and phytochemicals while at the same time forcing fluids through 13 hourly feedings of raw fruit and vegetable juices daily. About half of the melanoma subjects in this study received 24 ounces daily of raw veal liver and carrot juice (each glass contained the pressings of 1/2 pound of liver and 3/4 pound of carrots). Following numerous disruptions in supplies that began in late 1985, raw veal liver was formally discontinued in 1987 because of repeated instances of bacterial contamination (Campylobacter fetus s. fetus). Comparisons of patients from different time frames indicate that those receiving liver juice experienced better survival outcomes overall[15]. Gerson restricted calories while simultaneously increasing metabolism in an effort to emulate the antitumor effect of calorie restriction per se, first demonstrated by Moreschi[18] and Rous[19]. Enhanced caloric utilization rates (metabolism) can alter tumor growth, whether metabolism is accelerated by iodine medications[20] (Gerson used thyroid and Lugol's iodine solution) or exercise[21]. The caloric supply is limited to 2600-3200 calories per day by the low-fat, lactovegetarian diet served in three generous daily meals. Niacin, potassium salts (acetate, gluconate, and monophosphate), and crude liver extract with vitamin B12 injectable, were given to support accelerated cellular energy production. In the University of Munich experiments, Gerson found that temporary protein restriction aided edema absorption[22] and favored improvement in his patients. In Gerson's cancer diet, protein repletion with nonfat cultured dairy products occurs after at least 6 weeks in most cases. Shorter periods of protein restriction are recommended for children and elderly patients. Castor oil, a cathartic with no known clinical side effects, was administered every other day for many weeks. Retention enemas medicated with boiled coffee were taken as needed, as frequently as every 4 hours throughout the day and night, for their observed ability to alleviate pain and to improve nutritional condition. Peter Lechner observed statistically significant cancer pain relief from coffee enemas in a prospective matched control trial at the University Hospital of Graz, Austria[23]. Although the mechanism of pain relief is not known, Cope[7] suggested it may be the result of a crude sort of dialysis across the gut wall for tumor breakdown products such as polyamines, toxic bound nitrogen, and ammonia. Lechner and Kronberger[24] have also observed improved tolerance of aggressive conventional treatments in patients who employed Gerson's therapy at the same time. At CHIPSA, the therapy was prescribed for 18 to 36 months, subject to the physician's judgment and pati!ent response. This study, because of its retrospective nature, makes no attempt to adjust for variables such as mind-body treatments or adjuvant botanical or homeopathic materials (although it is our impression that such treatments were commonly used). We know of only two cases in which nonsurgical conventional treatments were employed concurrently with the Gerson treatment: 2 stage IVA patients, both 5-year survivors, added adjuvant biological response modifiers (One employed interferon for 6 months, and the other used levamisole). Several patients whose disease had escaped surgical management beforeadmission to the Gerson program required one or more surgeries during treatment. DATA COLLECTION To begin, we reviewed all records, files, and lists at our disposal from Hospitals La Gloria, La Mesa, Del Sol, CHIPSA, and the Gerson Institute in San Diego. In cases for which original patient phone and address records were no longer valid, we went to stored financial charts in which were found records of collect telephone calls placed by patients to friends and relatives. We used those additional numbers with considerable success to locate living patients and to learn the fate of the deceased. We were also able to extend our search by employing the epidemiological services of Equifax Credit Information Services. In 1993 the Gerson Research Organization began publishing a free newsletter for current and past patients, who were invited to join a support network. They were encouraged to share with all patients, even if they had not been treated by CHIPSA physicians. Through this route, several independently treated patients were discovered, contacts were established with !their physicians, and data were collected and used in this study. LEVELS OF DOCUMENTATION Because ours is a groundbreaking effort among various alternative forms of cancer management, we believe that explanation of our documentation process is warranted. Two standards of documentationwere applied: one for survivors and one for deceased patients. Forty-five survivor charts were meticulously cataloged to include independent histological verification, previous physicians' notes, surgical summaries, and radiological interpretations. In addition, our own physician notes, extended care consultation records, periodic laboratory reports, roentgenograms and scans as well as medication purchase records and other evidence of compliance, were included. Charts for 5 survivors could not be sufficiently cataloged to assess staging at admission, even though they did contain adequate evidence of the presence of melanoma. For purposes of this evaluation, we operated under two assumptions regarding deceased patients: (1) the majority probably achieved some measure of compliance with the Gerson treatment, and (2) the cause of death for the majority was probably melanoma. Mortality data are being assembled to address these assumptions if possible. In staging the deceased, we allowed less stringent documentation to suffice, with the understanding that the negative outcomes were probably due to melanoma. Fifty-seven charts of deceased patients contained independent confirmation of staging by their previous physicians, the standard of evidence required for all survivor charts in this study. In contrast, 44 were staged by relying on the admitting physician's oral history and physical examination. Beyond this, questionnaire responses and correspondence were considered to provide adequate information for 7 patients whose charts could not be located. Such lower-level documentation (admission oral history and physical examinations, and the questionnaire responses) was considered acceptable only for charts of deceased patients whose disease had apparently progressed. If we have erred in this judgment, it was on the side of caution. Because physicians administering the Gerson cancer therapy did not make exhaustive staging efforts on admission for any of their melanoma patients, the possibility certainly exists that deceased patients may have developed undetected distant and internal metastases before admission; in fact, this possibility cannot be ruled out for the survivors. With these criteria, 108 charts of the deceased were assessable for stage atadmission. Twenty-four charts were missing, presumably destroyed in the La Gloria Hospital fire of 1985 in which approximately 900 charts of all different pathologies were lost. Two cases for which outcomes had been documented (Both were noted deceased in a Gerson Institute file index) were identified by initials only, with no gender markers. Survival outcomes are known for 72 women and 81 men; 42 (58%) women and 69 (85%) men are deceased, a finding consistent with the female survival advantage widely reported in the melanoma literature. Two deceased men and 1 deceased woman (all stage III) lived 5 or more years and are reflected in this report as 5-year survivors. STATISTICAL METHODS Charts of 153 patients were assessable for both outcome and stage at admission. Five-year survival rates for each stage were compared with rates previously published by Balch[25], Drepper et al (the American Cancer Society)[26], Ryan et al (the Eastern Cooperative Oncology Group)[27], and Fawzy[28]. For most comparisons, we used the chi-square test; when comparing small samples, we employed Fisher's Exact Test. For the above tests, we employed a computer program, SigmaStat, by Jandel Scientific Software. Programs were created (by SC) to generate Kaplan- Meier survival functions. Survival curves were plotted using Harvard Graphics. Cox regressions and log-rank tests for homogeneity of survival curves were used for comparison of data. Table 1 Staging system used for this report STAGING USED IN THIS REPORT Because so many different staging systems exist for nodular and superficial spreading malignant melanoma, we have provided a breakdown of the staging criteria we used in Table 1. We borrowed from current international standards of the TNM (tumor, node, metastasis) system for melanoma as published by the American Joint Committee on Cancer[29] as well as the more precise staging divisions for micrometastases as published by the Union Internationale Contre le Cancer (UICC), or International Union Against Cancer[30]. Both of these methods incorporate Clark levels (tissue invasion) and the Breslow index (tumor thickness). The recent reclassification of melanoma staging emphasizes micrometastases and has, therefore, caused considerable stage migration. Many melanoma tumors that would previously have been categorized as stage IIB have moved to stage III. Stage III has been expanded and divided into stages IIIA and IIIB. The net effect of this reclassification, from our point of view, is an amplification of the survival benefit of lifestyle management as represented by the Gerson cancer treatment. In this paper, we have presented our findings with a proposed new division of stage IV into two parts. We believe that our findings support this proposal. RESULTS The primary purpose of our study was to assess survival outcomes as measured by 5-year survival rates by stage, which are summarized in Table 2. Of 249 potential melanoma patients identified from lists and files of the above mentioned organizations, survival outcomes were learned for 196 (79%), whereas 53 (21%) were lost to follow-up. Stage at admission was assessable in 167 cases (85%), whereas in 29 (15%) it was not. Table 2 5-year survival rates by most clinically important disease (TNM) Of 14 patients (8%) who were excluded, 3 did not have malignant melanoma (2 had melanoma in situ, and 1 had a history of melanoma). One case of pediatric melanoma was excluded because of its uniquenature. Ten cases of ocular melanoma (2 surviving, a deceased), which has different staging criteria and is not directly comparable to either nodular melanoma or the superficial spreading type, were also excluded. Superficial and nodular melanoma become comparable with the use of Clark levels and the Breslow index[24]. After exclusions, a total of 153 patients were included in this review; 45 (29%) lived at least 5 years (41 of whom were alive at this writing), and 108 (71%) were known to be deceased. Survival rates within the Gerson system are clearly stage-related (Table 3). A log-rank test for homogeneity of Kaplan-Meier survival curves for early (localized) versus late (regionally or distantly metastasized) disease (Figure 1) revealed that the difference was statistically significant (P=.007). However, as will be seen below, survival rates for men and women do not differ until distant (beyond the primary lymphatic drainage system- stage IV) metastases have presented. Table 3 Survival rates by stage (percent) STAGES I AND II Of the 153 patients assessable for stage at admission 14 (9%) entered the Gerson program with early (stage I or II) melanoma. At admission 4 patients were stage IA, 7 were IB, and 3 were stage II. None suffered progression of melanoma after admission; all remained free from melanoma for up to 17 years- 13 were alive at this writing; and I was deceased of other causes. All of the stage I and II patients reviewed were admitted to the Gerson program before May 1987 and were, therefore, included in the assessment of the 5-year survival rate. All of the 14 early stage melanoma patients remained disease-free for a mini- mum of 7 1/2 years and a maximum of 17 years. No deaths due to melanoma had occurred in this group as of this writing (although a 74-year-old, 15-year stage II survivor died of prostate cancer). When contrasted with a meta-analysis of 15,798 stage I and II melanoma patients from reporting centers worldwide in which Balch[25] found an overall average 5-year survival rate of 79%, the sample size in the Gerson treatment system was too small for statistical significance (chi-squared=2.56, P=.11). The sample would have to in the context of this study's unusually positive findings for stages III and IVA, these data hint that aggressive lifestyle intervention (e.g., Gerson's therapy) may hold a potential to reduce the world- wide 5!-year mortality rate for early-stage, localized melanoma. Of the early stage patients in Balch's meta-analysis, 21% (more than 3300) were deceased at 5 years. It is also of interest that stage I and II patients comprised approximately 88% (15,798 of 17,914) of the melanoma cases reported by centers worldwide, whereas physicians offering the Gerson cancer treatment saw only 9% (14 out of 153) at such an early and hopeful stage. STAGE III In all, 35 (23%) of the assessable cases were admitted at stage III. The 5-year survival rate for 35 assessable stage III melanoma patients treated with the Gerson diet therapy is 71%, with 10 deceased before the 5-year mark and 25 cancer-free for at least 5 years. The American Cancer Society has reported a 39% 5-year survival rate for stage III melanoma. Other reported 5-year survival rates[25] range from 27% in Brisbane to 42% at Duke University. Interestingly, no center included in Balch's meta-analysis[25], other than Duke University, reported a 5-year survival rate higher than 37%. Drepper et al[26], from the Fachklinik Hornheide, reported a 39% 5-year survival rate (n=103) for patients with stage IIIA (N1 only) melanoma. A comparable group from the Gerson system (n=17) achieved an 82% 5-year rate. The comparison (0.43 difference in means), which reveals a 110% greater survival advantage for patients in the Gerson system, is statistically significant (chi-squared=9.48 with 1 df, P=.002, power=.887). The Fachklinik Hornheide also documented a 41% 5-year survival rate for all (n=134) its stage IIIA (T4b and N1) and stage IIIB (N2 patients). Same-stage patients in the Gerson system (n=33) achieved a 5-year survival rate of 70%. The difference in means (.29) is statistically significant (chi-squared=7.62 with 1 df, P<.006, power=.802). STAGE IVA Of the assessable patients, 104 (68%) had a stage tumor at admission. All stage IV survivors in the Gerson program were admitted presenting only superficial metastatic disease (limited to skin, subcutaneous, and lymph involvement) with no internal metastases. We believe that these patients represent a responsive subgroup within stage IV, and suggest categorizing such patients separately as stage IVA. According to Balch, 23% of stage IV patients reported worldwide present first metastases confined to lymph, skin, and subcutaneous tissue (any T, any N, M1). He reports that this group has a median survival of 7.2 months and a 1-year survival rate of 25% worldwide. Of the stage IV patients admitted to the Gerson program, 18 (17%) were classified M1 (stage IVA); 7 (39%) of 18 were alive at this writing, with a survival range of 5 to 19 years. Therefore, the 5-year survival rate for 18 melanoma patients admitted to the Gerson program at stage IVA was 39%. Ryan et al[27] of the Eastern Cooperative Oncology Group (ECOG) published an outcomes analysis of 635 advanced-stage melanoma patients in which they offered a breakdown of survival by most significant sites. ECOG showed 11 of 194 patients fitting our stage IVA criteria to have lived 5 years, for a 5-year survival rate of 6%27. In contrast, the 5-year survival rate for 7 of 18 stage IVA melanoma patients in the Gerson system was 39% (550%) greater (0.33 difference in mean). This comparison is statistically significant (chi-squared=19.3 with 1 df, P<.0001, power=.997). STAGE IVB We have made no attempt to assess the survival impact of Gerson's cancer therapy in stage IVB. Because there were no exclusion criteria at any of the Gerson treating facilities, we were unable to find a single comparable treatment group moving through any other reporting treatment system. Of the 86 patients (56% of the assessable group) admitted to the Gerson program at stage IVB, most had gravely advanced disease. All are deceased, 6 of the deceased were not able to start the Gerson treatment, 6 died in the hospital, 1 presented with both melanoma and AIDS, and 14 are known to have had lactate dehydrogenase readings 300% or more above normal at admission. The highest recorded was 3776, or more than 2400% above normal. Major metastases were distributed as follows: 26% had brain involvement, 30% had liver tumors, 18% had tumors in abdominal viscera other than the liver, 40% had lung disease, 21% had melanoma in the bone, and 25% exhibited skin tumors. Only one patient, a female registered nurse originally admitted at stage III, had documented objective radiological evidence of progression to internal (bone) disease (M2, stage IVB) and subsequent complete remission of those lesions. She had been alive and well for 8 years at this writing. INFLUENCE OF GENDER ON SURVIVAL A female survival advantage has been reported widely in the melanoma literature. Although a female survival advantage is seen in the Gerson system (Table 4), male and female 5-year survival rates are not significantly different until stage IVA (distant metastases to skin, subcutaneous tissue, and lymph). Male and female survival rates are substantially the same for patients with stage I and II (completely local disease) as well as those with stages IIIA and IIIB (regionally metastasized disease). Table 4 Survival rates by gender (percent) Twelve women and 2 men were admitted with early (stage I and II) melanoma. This shows an unexplained female recruitment bias (6:1) in early-stage patients, which did not occur with any other stage. Of 35 patients assessed for stage IIIA and IIIB (all primary T4a, primary T4b, N1, and N2) 5-year survival rates, 18 (51%) were male and 17 (49%) were female, a distribution similar to that reported by the Fachklinik Hornheide[26], which had 49% male and 51% female patients. Of those who were cancer-free at 5 years or beyond, 12 were male and 13 were female. Of the deceased, 6 were male and 4 were female. Comparison of the 67% 5-year survival rate for all stage III men in the Gerson system with the 76% rate for women (0.09 difference in mean) is not statistically significant (Fisher's Exact Test, P=.71). Two of the 12 male 5-year survivors had recurrence of tumors after the 5th year and are deceased. One female 15-year survivor had recurrence of tumors and is deceased. Even at 10 years, although the survival rate for females (63%, n=8) is considerably higher than that for males (50%, n=12), the difference in means (0.13) is not statistically significant (Fisher's Exact Test, P=.49). Of 18 patients admitted for treatment of stage IVA melanoma, 9 were women and 9 were men. This recruitment pattern, half and half, is consistent with the melanoma literature. Of 7 who survived 5 years, 6 (86%) were female, whereas only 1 (14%) was male. Although the samples are tiny, the female 5-year survival rate of 67% is statistically significant compared with the male rate of 11% (Fisher's Exact Test, P=.05). When IVA survival and mortality data are included with data for stages I through IIIB, the Kaplan-Meier survival curves for stage I-IVA male versus female patients (Figure 2) are significantly different (P=.004) when log-rank tested for homogeneity over 5 years. LIMITATIONS It has been repeatedly suggested that patients who use alternative cancer treatments may be different from patients who employ only conventional treatments. Several differences have been reported by Cassileth et al[31], who found that alternative treatment users tended to be white and better educated than those who used only conventional treatments. It remains to be seen whether these or any other influences yet to be discovered can account for the survival advantage observed in the Gerson system. However, at present, we can cite no convincing evidence that patients treated in the Gerson system differed from the comparison groups according to any meaningful prognostic variables. This report has not accounted for variables such as the role and influence of individual components and various sets of components within the Gerson system. Subsequent to the completion of this report, we have shown two major variables, complementary use of surgery and the use of raw veal liver/carrot juice, to besignificantly associated with improved melanoma survival outcomes[17]. Studies of the rationales for modifications made by Gerson over the 30-year course of development of his treatment have led to contemporary modifications[17], creating still more challenges for thorough analysis. This study is a retrospective analysis and therefore lacks the luster of a randomized clinical trial. However, the authors have made every attempt to verify adherence to therapy (especially by the survivors), to contrast these data with existing data banks, and to clearly present the comparisons here. DISCUSSION No clearly defined mechanism has been identified to account for the survival advantage demonstrated above. Gerson believed that oxidizing enzymes supplied by the raw juices of his diet therapy improved host functions sufficiently to disadvantage malignant cells, which he believed produced their energy through fermentative metabolism. This belief was based on the long popular, but now disproven, cancer generalization of Otto Warburg discussed by Ling[32]. The clinical findings of the present study neither validate Gerson's Warburg-based rationale nor disprove Gerson's idea of host enhancement to challenge malignancy. Gerson also believed, after Tannenbaum[33], that calorie restriction, increased calorie utilization rate, and micronutrient hyperalimentation could favor the tumor-bearing host and suppress development of both primary tumors and metastases. In principle, this belief may have withstood the test of time and advances in research[31]. A huge general category of micronutrients, phytochemicals, has become the focus of a great deal of basic cancer and chemo-prevention research. Clearly, Gerson's treatment provides high, and in some cases extraordinary, doses of thousands of phytochemicals. However, the literature does not yield practical knowledge of the effects of either individual or combined phytochemicals on human cancers. Cope[39] wrote that Gerson's salt-and-water management for cancer was an approach that probably led to correction of tissue damage syndrome, or cellular edema caused by poisoning, starvation, hypoxia, or physical trauma. He believed that Gerson's sometimes extraordinary outcomes might have been due, at least in part, to this mechanism. Although it has been suggested[40] that any benefits conferred by Gerson's cancer therapy may result in greatest part from its psychosocial impact, this question has never been investigated. It is reasonable that observers assume a mind/body effect, due to the treatment's obvious self-help components and the CHIPSA medical team's active encouragement of family involvement, even during the patient's hospitalization. Provisions have been made at CHIPSA for inexpensive room and board for companions. Spouses and close relatives are often able to stay with the patient in a private room. This accommodation results in a very high level of family and support-community involvement. Fawzy et al[28] recently provided findings demonstrating the positive impact of psychiatric intervention on the 6-year disease-free survival rate of stage I melanoma patients in his treatment system. In his study 13 of 34 stage I control subjects had melanoma recurrences (10 had died at the time of his report), whereas only 7 of 34 test patients had recurrences (3 had died). Therefore, the 6-year disease-free survival rate for Fawzy's control subjects was 62%, whereas for his test patients it was 79%, a rate similar to the one cited by Balch[25]. Comparison with the 100% 6-year disease-free survival of 14 early stage (localized) melanoma patients in the Gerson treatment system shows a 27% greater survival benefit (0.21 difference in mean). However, due to the small sample size for Gerson patients, a log-rank test for continuity of survival curves (Figure 3) over the entire study time is below statistical significance, with only 93% confidence (P=.07). Still, especially w!hen seen in the light of stage IIIA, IIIB and IVA melanoma patients in the Gerson system, the complete absence of recurrence in the Gerson patients supports the possibility of a potent physiological effect from Gerson's therapy, in addition to its probable beneficial psychosocial effect. During peer review of this paper, a question arose regarding the potential difference between patients we were able to locate and assess versus those who remained lost to follow-up. How might lost-to-follow-up patients have affected the rates? To address this issue, we compared the current findings with those tabulated[34] in September 1993, at the beginning of our retrospective study. After updating its staging system to match the current report, we found that the 1993 analysis included 44 patients in stages I-IVA assessable for 5-year survival. The 5-year rates were as follows: Stages I and II = 100% (n=12); Stages IIIA and IIIB = 68% (n=25); Stage IVA = 57% (n=7). The average 5-year survival rate for the entire group was 75%. Fourteen patients who had been lost to follow-up in 1993 were located and assessed during the last 2 years. Adding those 14 cases, bringing the number of assessable patients to 58, the rates remained substantially the same (with the exception of IVA, in which the initial sample size was quite small). The 5-year survival rates including those 14 cases are: Stages I and II = 100% (n=14); Stages IIIA and IIIB = 67% (n=30); Stage IVA = 36% (n=14). The average 5-year survival rate of the enlarged group was 67%. An additional 9 patients who were admitted after August 1988 but before August 1990 became assessable for 5-year survival. With inclusion of those cases, bringing the number of patients to 67, therates remained similar: Stages I and II = 100% (n=14); Stages IIIA and IIIB = 71% (n=35); Stage IVA = 39% (n=18). With recently recruited patients, the group's average 5-year survival rate was 69%. There were no statistically significant differences among the average rates (chi-squared=0.786, power=.109). We believe that the continuity of findings at various stages of the investigation suggests that the current rates are probably reliable, and that discovery or recruitment of additional patients, barring the recruitment of substantially greater numbers of stage I and II patients, will probably not alter the average survival rate significantly. We were unable to assess a potential survival benefit for stage IVB melanoma patients in this treatment system. While the Gerson treatment provides many clinical benefits to stage IVB melanoma patients with internal metastases who are able to practice it, these benefits must be measured with validated "quality-of-life" instruments. Such measurements can be accomplished only through prospective data collection, which is ongoing and will be the subject of future reports. Data on exact date and cause of death are beingpursued by application to the National Center for Health Statistics for use of the National Death Index. We will report findings as they become available. Clearly, the search for meaningful biological response modifiers, vaccines, and other means of host stimulation may be paramount for the management of advanced melanoma tumors that are internallymetastasized. In fact, any means of relatively safe tumor debulking must be given serious consideration. This retrospective study is our first (but not our last) effort at assessment of the outcomes of cancer patients moving through the Gerson treatment system.The longest-surviving melanoma patient in this study has been disease-free for 20 years. Four patients who were alive and disease-free at 5 years (reported alive in this assessment) have died. Three stage III patients died of recurrent melanoma after the fifth year (one of them after 16 years). One stage IB patient died after 15 years, of prostate cancer, at age 74. And 41 patients are alive and free from disease. Although retrospective reviews cannot account for many influences, they clearly can be used to describe aggregate outcomes that can stand on their own for purposes of comparison with other groups and treatment systems, and to further the discussion regarding appropriate methods of cancer management. We encourage those involved with other alternative and complementary methods of cancer management to pursue this route. References Gerson M. Dietary considerations in malignant neoplastic disease: preliminary report. Rev. Gastroenterol. 1945;12:419-425. Office of Technology Assessment. Unconventional Cancer Treatments. US Government Printing Office; OTA-H-405:1990. Urbach E. Skin Diseases and Nutrition: Including the Dermatoses of Children, Vienna, Austria: Wilhelm Maudrich; 1932:183. Gerson M. The origin and rationales of dietary treatment of tuberculosis. Med Welt. 1929;3:1313-1317. Urbach E, LeWinn E. Skin Diseases. Nutrition and Metabolism. New York. NY; Grune & Stratton; 1946:530-537. Emerson C. Treatment of tuberculosis by altering metabolism through dietary management (Gerson-Sauerbruch method). Nebr State Med J 1929;14(3):104-107. Gerson M. The cure of advanced cancer by diet therapy: a summary of 30 years of clinical experimentation. Physiol Chem Phys. 1978;10(4):449-464. Gerson M. A Cancer Therapy: Results of Fifty Cases. 5th ed. San Diego, Calif: Gerson Institute; 1990. Gerson M. Effects of combined dietary regime on patients with malignant tumors. Exp Med Surg. 1949;7:299-317. Gerson M. No cancer in normal metabolism: outcomes of a specific therapy. Med Klin. 1954;49(5):175-179. Gerson M. Cancer, a problem of metabolism. Med Klin. 1954;49(26):1028-1032. Gerson M. On the medications of cancer management in the manner of Gerson. Med Klin. 1954;49(49):1977-1978. Ward P S. History of the Gerson Therapy. US Office of Technology Assessment; 1988. Cope F W. Pathology of structured water and associated cations in cells (the tissue damage syndrome) and its medical treatment. Physiol Chem Phys. 1977;9(6):547-553. Evans WED. The Chemistry of Death. Springfield, Ill.: Charles C Thomas; 1963:23-25,31. Gerson M. Diet therapy for lung tuberculosis. Leipzig, Germany: Franz Deuticke; 1934. Hildenbrand GLG, Hildenbrand LC, Bradford KM. Rogers DE, Straus C, Cavin S. The role of follow-up and retrospective data analysis in alternative cancer management: the Gerson experience. J Naturopath Med. In press. Moreschi C. The connection between nutrition and tumor promotion. Z Immanitaetforsch. 1909;2:651. Rous P. The influence of diet on transplanted and spontaneous mouse tumors. J Exp Med. 1914;20:433. Silverstone H, Tannenbaum A. Influence of thyroid hormone on the formation of induced skin tumors in mice. Cancer Res. 1949;9:684-688 Welsch MA. Cohen LA, Welsch CW. Inhibition of growth of human breast carcinoma xenografts by energy expenditure via voluntary exercise in athymic mice fed a high-fat diet. Nutr Cancer. 1995;23:309-317. Gerson M. Fluid rich potassium diet as treatment for cardiorenal insufficiency. Munch Med Wochenschr. 1935;82:571-574. Lechner P, Hildenbrand G. A reply to Saul Green's critique of the rationale for cancer treatment with coffee enemas and diet: cafestol derived from beverage coffee increases bile production in rats; and coffee enemas and diet ameliorate human cancer pain in stages I and II. Townsend Lett Doctors. 1994;130:526-529. Lechner P, Kronberger I. Erfahrungen mit dem Einsatz der Diaet-Therapie in der chirurgischen Onkologie. Aktuel Ernaerungsmmedizin. 1990;2(15):72:78. Balch CM. Cutaneous melanoma: prognosis and treatment results worldwide. Semin Surg Oncol. 1992;8:400-414. Drepper H, Beiss B, Hofherr B. et al. The prognosis of patients with stage III melanoma: prospective long-term study of 286 patients of the Fachklinik Hornheide. Cancer. 1993;71:1239-1246. Ryan L, Kramar A, Borden E. Prognostic factors in metastatic melanoma. Cancer. 1993;71:2995-3005. Fawzy FI. Malignant melanoma: effects of an early structured psychiatric intervention, coping, and affective state on recurrence and survival 6 years later. Arch Gen Psychiatr. 1993:50:681-689. American Joint Committee on Cancer. Manual for Staging of Cancer. 4th ed. Philadelphia, Pa: JB Lippincott: 1992:143-148. Hermanek P, Sobin LH, UICC: TNM Classification of Malignant Tumours. 4th ed. Berlin, Germany: Springer-Verlag: 1987:99-101. Cassileth BR, Lusk EJ, Strouse BA. Bodenheimer BJ. Contemporary unorthodox treatments in cancer. Ann Intern Med. 1984:101:105-112. Ling GN. In Search In Search of the Physical Basis of Life. New York, NY: Plenum Press; 1984:700-711. Tannenbaum A. The initiation and growth of tumors. Introduction. 1: Effects of underfeeding. Am J Cancer. 1940;38(3):335-350. Tannenbaum A. The genesis and growth of tumors. 2: Effects of caloric restriction per se. Cancer Res. 1942;2:460-467. Tannenbaum A. The genesis and growth of tumors. 3: Effects of a high-fat diet. Cancer Res. 1942;2:468-475. Tannenbaum A. The dependence of tumor formation on the degree of caloric restriction. Cancer Res. 1945;5:609-615. Tannenbaum A. The dependence of tumor formation on the composition of the calorie-restricted diet as well as on the degree of restriction. Cancer Res. 1945;5:616-625. Good RA, West A. Fernandes G. Nutritional modulation of immune responses. Fed Proc, 1980;39:3089-3104. Cope FW. A medical application of the Ling Association-Induction Hypothesis: the high potassium, low sodium diet of the Gerson cancer therapy. Physiol Chem Phys Med NMR. 1978;10:465-468. Sikora K, James N, Reed A. Juices, coffee enemas, and cancer. Lancet. 1990;336(8716):677-678. Hildenbrand C. Bradford K, Hildenbrand G. Melanoma retrospective best-case review: tabular report-a review in progress (typescript) 1993. In: Alternative Medicine: Expanding Medical Horizons. NIH publication No. 94-066; December 1994: US Government Printing Office. Financial support: Private grants were provided by Mr. Laurance S. Rockefeller, Arnold and Ann Gumowitz, and Richard Otto. The Gerson Research Organization holds a contract with the Centro Hospitalario Internacional del Pacifico, SA, to perform retrospective and prospective analyses of patient outcomes. The Gerson Therapy Copyright 1994,1995 (c) The Gerson Institute, All rights reserved.WT02-B03-110IA008-000090-B019-465http://www.gerson.com:80/cases.html 207.158.200.123 19970222123105 text/html 24813HTTP/1.1 200 OKDate: Sat, 22 Feb 1997 12:31:17 GMTServer: Apache/1.2b4Connection: closeContent-Type: text/htmlLast-Modified: Mon, 09 Dec 1996 22:48:38 GMTETag: "83e3da-5ffa-32ac9746"Content-Length: 24570Accept-Ranges: bytes The Gerson Therapy - Case Studies Gerson Therapy - Case Studies SIGRID NOVIKOFF, SPREADING ADENOCARCINOMA. September, 1984, lymph nodes in left axilla (armpit) swollen, biopsied: metastatic carcinoma, primary siteunknown, probably breast or lung, other doctors confirmed. Doctor gave her oneyear. Began Gerson Therapy in Mexican hospital November, 1984. All cancerdisappeared. No other treatment. Remained well over ten years. DAVID NELSON, HOPELESS ASTROCYTOMA (BRAIN CANCER). January, 1986, grand malseizure. Surgery removed 50% of lemon-sized tumor, many 'crabgrass roots' intobrain remained. Biopsy: astrocytoma. Doctors said two to 12 months to live.Began Gerson Therapy in Mexican hospital April, 1986. Four MRI scans in threeyears showed reduction and disappearance of tumor. Excellent health, remained free ofcancer for nine years. Son of Bill Nelson. GAIL ALLEN BOGUE, RECURRING BONE CANCER. Declared terminal at age 7. Lumpremoved from leg bone (fibula) and biopsied: giant cell sarcoma. Pain andtumor back in one year. Dr. suggested leg amputation, not to cure cancer, justto reduce pain. Parents refused. Began Gerson Therapy with Dr. Gerson June,1957. Tumor down by half, pain nearly gone in one week. Alive and well, twochildren, 38 years later. GEORGE GIMSON, INOPERABLE BRAIN CANCER Case 35 in A Cancer Therapy. Presentedby Dr. Gerson in 1946 to U.S. Senate Committee. Ulcer biopsied, U.S. Army,August, 1944: basal cell carcinoma. Surgery removed right mastoid cancer.Recurred April, 1945. Discharged, no treatment. Carried to Dr. Gerson, cryingin severe pain, left eye swollen closed, right eye barely open. October, 1945,X-rays showed fist sized tumor at base of skull growing into brain. Almostgone in four weeks. Complete recovery. Remained free of cancer for 49 years.Died of heart attack 1994. LARA BRADLEY, BREAST CANCER (invasive ductal carcinoma) biopsied 1984 withnodules on breast and liver plus medically diagnosed herpes simplex,Epstein-Barr, hypoglycemia, chronic fatigue syndrome, histo-plasmosis (virusfrom birds), severe depression (her three children on drugs). Began GersonTherapy May, 1984 in Mexican hospital. All symptoms disappeared. Still healthy11 years later. Therapy side effects: Dramatic health improvement of entirefamily, including mother's arthritis. ANNA WOMACK, SPREADING BREAST CANCER. right mastectomy February, 1978. Biopsy:adenocarcinoma nine months later, tumor under left arm. Within a few more weeks,several tumors in left breast. Started Gerson Therapy November, 1978 in Mexicanhospital. Lumps gone in 18 months. Now excellent energy, sense of well-being,no recurrence of tumors. Alive and well 17 years later. SHIRLEY TICE (55), SPREADING BREAST CANCER. Biopsied. Multiple deep tumorspartly removed. Two doctors insisted on mastectomy. Warned children she mightnot live six months. Visited Gerson Therapy hospital. Impressed by hopeful,positive, pain free patients off their pain drugs. Very healthy, active,thankful, cancer free ten years later. Enjoys children and grandchildren. WILLIE MAY CHAPPELL, BREAST CANCER SPREAD TO SKULL, SPINE, PELVIS, RIBS, LEGBONE. August 1974, biopsy, left breast and 19 lymph nodes removed. Problemscontinued. Began Laetrile 1975 and Kelley Therapy 1976. By May, 1977 cancerspread to above bones. Began Gerson Therapy in Mexican hospital just after itopened July, 1977. Recovered. Remained well, free of cancer 16 years. Died1994. DR. ELIZABETH CURRY, CERVICAL CANCER. February, 1983 biopsy confirmed by 3pathology labs: cervical cancer (invasive squamous carcinoma, Grade II-III,Stage 1A). Refused hysterectomy, radiation. Began Gerson Therapy in Mexicanhospital March, 1983. Recovered. Had two healthy babies (impossible if she hada hysterectomy). Healthy, active, 12 years later MARILYN BARNES, CERVICAL CANCER AND MELANOMA. Wide excision, biopsy 1979,melanoma (Clark Level 4). Cervical cancer biopsied. Tired, felt sick. BeganGerson Therapy in Mexican hospital September, 1980. Black melanoma pigmentextruded from hand (like Jaquie Davison, Cancer Winner). Marilyn recovered.Rebiopsy March, 1981, cervical cancer gone. Healthy, no cancer in 15 years.(Clark Level 4 nearly always recurs) Ran Gerson halfway house. Prepares Gersonorganic foods at conventions. LOUIS LUCAS, 70, COLON CANCER, SPREAD TO LYMPH NODES and TISSUE OUTSIDE COLON,June, 1989. Six inches of colon removed. Received colostomy. Surgeon saidchances looked bad. Began Gerson Therapy in Mexican hospital August, 1989.Improved quickly. Colostomy reversed, February, 1991. Surgeon found nocancer, was impressed. Patient remains well and cancer free six years later. ROSAMOND RAY, 81, COLON CANCER, MIGRAINES. 1953, blood in stool, pain,weakness. Head of Rectal Surgery, Stanford University Medical School didbiopsy: malignant polyp 13 cm up from rectum. Doctor stated that withoutcolostomy, she had less than 10% chance of survival. Went to Dr. Gerson's NewYork clinic in October, 1953. Recovered. Married in 1955. No more migrainesafter therapy began. Alive and well 40 years later. DELLA ROBINSON, LIVER CANCER. 1974, jaundiced. Portland, Oregon hospital liverscan and biopsy proved cancer. Given three to five weeks to live in January,1975. Weight down to 67 lb. Sent home in severe pain, heavy drugs, semi-coma,hopeless prognosis. Family started Gerson Therapy at home. Able to leave bedin three months, no more pain or drugs. Regained normal 115 lb. weight.Remained well, cancer-free for twenty years. Passed away 1995, age 90, ofcauses other than cancer. JESUS LECHUGA, 81, SPREADING LUNG CANCER. January, 1977 cough, Bronchioscopy,mediastinoscopy and biopsy. Lung cancer spread to mediastinum, glands, notoperable, 10 radiation treatments reduced tumor 80%. 30 days later sick,coughing again, X-ray showed 2 inch tumor. Started Gerson Therapy in Mexicanhospital October, 1979. X-ray in 13 months showed lungs cancer free. Alive andwell 16 years later. ALLISON SINCLAIR, RECURRING LYMPHOCYTIC LYMPHOMA September, 1979, lemon-sizedlump on neck, Surgery and biopsy. Chemotherapy recommended, refused. Jan.,1980, new lump in same area, chemotherapy again recommended, refused. Apr.,1980, lumps to 4 x 4 cm. Started Gerson Therapy in Mexican hospital. Remained free of cancer for over 15 years. Director of the Turtle Creek Psychotherapy Center in Dallas. DELPHINE LETTAU, LYMPHOCYTIC LYMPHOMA, EXCEPTIONALLY AGGRESSIVE. After yearsof infections, candidiasis, anxiety and depression, 1986 lymph node biopsied:malignant lymphoma. Radiation and chemo offered little hope; refused. GersonTherapy in Mexican hospital February, 1986. Healthy, active nine years later. DR. JOHN J. ALBRACHT, Chiropractor, RECURRING INOPERABLE LYMPHOMA. 1963,surgery, biopsy: retroperitoneal lymphoma. Radiation arrested disease untilDecember, 1986. Pain, severe hemorrhage, partial obstruction. Seven feet ofsmall intestine with tumor removed. Recurring umbilical mass; biopsy:malignant diffuse mixed lymphoma. Had only two chemotherapy treatments (Twochemotherapy treatments can't cure cancer). Too sickening. Diarrhea 20 times aday, vomiting, lost voice, lost 55 lb. Began Gerson Therapy at home January,1987, improved. To Mexican hospital February, 1987. Recovered. Surgeon said,"You are cured," credits Gerson. Remains well eight years later. BEATA BISHOP, SPREADING MELANOMA. Skin lesion biopsied, melanoma (Clark level4) spreading. Wide excision December, 1979. Spread into groin in December. Moresurgery refused. Began Gerson Therapy in Mexican hospital in January, 1981.Recovered. Former BBC writer, wrote excellent book: A Time to Heal.(see book list). Travels throughout Europe lecturing on Gerson Therapy. Aliveand well 14 years later. EDWARD DOWD, 69, SPREADING MELANOMA. Case #14 in A Cancer Therapy. Dormantmole began growing, removed, biopsied. Diagnosis melanoma, metastasized.Surgeon recommended radical neck dissection with both axillas, refused. Began GersonTherapy with Dr. Gerson May, 1954. Glands and nodes disappeared quickly.Discontinued therapy prematurely (after seven months). Recurrence. Returned totherapy. Completely healed. Now in good health, remains cancer free 41 yearslater. DEBBIE DOLE, SPREADING MELANOMA. Mole on arm, biopsied. Melanoma. Deep excisiondone February, 1978. Five months later, new tumor under arm. Additional surgerysuggested, refused. Started Gerson Therapy August, 1978 in Mexican hospital.Tumor disappeared in one month. Alive and well 17 years later. JAQUIE DAVISON, WIDESPREAD MELANOMA. In 1975 tumors all over head, neck,abdomen, diaphragm, arms, legs, abdomen bloated to 30 lb., melanoma biopsied,Doctor said under three weeks to live, death would be swift and certain. Gaveaway possessions, made funeral dress. Family began Gerson Therapy at home.Recovered, wrote inspiring book "Cancer Winner" (see book list). Cancer free20 years later. JOHN ASHBAUGH, 73, SPREADING MELANOMA. Case #13 in A Cancer Therapy. Bleedingmole biopsied, melanoma, in March, 1950. October 1950 new lump, arm amputated.July, 1951 new tumor biopsied, melanoma New moles, coughing, X-rays showed lungtumors, black masses in muscles and glands. Began therapy with Dr. Gerson inOctober, 1951. Tumors disappeared. No recurrence in 42 years. Died of othercauses, 1993. LINDA COFFEE, SPREADING MELANOMA, OSTEOPOROSIS. January, 1985, biopsy,melanoma, widely spread. Chemotherapy failed, tumors continued to grow duringtreatment. (Chemotherapy is not successful with spreading melanoma.) BeganGerson Therapy in Mexican hospital June, 1985. Complete remission.Osteoporosis disappeared on the same therapy. Alive ten years later. MAUREEN BINNEY, 86, SPREADING MELANOMA, HIGH BLOOD PRESSURE, ARTHRITIS,CATARACTS, POOR HEARING, LOSS OF EQUILIBRIUM. July, 1980, City of Hope surgeon"couldn't get all" of neck tumor. Biopsy: melanoma. More surgery to removemore cancer refused. Given two months to live. Began Gerson Therapy at Mexicanhospital in September, 1980. Cancer, high blood pressure, equilibrium problemsall healed. Family says she hears too much. Reads easily. Alive, cancer-free15 years later. SUSAN CANTRELL, SPREADING MELANOMA. Moles removed from right wrist, recurred.5mm lesion excised. Malignant melanoma biopsied Jan. 1980, University ofCalifornia. Three pathologists concurred. Repeated excisions. Spread intoright axilla, excised. Continued spreading. Began Gerson Therapy in Mexicanhospital, November, 1980. Complete remission. Still alive 15 years later. TOM POWERS, SPREADING MELANOMA. Biopsied March, 1982, melanoma (Clark level4). Recurred at excision site within ten days, many distant metastases. Toldsurgery hopeless. Began Gerson Therapy May, 1982 in Mexican hospital. No othertreatment. Complete remission, Two more children, alive and well 13 yearslater. VIRGINIA GOLDEN, 75, SPREADING MELANOMA. Case #12 in A Cancer Therapy.September, 1945, non-healing ankle wound excised, biopsied, melanoma. June1946, recurred plus dark nodes in groin. August, 1946, two new recurrences,ankle edema. Hopeless prognosis. Began therapy with Dr. Gerson September,1946. Recovered, healthy baby, October, 1948. Remains healthy, active, nocancer in 49 years. LESLIE TELL, WIDELY SPREAD INOPERABLE OVARIAN CANCER. March, 1985 Ultrasoundshowed large mass. Hysterectomy, oophorectomy, omentectomy, all tumors over 1cm removed. Biopsy serous cystadenocarcinoma, FIGO stage three (Gilda Radner'scancer), many tumors in peritoneal wall, spleen, diaphragm, cecum, appendix,pelvic wall, bladder. Ascites. No hope by surgery, radiation, chemo. BeganGerson Therapy at home July, 1985. Completely recovered. Healthy, active. Nocancer in ten years. PATRICIA AINEY, PANCREAS CANCER SPREAD TO LIVER (Michael Landon's cancer),SPLEEN AND GALL BLADDER. In pain, vomiting blood. Pancreas cancer biopsiedJanuary, 1986. CAT scan showed tumor in liver, spleen, gall bladder. Givenhopeless prognosis. Began Gerson Therapy in Mexican hospital March, 1986.Patient says "complete turnaround in 10 days." Recovery shown by CAT scan 6months later amazed her Canadian doctor. Enjoys work, grandchildren. Feels"really good" nine years later. GEORGE BIRNIE, 73, PANCREATIC CANCER. January, 1983 CAT scan showed tumor inbody and neck of pancreas, probably into head of pancreas. Top Victoria, B.C.,Canada doctors said 100% certainty of pancreatic cancer. Conventional therapyhopeless. Began Gerson Therapy in Mexican hospital February, 1983. Later CATscans show recovery. In good health, active 12 years later. DORA SHERKEN, LARGE PITUITARY CANCER IN BRAIN. Case #1 A Cancer Therapy.Dizziness, weakness, irritability, depression, fell unconscious in 1942. Hospital tests diagnosed adenoma. Right eye blind, left optic nerve partlydestroyed. Brought by ambulance, unconscious, to Dr. Gerson, March, 1944.Remained unconscious during first week of treatment. After two months didhousework, eyesight improved. Did secretarial work. Two CAT scans in 1980showed brain, bones and pituitary clear. Remained free of cancer for 50 years.Died at age 92 of heart failure. ART McGARRY, PROSTATE CANCER, HERNIATED DISCS, HYPERTENSION, KIDNEY COLICATTACKS, SPASTIC COLON. Adenocarcmoma of prostate biopsied April, 1981. BeganGerson Therapy in Mexican hospital April, 1981. Ongoing review by pastpresident of California Medical Association documented complete remission.Hypertension, kidney problems, spastic colon and herniated discs (on fulldisability) also cured. High energy, active, healthy, enjoying life 14 yearslater. PAUL TERRELL, PROSTATE CANCER. Lumps on prostate late 1976. Urologist didbiopsy. Confirmed cancer. Operation recommended, refused. Started GersonTherapy at home (no doctors or hospital available at time) in March, 1977.Repeated tests in last few years continue to show no cancer present. Alive,well 15 years later with no other therapy. Subsequently lost to follow-up. EDMUND BRAUN, 70, TESTICULAR CANCER, SPREAD THROUGH BOTH LUNGS AND CHEST. Case #11 A Cancer Therapy. Ten years after Los Alamos atom bomb radiation, hadenlarged glands in groin. Right testicle removed, biopsied, March, 1956 X-raysshowed nodules in chest, 88 deep X-ray treatments. More X-rays showed cancerthrough both lungs. Sent home hopeless. Began Gerson Therapy with Dr. Gerson,April, 1956. X-rays showed cancer gone, Back to work October, 1957. Cancer-free 38 years. JOSEPHINE MERHAR, UTERINE CANCER. (declared terminal) Excessive uterinebleeding, October, 1978. D and C, November 17, uterus twice normal size, biopsyshowed cancer in wall of uterus, hysterectomy advised, refused. Began GersonTherapy December, 1978 over violent protest of physician who threatened thatshe would die within a year. Completely recovered, cancer-free, 17 years later. MELVA BLACKBURN, 79, DIABETES, ARTHRITIS, ALZHEIMERS, KIDNEY, ADRENAL DISEASE,CUSHING'S SYNDROME, ETC. Medical problems from 1944. Treated until 1979.Heart, coronary artery disease. Diabetes drugs after 1965. Poor control oflegs, feel. Cushing's syndrome (adrenal disease, obesity, fatigue, weakness,osteoporosis, edema, infections). Pneumonia twice/year. Enlarged liver.Arthritis in all joints. Anxiety, ataxia, confusion, aphasia. Alzheimer's(premature old age) diagnosed. Years on drugs, many surgeries. Began GersonTherapy in Mexican hospital October, 1979. Rapidly improved. All diseasesgone, no drugs. Astounded her doctors. Remains active, well 16 years later. DR. JAMES CLARK, NON-HEALING INFECTIONS, ARRHYTHMIA, INSOMNIA. 1963 ankleinjury, infection wouldn't heal. 13 operations, grafts didn't heal. After yearin hospital, leg removed below knee. Continued infections, antibiotics,drugs, arrhythmia, stomach distress, confusion, headaches, couldn'tconcentrate, despaired of living, in psychiatric hospital. Severe insomnia.Began Gerson Therapy in Mexican hospital February, 1978. Slept 2nd night, Allproblems gone. Healthy 17 years later. YVONNE NIENSTADT, SEVERE ASTHMA. Coloratura soprano singing career blockedafter Minneapolis debut by severe asthma (4+). Estrogen for acne at age 13.Frequent antibiotics for bronchial and bladder infections. Accident impactedspine in 1972, asthma followed. Herbs, juices, raw foods helped, did not cure.Began Gerson Therapy at home in 1977. Healthy, doing well 17 years later. ELIZABETH BIRDWELL, MULTIPLE SCLEROSIS, BARTTER'S SYNDROME. After early lifeof poor health, many problems (mother took DES during pregnancy) multiplesclerosis diagnosed. Dec. 1973, Bartter's Syndrome diagnosed, alsohypothyroidism, hypoglycemia, multiple allergies beginning kidney failure,convulsions, profound exhaustion and muscle weakness. Many drugs. Began GersonTherapy in Mexican hospital May, 1984. Steady improvement. Well 11 years later,works as model. BILL NELSON, CHEMICAL SENSITIVITY, CANDIDA (YEAST) After 1977 restaurant mealhad 'hard time breathing'. Given drugs without diagnosis. 1978, First of 5sinus surgeries. Didn't help, couldn't breathe, more drugs, antibiotics. Whitefungus spots on mouth, 'privates', anus Probably yeast in lungs. On 60 mg.cortisone. No relief. Couldn't sleep. On continuous oxygen. Began GersonTherapy in Mexican hospital April, 1986. Immediate improvement. Now completelyrecovered. Continues good energy, feels normal nine years later. Father ofDavid Nelson. MARGE LEMLY, HEART DISEASE, EMPHYSEMA. April, 1976 heart attack, nervousbreakdown, sharp chest pains, on oxygen for three years, unable to move,extreme breathing difficulties. Doctors prescribed digitalis, nitroglycerin,Valium, enderol - refused. Emphysema diagnosed. Constant oxygen, diarrhea,bedfast. Lost weight to 76 lb. Began Gerson Therapy in Mexican hospital inOctober, 1979. Regained weight. Alive, well 16 years later. FRANSCA BAUMAN, 'HOPELESS' CHRONIC HEPATITIS. 21 years old in December, 1979advanced chronic hepatitis, in wheel chair, given hopeless prognosis. Severeedema, extensive prednisone, depression, confusion. Began Gerson TherapyDecember, 1979 in Mexican hospital. Completely recovered. Gave birth to twohealthy children; active in church, travels all over world. Healthy 16 yearslater. MARILYN DENT, PAIN, MIGRAINES, NARCOTICS, TACHYCARDIA, HYPOGLYCEMIA, MENTALILLNESS. 11 operations in 11 years - hysterectomy, exploratory, bladder, etc.Surgery injured sciatic nerve. Constant severe pain, sharp intermittent painhead to feet. Narcotics, Valium. Migraines, nervous breakdown, psychiatricward. Tachycardia, hypoglycemia. Began Gerson Therapy in Mexican hospitalOctober, 1977. Recovered, good condition, off all drugs. Lives normal life 18years later. CHRIS MATIESEN, ULCERATIVE COLITIS, INFERTILITY. Diagnosed 1974 afterproctoscopy, colonoscopy. 60 mg Sulfadine, prednisone. Latter caused weightgain, acne, moon face, facial redness. Doctor said diet makes no difference,urged removal of colon, refused. Started Gerson Therapy in June, 1979 inMexican hospital In five months, back to work, felt normal, off all drugs,became father. Alive and well 16 years later. BILL GOERDES, 96, SEVERE RHEUMATOID ARTHRITIS, BLEEDING STOMACH ULCERS. 1941,NY Presbyterian Medical Center X-rays showed spine fused top to bottom withrheumatoid arthritis. Offered no hope. Had bleeding stomach ulcers. BeganGerson Therapy with Dr. Gerson October, 1941. Ulcers gone in six weeks.Light work in 7 1/2 months, heavy duties in 14 months. Health completelyrestored. Last contact indicated over 50 years of good health. DEANNA POWELL DOUD, SEVERE RHEUMATOID ARTHRITIS. Began 1970, bedridden 1976,gold, prednisone. Constant pain, stiffness, all joints, swollen, elbows,knees, most fingers bent, frozen. Bony deformities, great difficulty walking.Heart palpitations, labored breathing, pale, anemic, hypoglycemic. 15-20aspirins daily, still pain, insomnia. Began Gerson Therapy in Mexicanhospital May, 1978. In six weeks, pain gone, most lumps dissolving. Allproblems resolved except a few joints not quite clear. Excellent energy,active, 17 years later. Married, has family. SUSAN ADAMS, SEVERE RHEUMATOID ARTHRITIS. April 1979, three weeks afterchildbirth, 'it hit all at once.' All joints swollen, stiff. On aspirin,losing hearing, stomach upset. On Motrin one year, hands locked shut, armsimmovable. Knees 3x size, ankles huge. Couldn't do anything, lay in bed andcried. Parents heard of Gerson Therapy. Coffee enemas helped. Gerson Therapyin Mexican hospital June, 1980, improved. After first year, really got better.Plays piano duets with son! Rides horseback. She is still well 15 years later. JULIE KLINDWORTH, SYSTEMIC LUPUS ERYTHEMATOSUS (SLE). Late 1979, all jointsswollen, no relief by drugs, couldn't push phone buttons, could hardlyswallow. Worse after ten days in hospital. Mayo Clinic diagnosed SLE (SystemicLupus Erythematosus). Said they couldn't help. Warned against "quack diet".Began Gerson Therapy at home January, 1980. improved from first day. Drove car,cared for home in three months. Doctor said "complete clinical remission."Alive and well 12 years later, lost to follow-up since. MARY ORMESHER, MARTHA ORMESHER HOWARD, IDENTICAL TWINS, TAKAYASU'S ARTERITIS(PULSELESS DISEASE). Started with Mary, October, 1978, age 16, infection, flu,diarrhea, severe headaches, pain on breathing, extreme chest pains. Dr.Johnson found no blood pressure or pulse in right arm. Diagnosis: Takayasu'sArteritis, confirmed by Mayo Clinic February, 1979. Given prednisone. Dr.Roland Johnson (Diplomate: Amer. Board of Internal Med. ) stated, "This is auniformly malignant and fatal arteritis." A few months later, twin sisterMartha had same symptoms and diagnosis. Mary began Gerson Therapy June, 1980in Mexican hospital, Martha began August, 1980. Included adjustments, herbs,etc. Steady improvement. Both active, functioning well 15 years later. Copyright 1995, 1996 (c) The Gerson Institute, All rights reserved.WT02-B03-111IA008-000090-B020-3http://www.gerson.com:80/booklist.html 207.158.200.123 19970222123122 text/html 19029HTTP/1.1 200 OKDate: Sat, 22 Feb 1997 12:31:38 GMTServer: Apache/1.2b4Connection: closeContent-Type: text/htmlLast-Modified: Fri, 13 Dec 1996 18:45:34 GMTETag: "80e39f-4962-32b1a44e"Content-Length: 18786Accept-Ranges: bytes Gerson Therapy and Health-RelatedBooks Gerson Therapy and Health-Related Books To order any of these books, please use the orderform. A Cancer Therapy -- Results of Fifty Cases Max Gerson, M.D.$14.95 The most complete book on the Gerson Therapy. Dr. Gerson describeshow the treatment reactivates the body's healing mechanism in chronic degenerativediseases. Extensive explanation of the theory, research and exact practiceof the therapy, and presentation of fifty documented case histories. Alsoincluded is a modified version of the therapy for use with non-malignantdiseases. Censured for Curing Cancer: The American Experience of Dr. Max GersonS. J. Haught $6.95 Newspaper reporter S. J. Haught was assignedto write an article, The Unveiling of a Quack, about Dr. Gerson.This book is Haught's story of his research and his own discovery of Gerson'ssuccess in healing "incurable" illness. The book has many personalstories, and examines the suppression of information about Gerson's treatment.Also included are case histories, and Dr. Gerson's 1946 testimony beforethe U.S. Senate, in which he presented healed "incurable" cancerpatients. The Gerson Primer Revised, Edited by the Gerson Institute$19.95 A companion to A CancerTherapy , this workbook provides practical resources and guidancefor patients on the Gerson Therapy. The Primer includes notes from lecturesby Charlotte and other Gerson-trained personnel, information on adjuvanttherapies and procedures, necessities for doing the therapy at home, laboratorytest interpretation and more. Includes all of the recipes in the GersonTherapy Recipes book. Gerson Therapy Recipes Edited by the Gerson Institute $5.95A variety of delicious, healthy recipes -- main courses, side dishes, dessertsand salads -- for Gerson Therapy patients and anyone who wants to healand prevent disease through diet. A companion to the FoodPreparation video. A Time to Heal (formerly My Triumph Over Cancer), Beata Bishop$6.95 Told that her spreading melanoma would take her life by 1981, Beatatraveled from London to Mexico to begin Gerson Therapy treatment. She writesabout her experiences at the hospital with humor and introspection. Beatais an experienced journalist and broadcaster for the BBC, and her bookillustrates her newfound sense of well being. Cancer Winner (photocopy edition) Jacquie Davison $12.00After being diagnosed with advanced terminal melanoma and given just afew weeks to live, Jacquie found Dr. Gerson's book and started on the therapyat home. This inspiring book chronicles Jacquie's experience of seeingher tumors recede and feeling her body rebuild itself on the Gerson therapy.Jacquie remains cancer-free 20 years later. The Gerson Healing Newsletters $64.00 The complete set of backissues of the membership publication of the Gerson Institute. Includesmany interesting articles case histories of recovered patients and scientificrationales for various aspects of the Gerson therapy. The Genial Seed Giuliano Dego $2.00 An epic 37 stanzapoem by one of Europe's foremost poets, a former Gerson patient. A touching,beautiful tribute to Dr. Max Gerson on the centennial of his birth. Diet, Food, Food Additives, Etc. Empty Harvest Dr. Bernard Jensen and Mark Anderson $9.95Shows how our organs are unalterably tied to the soil, the water, the air,when any of these are polluted, our bodies eventually suffer. Everything You Wanted to Know About Potassium, But Were Too TiredTo Ask Betty Kamen Ph.D $10.95. Points out the many seriousphysical and neurological problems that even a slight potassium deficiencycan cause, and how simple it is to correct these problems by maintaininga healthful potassium balance. Facts about Fats John Finnigan $8.95 This is a thoroughlyresearched and easy to read book that separates facts from controversyand sets the records straight by exposing major contributions to heartdisease, cancer and other serious illnesses. Fats and Oils Udo Erasmus $22.95 The most complete guideto fats and oils in health and nutrition, this book describes the successof Dr. Johanna Budwig in using unrefined flax oils to help heal cancer,arteriosclerosis and other degenerative diseases. Important informationfor Gerson patients and all people. Fresh Vegetable and Fruit Juices Norman Walker $5.95 Arevision of the classic "Raw Vegetable Juices" by the man whorecovered from life-threatening illness using vegetable juices and laterdeveloped the Norwalk Juicer. Pottenger's Cats Francis M. Pottenger, Jr., M.D. $7.95The classic research study showing the dramatic degeneration of successivegenerations of animals fed cooked food instead of raw food. Emotional Health, Meditation and Visualization Anatomy of an Illness as Perceived by the Patient: Reflections onHealing and Regeneration Norman Cousins $11.95 Famous author'spersonal account of his recovery from a fatal disease -- after doctorsgave him up -- by a nutritional program and a remarkable "secret ingredient"-- humor! Bright Words for Dark Days: Meditations for Women Who Get The BluesCaroline Adams Miller $9.95 This inspirational book offers healingwords which can be a great comfort during times of heartache and sadness.Each day of the year, advice, hope, and understanding can be found in thesepages Conscious Eating Gabriel Cousens, M.D. $19.95 This isa thoughtful and comprehensive look at diet and the relationship of foodto spiritual life. A live-food vegetarian diet is fully supported for realizinga healthy body, sharp mind, and strengthened spirit. The most essentialquestions regarding food choices are clarified. The Healer Within: The New Medicine of Mind and Body StevenLocke, M.D. $5.99 The new science of psychoneuroimmunology (PNI)) showsastounding ways in which emotions and attitudes, both negative and positive,can affect health and treatment of illness. How to Live Between Office Visits Bernie Siegel M.D. $12.95This book answers the questions we've all wanted to ask about dealing withlife's challenges and difficulties. The answers help guide readers to lookinto their own hearts and find strength in the face of adversity, whetherit be life-threatening illness or other tragedies. Love, Medicine and Miracles Bernie Siegel M.D. $12.95A nationally acclaimed surgeon presents case histories of "incurable"cancer victims who have regained health through mental and emotional controlof their bodies. Meaning and Medicine -- Doctor's Tales of Breakthrough and HealingLarry Dossey, M.D. $12.95 Vital new evidence of the mind-body connectionoffers supporting proof that even genetic diseases can yield to the powerof one's belief. Dossey shows that health and illness are sometimes morea matter of being than doing, and that the individual is often a more potentheater than doctors and drugs. Minding the Body, Mending the Mind Joan Borysenko Ph.D.$12.95 Dr. Borysenko explains her pioneer non-drug approaches to achievingalmost miraculous improvements in patients after all orthodox treatmentshave failed. Women's Bodies Women's Wisdom Christine Northrup, M.D.$14.95 This book explores the connection between emotional suffering andphysical illness. It shows women how to heal themselves by listening totheir bodies' own wisdom. Stories are presented of patients who heatedtheir diseases by attending to the emotional wounds that developed in thecontext of their everyday lives. Environmental and Medical Toxins Fluoride: The Aging Factor John Yiamouyiannis, Ph.D.$14.95 Complete, well-documented research on the use of fluoride in drinkingwater, toothpaste, and dental treatments. Contrary to popular notion, Yiamouyiannis,a former public health official, shows that fluoride does not reduce cavities,and instead, contributes to mottling of teeth, osteoporosis, cancer, arthritis,and other degenerative diseases. It's All In Your Head Hal A. Huggins, D.D.S. $19.95 Learn about the many symptoms, allergies, and other conditions causedby mercury fillings, and how to avoid other sources of mercury in the environment,as well as how to correctly remove the offending fillings. A must for anyonesuffering from unexplained neurological, allergic and immunological problems. Malathion, the Toxic Time Bomb Betsy Russell-Manning $19.95This book addresses the widespread use of malathion in America. A timelycompilation offsets for people who are concerned about toxic chemical pollution The Root Canal Coverup George Meinig, D.D.S., F.A.C.D. $19.95 The founder of the Association of Root Canal Specialists reveals hisresearch into the degenerative diseases and health problems caused by rootcanals. General Health, Healing and Wellness Colon Health: Key to a Vibrant Life Norman Walker $5.95Dramatic evidence that every organ, gland and cell in the body is affectedby the condition of the colon and how this knowledge can lead to relieffrom numerous ailments. Complete Book of Homeopathy Michael Weiner and Kathleen Gross$9.95 Provides information on history of homeopathy, defines its principles,and offers a guide to practical applications, case studies, and remedies. Dealing with Depression Naturally Syd Baumel $19.95 Two dozennatural, drugless methods of fighting the insidious, draining and oftendeadly plague of depression. Enzyme Nutrition: The Food Enzyme Concept Dr. Edward Howell$8.95 Startling facts about the essential rote of enzymes, what they are,and how they work. Everyday Cancer Risks and How to Avoid Them Mary Levestein$11.95 There are many things everyone can do to minimize, if not avoid,the risk of cancer. But this involves knowing the risks, and what choicesone must make to improve survival odds. Guess What Came To Dinner: Parasites and Your Health Ann LouiseGittleman $9.95 This alarming guide offers crucial information to guardagainst parasitic-related disorders by explaining what they are, how theyare transmitted, and the damage they do. How to Raise a Healthy Child... In Spite of Your Doctor RobertMendelsohn, M.D. $5.99 World famous pediatrician and "medicalheretic" gives highly competent medical advice, but also advocates"mother nature" as the best doctor. Hypothyroidism: The Unsuspected Illness Broda Barnes M.D.and Lawrence Galton $24.95 Low thyroid function is one of the granddisturbances that many people suffer from without even realizing it. Itmaybe responsible for headaches, repeated infections, unyielding skin problems,and much more. This book tells how hypothyroidism maybe affecting yourheath. Miracle Nutrient - Coenzyme Q10 Gerry Hunt and E. G. Bliznakov,M.D. $6.95 Learn how Co-Q10 improves cardiac function, normalizes bloodpressure, boosts the immune system, burns fat to normalize weight, andmuch more. PDR - Family Guide to Prescription Drugs $24.95 Based on thePhysician's Desk reference, this book has the same information that physiciansrely on, in easy-to-understand English. Lists over 1,600 prescription drugs,and includes a Quick Reference section on the 100 most widely used medications.1,000 full-color photos. One Minute (or so) Healer Dana Ullman, M.P.H. $9.95 Thisunique resource guide offers hundreds of immediately useful yet littleknown tips for improving health and treating a wide variety of common illnessesand ailments naturally. Sharks Don't Get Cancer: How Shark Cartilage could Save Your LifeDr. I. William Kland and Linda Comac $11.95 Years of research by qualifiedbiochemists confirm that shark cartilage contains a substance which inhibitscancer growth and can also alleviate arthritic pain and inflammation, neovascularglaucoma, and psoriasis. Shot in the Dark: Vaccination May Be Hazardous. Harris Coulterand Barbara Fisher $19.95 A qualified medical researcher questionsthe safety of the DPT vaccine and the conspiratorial relationship betweenthe FDA and the drug companies. A guide to concerned parents and warningsigns of adverse reactions in their children. Solved, the Riddle of Illness Stephen P. Longer and JamesF. Scheer $12.95 A leading specialist in preventive medicine explainssimple ways hypothyroidism, a debilitating hormone disorder, may be discoveredand treated successfully by natural methods. Medical Politics The Cancer Blackout Nat Morris $6.95 A 200 year historyof the development, use, and suppression of many successful, non-toxiccancer remedies. Confessions of a Medical Heretic Robert Mendelsohn, M.D.$14.95 Dr. Mendelsohn campaigned nationwide that modern medicine's methodsare rarely effective, and in many instances are more dangerous than thedisease they were supposed to diagnose and treat. Healthy School Lunch Action Guide Susan Campbell and ToddWinant $19.95 This guide shows how to bring healthier lunches to theschools in your community and how to teach and motivate children to makehealthy food choices. Outrageous Practices: The Alarming Truth about How Medicine MistreatsWomen Leslie Laurence and Beth Weinhouse $22.59 This book shinesa penetrating tight on the medical establishment to discover the existenceof pervasive neglect, rampant gender bias, and systematized discriminationin women's health care. Racketeering in Medicine James Carter, M.D. $12.95 Thisstinging expose uncovers many of the disturbing politics taking place inorganized medicine. Organic Gardening Carrots Love Tomatoes - Secrets of Companion Planting LouiseRiotte $9.95 An A to Z compendium of the secrets of companion plantingfor successful gardening. This practical book describes plants that helpeach other to grow well. How To Grow More Vegetables John Jeavons $14.95... thanyou ever thought possible, in less land than you can imagine. That's thefull title of the book, and it accurately describes the subject matter.Jeavons teaches you numerous methods to get a larger yield ins smatteramount of apace, and with teas work, as well. An excellent book, whetheryou're planting a small garden on the balcony of your apartment, or a largeplot to feed dozens of people. The Gerson Institute and Cancer Curing Society Post Office Box 430 Bonita, CA 91908-0430 email: info@gerson.org Tel: 619 585 7600 Fax: 619 585 7610 Back to the Gerson Therapy home pageWT02-B03-112IA008-000090-B020-37http://www.gerson.com:80/vidlist.html 207.158.200.123 19970222123142 text/html 3899HTTP/1.1 200 OKDate: Sat, 22 Feb 1997 12:32:00 GMTServer: Apache/1.2b4Connection: closeContent-Type: text/htmlLast-Modified: Mon, 09 Dec 1996 23:00:15 GMTETag: "878a95-e4a-32ac99ff"Content-Length: 3658Accept-Ranges: bytes GersonTherapy and Related Videotapes Gerson Therapy and Related Videotapes To order any of these videotapes, please use the order form . Cancer Doesn't Scare Me Anymore! Lorraine Day,M.D. $19.95 Dr. Day, for 15 years a San Francisco traumasurgeon and professor of orthopedic surgery, developed breastcancer. She rejected orthodox treatment and cured herselfusing natural methods based on the Gerson therapy. In ascathing indictment of orthodox treatment methods Dr. Dayuses articles in the Journal of the American MedicalAssociation, the New England Journal of Medicineand the respected British medical journal Lancet todemonstrate the failures of conventional medical approachesin the treatment of cancer. An excellent video for thoseseeking rational scientific evidence of the value ofalternative therapies. 77 minutes, VHS The Gerson Therapy: Elizabeth Claire Prophetinterviews Charlotte Gerson $19.95 This video is atwo-hour interview of Charlotte Gerson originally producedfor Summit University television. A well-produced, goodintroduction to the Gerson Therapy. Healing Incurable Diseases: The GersonTherapy, Volume I - Overview and Patient Testimonials$19.95 Available June 1996. This new video wasrecorded in September 1995 and features an introductorylecture on the Gerson therapy, the presentation of healed"incurable" patients and question and answers. 120mins. VHS Healing Incurable Diseases: The GersonTherapy, Volume II - The Gerson Therapy at Home $59.95Available June 1996. This new (1995) video describesthe "nuts and bolts" of the Gerson Therapy at home.Includes specific details about foods, juices, water,medications, flareups, common mistakes and much more. 2 tapes, over 4 hours Healing Incurable Diseases: The GersonTherapy, Volume III - Basic Food Preparation $29.95 In thiscompanion to the Gerson Therapy recipe book, Charlotte Gerson shows you how to prepare all of the juices used on the Gerson therapy, demonstrates meal preparation and proper cookingtechniques, and explains many other important aspects of theGerson therapy. Essential for Gerson patients. 110 minutes.VHS. Healing Incurable Diseases: 3 volume set$99.95 This set includes all 3 votumes (4 video tapes) for aspecial discounted price. The Gerson Therapy: Fifty Healed"Incurables" $39.95 Recorded during the 1981convention honoring the 100th anniversary of Dr. Max Gerson'sbirth, this video includes a 40 minute lecture by CharlotteGerson, followed by the presentation of almost fifty healed"incurables". 2 tapes, 3 hours total. VHS. Afree gift with a minimum $100 membershipcontribution. The Gerson Institute Post Office Box 430 Bonita, CA 91908-0430 Tel: 619 585 7600 Fax: 619 585 7610 Toll free: 888-4-GERSON email: mail@gerson.org Return to the Gerson Therapy home page. WT02-B03-113IA008-000090-B020-65http://www.gerson.com:80/default.html 207.158.200.123 19970222123156 text/html 3102HTTP/1.1 200 OKDate: Sat, 22 Feb 1997 12:32:20 GMTServer: Apache/1.2b4Connection: closeContent-Type: text/htmlLast-Modified: Mon, 09 Dec 1996 22:49:51 GMTETag: "83e3d0-b2d-32ac978f"Content-Length: 2861Accept-Ranges: bytes  The Gerson Institute The Gerson Therapy The Gerson Therapy is an intensive, nutrition-based and detoxifying medicaltreatment for cancer, heart disease, diabetes and other chronic, degenerative diseases. It worksclosely with nature to help the sick body to rid itself of disease through the supportive effects ofsimple foods, juices, and non-toxic medication. Its successes in curing the dread diseases of ourtimes for the past 75 years have no parallel in the conventional medical context. The Gerson Institute is a non-profit organization dedicated to the holistic treatment of degenerative diseases. We strive to educate the public on the benefits of holistic healing through worldwide lectures and seminars, publication and distribution of literature on the Gerson Therapy, Training programs for Physicians, Healthcare practitioners, and home care assistants, and through establishing ties to approved clinics and treatment centers. The Therapy Information on the Therapy Events Upcoming Gerson Therapy Conventions and Lectures Care Centers About the Therapy Centers Histories Case Histories and Survival Rates Training Gerson Practitioner Training programs News Gerson News and Announcements Information Gerson Books, Audio Tapes and Video Tapes Newsletters Selections from the Gerson Healing Newsletter Resources Suggested Resources from the Gerson Institute Links Related Internet Resources and Organizations We welcome all comments. Please contact us at: The Gerson Institute and Cancer Curing Society Box 430 Bonita, CA 91908 Please direct email to: info@gerson.org tel: (619) 585 7600 Toll Free: (888) 4-GERSON fax: (619) 585 7610 Copyright 1994,1995,1996 (c) The Gerson Institute. All rights reserved. This page v3.6, last updated 12/9/96. Questions, comments or problems with this page? Please send to email to webmaster@gerson.org WT02-B03-114IA008-000090-B020-97http://www.gerson.com:80/audlist.html 207.158.200.123 19970222123209 text/html 3698HTTP/1.1 200 OKDate: Sat, 22 Feb 1997 12:32:30 GMTServer: Apache/1.2b4Connection: closeContent-Type: text/htmlLast-Modified: Mon, 09 Dec 1996 22:46:45 GMTETag: "80f52a-d81-32ac96d5"Content-Length: 3457Accept-Ranges: bytes GersonTherapy and Related Audio Cassette Tapes Gerson Therapy and Related Audio Cassette Tapes To order any of these audio cassette tapes, please usethe order form . The Gerson Therapy at Home $24.00 The audiocassette version of Volume II of the video tape series.Features Charlotte Gerson describing the "nuts andbolts" of the Gerson therapy, including many commonlyasked questions, problems and pitfalls, and much more. 4tapes, almost 4 hours. From Death to Life: My Conscious Choice MaryLee Rork $6.00 This is the inspiring story of Mary Lee'srecovery from cancer using the Gerson Therapy. Recorded liveduring the 1981 Gerson Therapy convention. Approx. 45minutes. How to Heal and Prevent Cancer and Other Diseases$12.00 A lecture by Charlotte Gerson, similar to Volume I ofthe video tape series. Almost 2 hours. Hypothyroidism: the Unsuspected Illness BrodaBarnes M.D. $6.00 Dr. Barnes, a respectedendocrinologist, describes how an underactive thyroid canaffect health in many different ways, causing or contributingto heart disease, diabetes, hypoglycemia, obesity, and manyother diseases. Recorded live at the 1981 Gerson Therapyconvention. Approx. 45 minutes. The Gerson Therapy: Elizabeth Claire Prophetinterviews Charlotte Gerson $14.95 This is the audio tapeversion of the video described above, a two-hour interview ofCharlotte Gerson originally produced for Summit Universitytelevision. A well-produced, good introduction to the GersonTherapy. Max Gerson, M.D. with Long John Nebel $14.95(Available July, 1996) This is a digitally remastered andmuch improved version of a 1957 radio interview with Max Gerson . In this tape, Dr. Gerson describes theGerson Therapy in his own words, and discusses the treatmentof John Guenther, Jr. and other cases. Approx. 2 hours. My Life with Dr. Max Gerson Howard Straus$6.00 Howard, grandson of Dr. Max Gerson, and Vice Presidentfor Communications at the Gerson Institute, Tells of Dr.Gerson's influence on Howard's life. Among other things,Howard tells of being unaware that cancer was considered"incurable" until he was 16 years old. Recorded atthe 1981 Gerson Therapy convention. Approx. 45 minutes. Total Health from Conception through Active OldAge Charlotte Gerson $6.00 Hear Charlotte teachyou how to maintain an active, healthy lifestyle withoutsuffering from headaches, fatigue, or numerous otherillnesses, using the principles for healthy living developedby Dr. Max Gerson. Recorded at the 1981 Gerson Therapyconvention. Approx. 45 minutes. The Gerson Institute and Cancer Curing Society Post Office Box 430 Bonita, CA 91908-0430 Tel: 619 585 7600 Fax: 619 585 7610 email: mail@gerson.org Return to the Gerson Therapy home page. WT02-B03-115IA008-000090-B020-115http://www.gerson.com:80/schickel.html 207.158.200.123 19970222123217 text/html 3900HTTP/1.1 200 OKDate: Sat, 22 Feb 1997 12:32:41 GMTServer: Apache/1.2b4Connection: closeContent-Type: text/htmlLast-Modified: Mon, 09 Dec 1996 22:58:09 GMTETag: "835a60-e4b-32ac9981"Content-Length: 3659Accept-Ranges: bytes Wefind another of Dr. Gerson's patients From the Convention Circuit ... We find another of Dr.Gerson's patients by Charlotte Gerson At the end of September, 1996, I had the great pleasureof visiting the New York Chiropractic College. I was invitedto address the faculty and students, discussing the GersonTherapy. The following day, I did the usual lecture andworkshop for the public.I received a warm reception, andthank the students and faculty for their help. I was deeplyimpressed by the magnificent campus, set among rolling greenhills, studded with beautiful, majestic trees. The light,airy buildings are situated along one of New York's extensivefinger lakes. There is a feeling of peace and beauty, veryconducive to study and meditation. I received great joy from the testimonial of one of themembers of the audience. This gentleman introduced himself asthe nephew of one of the 50 cases (Case #18) Dr. Gersondescribed in A Cancer Therapy. William Schickel. at age 32 was astruggling artist with a young family, three small children,the youngest a baby, and a 22 year old wife. He had beendiagnosed with inoperable, widespread retroperitoneallymphoma. Radiation was not an option, and he was literallysent home with perhaps two months to live. Bill's wife, Mary,found an article in a magazine on organic gardening in whichshe read that Dr. Gerson was curing cancer by diet. Followinga pilgrimage to the shrine of the Blessed PhilippineDuschene, their decision was made: they would go to see Dr.Gerson in New York City. They arrived in the spring of 1950 from their home inLoveland, Ohio. After numerous tests, Dr. Gerson felt thatBill had perhaps a 30% chance of recovery on the nutritionaltherapy. Bill was surprised that, in spite of the quietelegance of a Park Avenue office, Dr. Gerson's fees were"very modest". Gerson also told Bill that he wouldnot cure him but that his reactivated defenses, his bodywould work to heal him. Struggling physically and financially to follow thisdemanding treatment, but with nothing to lose, Bill reportsthat he felt better within a few weeks. He received no othertreatment.Bill writes that in 1983 he looked back on "33years, eight children, twelve grandchildren, and a wonderfulproductive life". In September, 1996 (46 years after hisprognosis of 'two months'), Bill and his wife Mary beam fromthe cover of St. Anthony's Messenger, inside of whichis the inspiring story of Bills activities. He is a famousartist, designs and builds churches, church art and stainedglass windows, assisted by his sons and daughter Martha inhis art studio. Bill won national honors for his interiordesign and artwork for the new St. Mary's Church in St.Clairsville, Ohio. Some years ago, he also had an art show inSan Diego which I was proud to visit. Now 77, Bill works fulltime with his family in his studio. When I spoke to him toask permission to publish this story, I could hear the energyand enthusiasm in his strong voice. His story is copyrightedand he expects to publish it sometime in the future. We are grateful to Dr. Gerson for having given thiscreative, prolific and talented artist the chance to live along, healthy and productive life, and make his quitesignificant contribution to the world. WT02-B03-116IA008-000090-B020-151http://www.gerson.com:80/soy.html 207.158.200.123 19970222123227 text/html 9303HTTP/1.1 200 OKDate: Sat, 22 Feb 1997 12:32:48 GMTServer: Apache/1.2b4Connection: closeContent-Type: text/htmlLast-Modified: Mon, 09 Dec 1996 22:58:34 GMTETag: "83b22b-2365-32ac999a"Content-Length: 9061Accept-Ranges: bytes AreSoy Products Dangerous? Are Soy Products Dangerous? by Charlotte Gerson, with portions reprinted bypermission of Newlife Magazine A considerable percentage of the world's population isundernourished or outright starving. For many years,proteins, preferably from animal sources, have beenconsidered to be the best and most acceptable source ofnutrients. However, we also know that it takes some 16 poundsof grains, fed to cows, to produce one pound of meat. In hisbook Diet for a New America, author John Robbinspoints out that we could easily feed the whole world ifeveryone were to become vegetarian. This is an unlikelyscenario in the affluent Western world. So, in order to tryto feed the hungry, we are always looking for new sources of"good" protein. Much attention has been focused on the soy bean, a widelygrown legume that fulfills both the requirement for a highprotein food and a widely publicized health advantage: it islow in fat and devoid of cholesterol! This should make it anideal food, but is it safe? An extensive discussion on the subject written by SallyW. Fallon, M.A., and Mary G. Enig, Ph.D. appeared in the May1966 edition of Newlife magazine. Since we have oftenbeen asked by a number of our Gerson HealingNewsletter readers why Dr. Gerson prohibited soyproducts, we should like to report on this thoroughlyresearched material. The authors trace the origin of the soy bean to theOrient, where it was apparently used during the Chou Dynasty(1134-246 BCE) as a crop rotation material, for its capacityof fixing nitrogen in the soil. Soy products did not serve asfood until fermentation techniques were developed. When amethod was developed to make soy into a curd by precipitatingit with calcium sulfate or magnesium sulfate, the use of soyproducts started to spread. Fermented soy products, such asmiso and tamari sauce, are apparently less harmful than theprecipitated ones, such as tofu or bean curd. But tofuaccounts for about 90% of the processed soybeans in Asiatoday, say the authors. It seems that bean curds as a sourceof protein did not come into use until about 700 A.D. Fallon and Enig state that the "Chinese did not eatthe soybean as they did other legumes, such as lentils,because the soybean contains large quantities of a number ofharmful substances." Did the Chinese know this? Perhapsthey did, possibly they observed that disease symptomsappeared after eating tofu or other cooked soy products.Among the harmful substances, the authors name "potentenzyme inhibitors, which block the action of trypsin andother enzymes needed for protein digestion." Apparently,cooking does not deactivate these enzyme inhibitors, and theycan produce serious digestive problems such as reducedprotein digestion, chronic deficiencies in amino acid uptake,enlargement of the pancreas (in animals) and cancer. Soy products also contain another chemical, hemaglutininwhich promotes clumping of red blood cells. These clumped redcells are unable to fully take up oxygen and carry it in theblood stream to all tissues. Hemaglutinin has also beenobserved to act as a growth depressant. Fermentationdeactivates these enzyme inhibitors, or at least reduces theamounts present. Soybeans are also high in phytic acids which is presentin the bran of hulls of all seeds. This material blocks theuptake of essential minerals in the intestinal tract,including such important ones as calcium, magnesium, iron andespecially zinc. Again, only the process of fermentation willsignificantly reduce the phytate content of soy products.Soybeans have a higher content of phytates than any otherlegumes, making them of questionable safety and nutritionalvalue. Bearing the above in mind, the authors feel that soyproducts consumed with meat have a reduced mineral blockingeffect; however they warn particularly that vegetarians whoeat tofu with the idea that it may act as a proteinsubstitute, risk severe mineral deficiencies. They also feelthat most people appreciate the problems of calcium,magnesium and iron deficiencies, but that zinc deficiencyproduces some especially serious problems: zinc is needed foroptimal development and function of the brain and nervoussystem, aside from its role in the immune system. The profit motive. The average American has not adopted soy products (tofu,tempeh, miso) as a principal food. Soy sauce may be theexception to this rule, even though soy oil is also quitewidely used. About 140 billion pounds of soy beans per yearare grown in the US since the end of W.W.II, and the industryis looking for new markets. At this time, the major use forthe bean is animal feed, and soy oil is used for hydrogenatedfats, margarine and shortening. New soy products are beingmarketed to the growing "health product" consumers:soy milk, soy baby formula, soy yogurt, soy ice cream, soycheese, soy flour for baking, and soy protein as a meatsubstitute for the vegetarians. During the production of soy milk, in order to remove asmuch of the trypsin inhibitor as possible, the puredbeans are soaked in an alkaline solution, then heated toabout 115 C. in a pressure cooker. Unfortunately, eventhough most (but not all) of the antinutrients are destroyed,this processing also denatures the proteins, so the remainingsoy protein is very difficult to digest. The phytate contentremains in soy milk to block the uptake of essentialminerals. Worse, the alkaline soaking solution produces acarcinogen, lysinealine, and reduces the cystine (an aminoacid) content in the soybean. Without cystine, the proteincomplex is virtually useless unless the diet is fortifiedwith meat, eggs or dairy products, an unlikely situation forvegetarians. These problems arising from soy production are notmentioned on labels, and the public is not aware ofthem."Soy based infant formulas, along with trypsininhibitors, contain a high phytate level. Use of soy formulahas caused zinc deficiency in infants. Aluminum content ofsoy formula is ten times greater than milk-based formula and100 times greater than unprocessed milk." While soy milkis tried on infants with milk allergies, allergy to soyproducts is almost as common. The lack of cholesterol in soyinfant formula could inhibit brain development sincecholesterol is essential for the brain and nervous system.Chemical additives to soy based foods further add to theproblems. Soy products are widely distributed in third worldcountries, presumably to overcome a protein deficiency in thediets of starving people. They are also used extensively inschool lunch programs, commercial baked goods, diet beveragesand fast food products. New publicity promotes soy productsfor their "cancer preventing properties". Whiletraditionally fermented soy products may contain a cancerpreventing chemical, these are contained in an altered statein non-fermented soy products and have no anti-carcinogeniceffect. On the contrary, it has been suggested that the rapidincrease of liver and pancreatic cancer in Africa is due tothe increased use of soy products."...to remove oil fromthe soy bean, particularly high pressures and temperaturesare required, since this is an unusually difficult process.Furthermore, hexane or other solvents are always used toextract oil from soy beans, and traces remain in thecommercial product. But the high temperatures destroy some ofthe possible beneficial fatty acid fractions of the soy oil:the Omega-3's, which are especially susceptible to ranciditywhen subjected to high pressures and temperatures." "Claims that the fermented soy products can berelied on as a source of B12 have not been supported byscientific research." Nor do they supply the essentialfat soluble vitamins D and A, needed for the absorption ofall minerals. Unfortunately, soy products increase therequirements for vitamin B12 and D. The authors summarize all the above, and possiblearguments that soy products have been used for many centuriesin the Orient, as follows: "traditional fermented soyproducts have a long history of use that is generallybeneficial when combined with other elements of the Orientaldiet including rice, sea foods, fish broth and fermentedvegetables. Precipitated (Western) soy products can causeserious problems, especially when they form the major sourceof protein in the diet." Newlife Magazine is published by SerenityHealth Organization, Inc., 218 W. 72 St., Suite 2FE, New YorkCity, NY 10023 From The Gerson Healing Newsletter, Vol. 11, No.5, Sep./Oct. 1997WT02-B03-117IA008-000090-B020-175http://www.gerson.com:80/bse.html 207.158.200.123 19970222123236 text/html 15645HTTP/1.1 200 OKDate: Sat, 22 Feb 1997 12:32:57 GMTServer: Apache/1.2b4Connection: closeContent-Type: text/htmlLast-Modified: Mon, 09 Dec 1996 22:47:23 GMTETag: "80a255-3c2a-32ac96fb"Content-Length: 15402Accept-Ranges: bytes TheApproaching Era of BSE ... Revenge of the CannibalCows The Approaching Era of BSE ... Revenge of the CannibalCows by Howard Straus, Editor There have been many cries of apocalyptic doom overthe last decade, from the hole in the ozone to the globalspread of AIDS, the rising cancer rate or global warming.Many of these have generated controversies, each side of thecontroversy having either a palpable agenda, or a vestedeconomic interest in the status quo. Meanwhile, governments,in league with agribusiness have been fashioning a real,present and current disease through cynicism, incompetence,lies and shortsighted economic expedience. The result couldsoon spell an epidemic that would dwarf cancer, heart diseaseand AIDS. In 1981, the British government relaxed agriculturalregulations regarding what could be fed to livestock,allowing processed slaughterhouse waste to be fed tolivestock as high protein supplements. That meant thatvarious parts of sheep, chicken and cows, including brains,eyes and bones, could be processed, flavored and mixed withother feeds to cheaply increase the productivity of cattlefarms. Brains of sheep with a disease called scrapie wereincluded in the list of permitted contents of cattle feed, aswere, incredibly, chicken droppings. The fact that thispractice would turn normally vegetarian animals intocarnivores, even cannibals, was simply ignored, despitewarnings from various concerned scientists, and a RoyalCommission, who were roundly ignored and effectivelypooh-poohed. The practice was widely adopted in the British cattleindustry, and subsequently led to cheaper beef, a highlydesirable result for the growers, and one that enabled theBritish to compete well with the Continental beef producersin France and Holland. Suddenly, in 1986, the honeymoon ended. The first case ofa new cattle disease had been diagnosed. It was a bovine formof the sheep disease scrapie, and was called bovinespongiform encephalopathy, or BSE for short. Its better-knownname, by now, is Mad Cow Disease, because the cows thatcontract the disease become aggressive, disoriented, andgenerally appear to have gone "mad". The diseasedestroys and kills by literally turning the animals' brainsinto sponges by boring holes in brain and nerve tissue.Though the new disease was reported to the appropriateauthorities in the British government, they did nothing toalert the general population to the situation for at leasteleven months, when they finally published the finding in anobscure veterinary journal, unlikely to be seen or noticed bythe general public. Certainly, nothing was done to change thepractice of feeding slaughterhouse offal to cows, sheep,chickens or pigs. When the press got a hold of the story, and began raisingquestions about the safety of British beef, the organs ofgovernment churned into high gear. Every possible seniorofficial who had anything to do with public opinion, from thePrime Minister to the Minister of Food and Farming, assuringthe world that British beef was sound, safe, and that thisdisease, which had already made the jump from sheep tocattle, could not possibly make the jump from cattle tohumans. This despite the fact that virtually nothing wasknown for certain about BSE. Any researcher or governmentofficial who did not hue to the party line was rapidly andeffectively silenced and/or "made redundant", i.e.: fired. In 1989, two cases of an atypical strain ofCreutzfeldt-Jacob Disease (CJD) were diagnosed, a strainwhich was alarmingly similar in effect and area of the brainattacked to BSE. Rare instances of this disease had beenrecorded as far back as 1965. Britain's trading partnersbegan making noises about quarantining British beef, as theEuropean Economic Community (EEC) had already done toAmerican beef (antibiotic residues are so high that Americanbeef is considered "tainted" by the EEC). Stillknowing nothing about the cause of the disease, and having no"scientific" proof one way or another, the Britishgovernment continued its public relations campaign toconvince the world that British beef was sound. How couldthey guarantee the health of every cow in the British Isles?Advertising and governmental gobbledegook would have to dothe trick. The idea that someone might actually have to beheld accountable for an incipient and deadly epidemic wassimply unthinkable. Still, nothing was done to halt thepractice of feeding cows to cows. The epidemic started to grow. At first, only older peoplewere affected. Many cases of CJD were probably misdiagnosed,since the symptoms in humans are very similar to those ofAlzheimer's' Disease. In fact, at least one victim's wife,convinced that her husband had died of CJD rather than thediagnosed Alzheimer's, repeatedly demanded an autopsy beforeher husband's body was cremated. She was unable to preventthe cremation, and the autopsy was never done. Anothervictim's mother, going public to save other mothers the agonyof watching their own teenagers sicken and die, was told tothink of the economic havoc she was causing. It appeared thatCJD had an incubation period of between ten and twenty years,and nobody could prove that it was transmitted via cows andthe consumption of animal flesh. Experiments done by theBritish government themselves showed that, contrary to theauthorities' statements, monkeys, and by extension, probablyhumans were capable of contracting the disease from cattle.Yet, the spin doctors managed to turn even these experimentsinto encouraging news! Not until 1988 were any limits putonto the amounts, types and health of the offal going intocattle feed, and then they were inadequate and sloppilyenforced by a government far more responsive (as usual) tothe short-term economic interests of the farmers and commercethan to the health and survival of its individual citizens.It was a further two years before controls were put onfeeding infected offal to poultry, whose droppings, remember,were still being fed to the cattle. Only on March 20, 1996,after teenagers, some as young as 15 and 16 years old, beganto die of a much faster moving strain of the disease, onewith an incubation time of five to ten years, did thegovernment finally admit that BSE was the "mostlikely" cause of the recent outbreak of CJD, publiclyeating their own words. On March 26, 1996, the rest of Continental Europe, led byGermany, put a quarantine on all British beef and beefproducts. Russia even embargoed British milk and leather. TheBritish government has very belatedly instituted a program ofcattle destruction, hoping to limit the damage and restoreconfidence in farming practices and the health of the Britishcattle herd, numbering in the millions of animals. Thepractice of feeding infected offal to the remaining animalshas been discontinued. But the death toll from the new strainof CJD continues to rise, and the victims are otherwisehealthy teenagers and young adults. The problems, of course, are very complex. In Iceland,when the related sheep disease scrapie was found to beinfecting a large proportion of the sheep, every sheep inIceland was slaughtered and disposed of, and the entire herdwas replaced by importing healthy animals from abroad. Withina few years, however, the new herd was infected again. Theonly possible means of transmission of the disease from thesheep that no longer existed to the new, healthy sheep, wasthat the ground was infected, and the new sheep could beinfected from the urine and droppings of the old sheep. Thelatest understanding of this disease is that it is nottransmitted by a virus or microbe, but by a tiny proteinfraction (called a prion) that is virtually indestructible bysterilization, acids, heat or burial in soil. This haschilling implications for the British, who, until recently,have been burying large numbers of slaughtered, infected cowsand sheep in farms and landfills, many near rivers andmunicipal water sources. There is no way to remove thesesources of infection from the ground, as the products ofdecay have, by now, spread far and wide, both from urine andcattle droppings, and from the buried animals. The diseasecauses no immune response, and there is no known treatmentfor it, much less cure. Often, when a farmer begins to see the first symptoms ofa BSE-infected animal, economics dictate that he is betteroff to kill and bury the animal on his farm than to admitthat his farm is no longer BSE-free, or even better, send theanimal to the slaughterhouse before the animal becomesclinically ill and has to be destroyed. Although thegovernment will pay him to destroy and incinerate thecarcass, animals from "BSE-free" farms fetch higherprices than those from farms admitting the problem.Unfortunately, this gives farmers large economic incentive tomisrepresent the status of their farms. Some farmers havealready been fined for falsely representing their farms asBSE-free, others have, most likely, escaped detection. By May, 1990, a quarter of the population of GreatBritain refused to eat beef. In six months, beef pricesdropped 10-25%, devastating the cattle industry. Cats and zooanimals are now dying regularly from their own variants ofspongiform encephalopathy; over 160,000 British cattle havealready succumbed to it. To date, there is still nowell-defined, strictly implemented program for keepinginfected offal from infecting healthy meat in GreatBritain. That's England, though, isn't it? "What does this have to do with the UnitedStates?" you may be asking. "We have been assuredthat there is no BSE problem here. We don't import Britishbeef, do we?" Well, no, we don't, and haven't since1989. But what we do continue here is the practice, nowbanned in Great Britain, of feeding processed slaughterhousewaste to cows, chickens and pigs as low cost, high-proteinfeed supplementation. This is the very practice that got theBritish cattle industry in such bad trouble so very quickly adecade and a half ago: feeding cows to cows. In 1991, theUSDA considered a mandatory ban on the practice. Butaccording to an internal USDA document, the agency dismissedthe ban because, "the cost to the livestock andrendering industries would be substantial." (Sound likeBritain's initial response?) We certainly have the problem of scrapie in America, andit is known to have jumped the species barrier from sheep tothe cattle herd. Scrapie manifests itself in cattle as theanimal falling down, and being unable to rise again. There isthe possibility, even the likelihood of an outbreak of BSEand its associated human form, CJD occurring in the UnitedStates. It may already have arrived here, and been missed inthe background noise of the enormous human tragedy of ourepidemic of Alzheimer's disease. It is quite possible thatmany cases of CJD have been misdiagnosed here as Alzheimer's,disguising the onset of the epidemic by not recognizing itfor what it is, and giving us a false sense of security. Infact, there is good evidence that BSE has been in the UnitedStates since the mid-'70s. What is even worse is that it is not just beef that isaffected. By now, slaughterhouse workers, farmers and foodpreparation workers have died of CJD, possibly from theconstant contact with animal blood and offal. The ground onwhich the cattle have been urinating and defecating iscertainly infected, and we know that the vector survives inthe ground for long periods of time. We know little about theeffects of the disease or its vectors on other animals fedinfected offal, such as chickens and pigs. And we must assumethat milk and other animal products, like gelatin and dairyproducts, and anything that contains them, are possiblyinfectious. Think about that, for a moment. Substitute themore familiar but less likely disease "AIDS", andimagine being at risk for infection from a milk chocolate baror a cold remedy in a gelatin capsule, the egg, butter ormilk in a piece of birthday cake, a cup of nonfat yogurt orcottage cheese, and you will begin to understand how deeplythe malpractice of the food-animal industry has endangeredyour life and the lives of your family. "The critical uncertainty," to quote an articlefrom the Internet by Michael Greger, "is, how small adose is necessary to pass the disease along? Theoretically,it doesn't matter if BSE can infect humans if we never eatenough meat within a lifetime. Last year, calculations weremade to determine how many people will have consumed apotentially infectious dose by 1997. The conservativeestimate runs upwards of 34 million people. In other words,virtually a whole generation of people may die. And we arenot talking about a quick and simple death, either. If weassume the disease runs a course similar to CJD, these peoplewill wake up one morning twitching and deteriorate weeklyinto blindness and epilepsy, while their brain perforatesinto a sponge. If they're lucky, they will be dead withinthree months; if not, it may take up to five years." This disease has the potential to be far more widespreadand deadly than AIDS or cancer, than heart disease or stroke.And we don't know we have it until it is far, far too late todo anything about, not to mention the fact that there is, atthe moment, nothing we can do about it. Americans' trust inour own government has already fallen to such a low levelthat we rarely believe its self-serving, exculpatorystatements. We must now, however, find a way to let thegovernment know, in no uncertain terms, that we are outragedat the suicidal behavior of the factory farming industry andof the U. S. Department of Agriculture, which is charged withthe often contradictory tasks of regulating and promotingAmerican agriculture. Though we, as Gerson Persons, are basically vegetarians,the practice of making vegetarian animals into cannibals putsus all at risk from the most apparently innocuous substances,and from contaminated water that cannot be purified short ofexpensive steam distillation. We must force our governmentalorgans to be responsive to our health and safety, and soon,if we are not to fall victims en masse to the same fate as somany Britons have already. We must fight for our survivalagainst our own food suppliers, and against our owngovernment, against the very institutions we want to believeare protecting us. We know the results of trusting the FDAand the NCI to help us. This one, however, is a battle we cannot afford to lose. Return to the Gerson Institute homepage . email: mail@gerson.org The Gerson Institute Post Office Box 430 Bonita, CA 91908-0430 Tel: 619 585 7600 Fax: 619 585 7610 Copyright (c), 1996 The Gerson Institute. All RightsReserved. WT02-B03-118IA008-000090-B020-192http://www.gerson.com:80/lungcure.html 207.158.200.123 19970222123249 text/html 2964HTTP/1.1 200 OKDate: Sat, 22 Feb 1997 12:33:12 GMTServer: Apache/1.2b4Connection: closeContent-Type: text/htmlLast-Modified: Mon, 09 Dec 1996 22:54:06 GMTETag: "8d2f6c-aa3-32ac988e"Content-Length: 2723Accept-Ranges: bytes The Gerson Therapy - Cure of Small Cell Lung Cancer Cure of Small Cell Lung Cancer Patient Story: William Hetzler by Charlotte Gerson We rarely see patients with "small cell" (or oat cell) type of lungcancer. Current Medical Diagnosis and Treatment, Krupp and Chatton,1993 says that lung cancer patients, in general, have an 8% chance ofsurviving 5 years. However, the small cell anaplastic (oat cell)types have the worst prognosis. "It metastasizes early and widely,and is not amenable to surgery." In his monograph Chemotherapy ofAdvanced Epithelial Cancer, physician and biostatistician Dr. UlrichAbel wrote that "small cell lung cancer is the only carcinoma forwhich good direct evidence of a survival improvement by chemotherapyexists." But this improvement amounts to a matter of three months! In late February of 1993, William Hetzler, then 55 years old, arrivedat the hospital. He had been diagnosed and biopsied at theLong Beach Hospital on Long Island, (New York). He subsequentlyconsulted a pulmonary specialist at the North Shore Hospital, also onLong Island, for a second opinion . He was advised to transferimmediately to the oncology department for chemotherapy. He was toldthat without chemotherapy, he might have 3-4 months survival. A cousin of his in Oregon where he runs an organic farm told him tocall the Gerson Institute for information on nutritional healing.Given some hope, he came to Mexico. He now admits that he was deeplydepressed and had periods of crying while at the hospital.However, by the time he left, he had become hopeful. In August of 1993, while we were at a Convention in New York, Williamattended, mostly in order to testify about his experience. At thattime, only about 6 months after he arrived at the hospital in "terminal"condition, he reported that his latest chest X-ray showed his lungsto be clear of cancer. He carried on with the strict Gerson Therapyfor two years. It is now over two years and he is well, planning abusiness trip to Europe. He says that he now "sleeps to heal," andremains on the modified Gerson Therapy. He told me that he tookshark cartilage all through his therapy. He doesn't want to go backto his original oncologist. "All the sick people there depress me,"he said. The Gerson Therapy Copyright 1994,1995, 1996 (c) The Gerson Institute, All rights reserved.WT02-B03-119IA008-000090-B020-221http://www.gerson.com:80/cnb104.html 207.158.200.123 19970222123259 text/html 13656HTTP/1.1 200 OKDate: Sat, 22 Feb 1997 12:33:20 GMTServer: Apache/1.2b4Connection: closeContent-Type: text/htmlLast-Modified: Mon, 09 Dec 1996 22:49:25 GMTETag: "8e2484-3465-32ac9775"Content-Length: 13413Accept-Ranges: bytes TheGerson Therapy - Healing Newsletter Vol. 10, No.4 From Charlotte Gerson's Clinical Notebook, HealingNewsletter Vol. 10, No. 4 Answers to Some Frequently Asked Questions by Charlotte Gerson In his last book, A Cancer Therapy: Results of 50 Cases, Dr. Max Gersonincorporated the experiences, trials and errors of alifetime. He especially needed to record the details of hiswork with advanced and terminal cancer patients. For thesepatients he had to fine-tune his therapy to the ultimatedegree, to obtain the best foods and juice extraction, themost carefully adjusted medications, and the most thoroughdetoxification. He did this with very specific directions:how to do the enemas, how best to extract the juices, and soforth. Over the years, various authors have proposed theirown ideas in the above areas, often differing from Dr.Gerson's. This has naturally raised questions for patientsusing the Therapy, as well as others interested in the theoryand practice of the Gerson Therapy. I would like to explainsome of the reasons underlying Dr. Gerson's detailedinstructions in these areas. Juicers The juicing is so tedious, with all the grinding andpressing. Isn't there an easier and faster way, or a cheaperjuicer that I could use? Dr. Gerson said in his address to a group assembled inEscondido, California in 1956 (Appendix II, p. 406, A Cancer Therapy): "At first I thought thatliquefiers would be the most wonderful thing. All thematerial was there, nothing was lost. But it didn'twork." The rotating blade gives rise to a "dynamoeffect", causing electricity to be generated, andkilling enzymes. The same is true for centrifugal juicers.Juices must be made by grinding the vegetables first, mixingthem, and then pressing them in a press. We have recentlycome across cancer patients who tried to heal themselves onthe Gerson Therapy using a centrifugal juicer. Theyexperienced no improvement. When they tried the Therapy withChampion juicers, they did well. The more seriously illpatients still need the grinding plus pressing type of juicerarrangement to properly heal. In response to a question from a patient about the twostep juicing process, Dr. Gerson wrote that "the malicacid (contained in the apples) mixed with the ground carrotshelps to release the minerals from the carrots." Inother words, it is necessary to first grind the apples andcarrots together into a bowl, using a grinder. The Norwalk,K&K or Champion juicers can be used as grinders, but theChampion cannot be used as a press. The ground materials aremixed in the bowl, the mixture is placed in a press cloth andput under pressure in the Norwalk or K&K press. Thisprocess produces the best extraction, richest in minerals,and the tastiest juice. Juice produced by the Champion juiceralone separates into a transparent liquid at the bottom andmush on top after a very short time. This juice is harder forthe patient to drink because of the particles, and is not asrich and homogeneous in nutrients. Recently the Green Power juicer was introduced. It does abetter job of extraction than the Champion alone used as ajuicer. But it offers no way (as the Champion does) to blockthe juicing action. It is impossible to use the Green Powerjuicer as a grinder only, it grinds and juices in oneoperation. While it extracts juice quite efficiently, it doesnot fulfill Dr. Gerson's requirement of mixing the groundapples and carrots thoroughly before pressing. Enemas I thought that high colonics cleaned out the entirecolon. Why shouldn't one do high colonics? Aren't we tryingto clear out the colon? Anyone who is at all familiar with the Gerson Therapy iswell aware of the utmost importance of the coffee enemas.(Gerson Healing Newsletter #13, May, 1986). But questionsarise from Dr. Gerson's instructions, specifically hiswarning: NO HIGH COLONICS. High colonics don't accomplishwhat coffee enemas do, namely, open the liver/bile ducts toallow the liver to release toxins. They also interfere withbasic colonic functions: reabsorption of nutrients, vitaminsand fluids, especially when used regularly. Let us first examine the basics. Dr. Gerson found thatthe underlying problems of all cancer patients are toxicityand deficiency. He had to overcome both these difficulties.He found that one of the important features of his therapyhad to be the hourly administration of fresh vegetablejuices. These supply ample nutrients, as well as fluids tohelp flush out the kidneys. When the high levels of nutrientsre-enter tissues, toxins accumulated over many years areforced into the blood stream. The toxins are then filteredout by the liver. The liver is easily overburdened by thecontinuous release of toxins and is unable to release theload. This can cause liver damage, even liver coma -- unlessthe liver is helped to release the overload. Dr. Gerson foundthat he could provide help to the liver by the caffeine incoffee, absorbed from the colon via the hemorrhoidal vein,which carries the caffeine to the portal system and then tothe liver. The caffeine stimulates the liver/bile ducts toopen, releasing the poisons into the intestinal tract forexcretion. High colonics are usually not done with coffee, andtherefore do not benefit the liver. Even if coffee were to beused, a high colonic forces it high into the transverse andascending colon, where it is not absorbed into the portalsystem. With the constant administration of vegetable juices ofthe Gerson Therapy, a flood of toxins is steadily releasedfrom the poisoned cells in the body. Four to five coffeeenemas daily are needed to help continuously unburden theliver, and deal with the toxins. It would be impossible, evendangerous, to do five high colonics daily. Colonics have another undesirable effect. The colon is avery important recycling organ which reabsorbs fluids,enzymes and minerals. It also produces some vitamins with thehelp of friendly bacteria. Regular high colonics disturb thisactivity, flushing out essential minerals, enzymes andfriendly bacteria along with the waste materials. This couldlead to dehydration and electrolyte imbalance (washing outtoo many of the minerals the body needs). If a patient wishes to use one or two high colonics priorto starting the Gerson Therapy, we have no objection. But theoften-suggested course of 15 or 30 colonics should not beundertaken. In addition, it is possible to stretch the colonand lose some of its normal muscle function. Most doctors and nurses are taught to have the patientlie on the left side to take their enemas. Dr. Gerson wantedthe patient to lie on his right side. With the patient inthis position, gravity will help the coffee flow past thedescending colon, just around the "corner" of thesplenic flexure, and into the transverse colon for higherpenetration and better release of toxic feces. One more important note: When using the castor oil enema,it is necessary to add some soap to the coffee/castor oilsolution so the oil does not float to the top. Do not gratesoap into the solution. Too much soap will irritate andinflame the colon. Just rub a cake of soap for a few momentswith your hand immersed in the (liquid) coffee. This willrelease enough soap to do the job. Flax Seed Oil Dr. Gerson strongly prohibited any fats or oils, yet A Cancer Therapy says to use flax seed oil. What is thesource of this contradiction? Dr. Gerson was very much aware that patients require theintake of essential fatty acids. He experimented with varioussubstances, including sunflower, safflower, olive and otheroils to try to satisfy this need. He even tried fresh,unsalted butter. In all cases, fats administered to patients,even after they were already free of tumor tissue, caused theregrowth of cancers. Therefore, Dr. Gerson stated repeatedlyand emphatically when describing the practice of the Therapy"NO OILS, NO FATS." In 1958, after his book had been published, Gerson foundthe work of Dr. Johanna Budwig. Dr. Budwig described hersuccessful use of flax seed oil (linseed oil) in cancerpatients. Dr. Gerson tried this substance and found it verybeneficial. It supplies the essential fatty acids, helps tocarry Vitamin A through the blood stream and supplieslinoleic and linolenic acids. In a letter to his long-time friend, Dr. AlbertSchweitzer, Gerson described his protocol for the use of FlaxSeed Oil: two tablespoons a day for the first month on theGerson Therapy; one tablespoon thereafter. This prescriptionseems to be in conflict with Dr. Gerson's injunction of NOOILS, NO FATS. In the charts on pp. 235 and 236 of A Cancer Therapy, the reader will find that the use offlax seed oil is described. The reason for the"contradiction" is that, on the basis of Dr.Gerson's research in the last year of his practice, we addedthe flax seed oil prescription. We did not change the text inthe book prohibiting all fats and oils, because we wanted tokeep Dr. Gerson's original words as intact as possible. Wehope that this explains any apparent contradictions thereader may find. Flax seed oil is made from organic flax seed, coldpressed, bottled in a light-tight container, and sealed inthe presence of inert gas, not air. This careful handlingkeeps the oil from oxidizing, and becoming rancid. It mustnever be heated, and should never be used to cook, bake orfry anything. Unopened bottles may be stored in a freezer forup to six months; in a refrigerator for up to three months.Once opened and exposed to air, still refrigerated, the oilis only usable for three weeks. Patients should use the golden, filtered oil , not the brownish and viscousmaterial that includes lignins. The lignins come from part ofthe fiber of the seed, which also contains certainundesirable proteins. These should be avoided. Also, whenused by patients, only the oil should be taken, not freshlyground flax seeds, for the same reason. Some patients havebeen told by well-meaning friends that lignins or flax powdercan be used and added to cakes. That is totally out of thequestion. "Medical Hell" At the end of May, 1995, a patient was admitted to thetherapy hospital suffering from pancreatic cancer. Patients arerequested to bring their medical records with them, and thispatient brought his doctor's consultation and operation(biopsy) report along. This young man is only 38 years old,and has a fairly healthy lifestyle. I do not understand whyhe has such a serious problem at this early age. He gave me acopy of his medical report and, I must admit, I read it inamazement and disbelief. Since it is so incredible, I amquoting two paragraphs here exactly as they appear on thereport. "I have explained to the patient the absence ofsurgical resolution of the problem [inoperable] and he willbe seen by the Cancer Clinic and we'll discuss the role ornon-role of chemo and radiotherapy in this condition. Thegravity of his illness was explained to him. At the moment,he's in a state of denial and shock, but certainly his father[who is an MD] and wife are well aware of the seriousness ofthe situation. "This man was informed of the diagnosis in theabsence of all involved regular physicians by one of thefamily physicians covering for Dr. D. D. in Campbell River.This at least prepared him for the descent into hell ofhaving the diagnosis of cancer of the pancreas that he is nowembarked upon ..." We have seen a number of patients showing totalrecoveries from pancreatic cancer, even when it has spread tothe bile duct, spleen, or further. We are often accused ofquackery and "giving desperately ill people falsehope." Even if our patients do not all recover, we dogive them hope, not false hope, rather than despair. Is theabove medical report an example of compassionate "healthcare" providers? Return to the Gerson Therapy homepage email: mail@gerson.org The Gerson Institute Post Office Box 430 Bonita,CA 91908-0430 Tel: 619 585 7600 Fax: 619 585 7610 Copyright (c) 1994, 1995 The Gerson Institute, Allrights reserved. WT02-B03-120IA008-000090-B020-238http://www.gerson.com:80/rootcan.htm 207.158.200.123 19970222123306 text/html 8144HTTP/1.1 200 OKDate: Sat, 22 Feb 1997 12:33:29 GMTServer: Apache/1.2b4Connection: closeContent-Type: text/htmlLast-Modified: Mon, 09 Dec 1996 22:58:00 GMTETag: "8ea7e4-1ede-32ac9978"Content-Length: 7902Accept-Ranges: bytes Gerson Therapy - Root Canal Cover-Up, Are your teeth killing you? Root Canal Cover-Up Are your teeth killing you? by Charlotte Gerson Many of our patients and readers are well-informed about the dangersof "silver-amalgam" fillings. These commonly-used fillings consistof more than 51% mercury mixed with silver and some other metals.The problem, of course, is mercury - a highly toxic heavy metalwith a powerful effect on the nervous system. Once installed inteeth, some of the mercury leaches out into the system and intocirculation. Some people, admittedly, are a great deal moresensitive to this circulating mercury than others. Mercury has beenshown to even cause multiple sclerosis in some patients. When the"silver fillings" were removed, the patients recovered. Other peoplehave silver fillings in their teeth for many years with no apparentproblems. What is less well-known is the condition that occurs when the root ofa tooth becomes abscessed. In order to treat the infection, thedentist first removes any loose or diseased material from the canalthat houses the nerve. When the nerve is removed, the tooth dies.Root Canal Cover-Up by Dr. George E. Meinig, D.D.S., F.A.C.D. in 1993documents the extensive and detailed research done by Dr. Weston A.Price, D.D.S., F.A.C.D., in the first few decades of this century.Dr. Meinig founded, and for many years headed The Association of RootCanal Specialists, a group of dentists engaged in performing rootcanal procedures. He admits to doing many hundreds himself.However, when he discovered the research done by Dr. Price detailingthe dangers inherent in this treatment, he resigned his position andnow spends his time and energies in making the public, as well asprofessionals, aware of the research. Dr. Price's first indication of health problems due to root canalscame from a patient who was bedfast and virtually paralyzed byrheumatoid arthritis. For some reason, her root canal filled toothwas removed, although it looked healthy and normal on X-rays. Withina few weeks the patient was able to get up; after some months, shewas able to walk and her health was totally restored. Intrigued, Dr.Price took the extracted tooth, sterilized it thoroughly, andimplanted it under the skin of a rabbit. Within five days, therabbit developed severe rheumatoid arthritis; in ten days it died ofthe disease. Dr. Price subsequently repeated the experiment with many otherpatients who had root canal filled teeth extracted, some sufferingfrom kidney disease, others from heart disease, and many more witharthritis. In virtually all cases, the patients showed considerableimprovement, and some even total recovery after the offending teethwere removed. Often, Dr. Price implanted the extracted andsterilized teeth under the skin of rabbits. In each case, a toothremoved from the patient caused the patient's disease in the rabbit.Dr. Price went even further to try to clear the apparently infectiousmaterial from the extracted teeth: he autoclaved them (sterilized bysteam pressure, usually at 250 degrees F. or 121 degrees C.).Sterilization made no difference: the rabbits with the sterilizedteeth implanted still developed the diseases and died, usually withinten days. As a control, Dr. Price implanted a healthy tooth underthe skin of a rabbit. This rabbit lived without showing any signs ofdisease for its normal life span of about 15 years. The underlying problem is very interesting: when the nerve is removedfrom a tooth, the tooth is dead, and is no longer supplied withnutrients. The normal structure of a tooth includes tiny "canules"(similar to capillaries in all human tissue) that carry nutrients tothe living tooth. The tooth's constant circulation is alsoinstrumental in clearing potentially infectious material from thetooth. Once the tooth is dead, however, nutrients stop circulatingthrough these canules, and the tooth loses its ability to clearitself of infection. Instead the canules become infested with germsand viruses. Additionally, the filling of the nerve canal shrinks alittle bit over time, allowing still more bacteria and viruses tolodge in the gap between the filling and the tooth. None of this isvisible on X-rays. A dead tooth is thus a potent source of bacterialand viral toxins and infections that can spread throughout thesystem. Inability of sterilization under extreme conditions to clearthe infectious material should prove that, no matter how good one'sdental hygiene is, it is simply impossible to remove the danger. People with good immune systems and powerful defenses can often livewith this constant trouble source without developing symptoms. Yet,careful X-rays eventually show "cavitation" (hollowing out of thesurrounding jawbone) around the root canal treated teeth. As thehitherto resistant patient ages or is weakened by accidents, coldsand flus or severe stress, his ability to overcome this "focalinfection" is reduced. The infection is then able to cause orcontribute to the development of severe chronic disease. In view of the above, it will not come as a surprise that we urgentlysuggest that patients remove any teeth with root canal fillings. In the 1950's, German physician Dr. Josef Issels heard a lecture byDr. Gerson, and subsequently successfully used alternative treatmentsin helping many cancer patients. Dr. Issels himself spent some timeat the CHIPSA hospital, and, while there, pointed out the severedamage caused by root canal fillings. He said that he refused totreat any cancer patient who did not allow all "devitalized" (dead)teeth to be removed, as he found that he could not obtain goodresults without this procedure. Infected tonsils also cause problems We had the pleasure of meeting Dr. Issels again recently, at aconvention in Orlando that we were both attending. In the course ofour discussion, he returned to the question of "devitalized" teeth,and described a simple, infrared machine that is capable of detectingthe infections. He told us that the detector is also capable offinding infected tonsils. Dr. Issels estimated that approximately 90% of cancer patients haveundetected infections in their tonsils that cannot be found duringroutine examinations. He told us of the case of a patient whosetonsils Issels insisted needed to be removed. The surgeon wasdoubtful about the necessity of the procedure, because he could notfind any reason for the tonsillectomy. After the tonsil was out, thesurgeon wanted to prove to Issels that the removed tonsil wasperfectly sound, and cut into it. He was shocked to have the pusvirtually squirt out into his face. Dr. Issels was making the following point: it is difficult todetermine that teeth and/or tonsils are infected and aresignificantly contributing to the patient's illness. Every effortshould be made to clear these foci of infection by removing rootcanal filled teeth and damaged tonsils, to ensure the maximum chanceof recovery. Root Canal Cover-Up by Dr. George E. Meinig, D.D.S., F.A.C.D, $19.95,plus $3.00 postage and handling, is available from the GersonInstitute. California residents, please add 7.5% sales tax. The Gerson Institute Copyright 1995 (c) The Gerson Institute, All rights reserved. WT02-B03-121IA008-000090-B020-272http://www.gerson.com:80/diabetes.html 207.158.200.123 19970222123317 text/html 14132HTTP/1.1 200 OKDate: Sat, 22 Feb 1997 12:33:37 GMTServer: Apache/1.2b4Connection: closeContent-Type: text/htmlLast-Modified: Mon, 09 Dec 1996 22:50:19 GMTETag: "8e76a9-3641-32ac97ab"Content-Length: 13889Accept-Ranges: bytes GersonTherapy - The Cure and Prevention ofDiabetes The Cure and Prevention of Diabetes by Charlotte Gerson, President, The GersonInstitute In order to simplify the discussion of diabetes, we willdivide the subject into two sections: Juvenile Diabetes andAge Onset Diabetes. Due to its causes, age onset diabetes isrelatively simple and easy to overcome with the GersonTherapy. It has been shown that many patients with age onsetdiabetes actually produce adequate amounts of insulin, as isevidenced in their blood. Yet they are not able to properlyassimilate and burn sugar at the cellular level to produceenergy. Instead, diabetics often excrete sugar in the urine,are thirsty and drink excessive amounts of water, and lackenergy. Since these patients have insulin in their blood, whyare they diabetic? The problem is that the available insulinin the bloodstream is not being used by the body tometabolize the sugar. In order to perform its function,insulin must enter the individual cell and reach the cell'sinsulin receptors. In diabetics, insulin receptors areblocked or clogged with cholesterol, so the insulin is unableto do its job. So age-onset diabetes is really a cholesterolproblem, not one of sugar, or even malfunction of thepancreas (which produces insulin in the Islets ofLangerhans). Since no animal products are used, the Gerson Therapy istotally devoid of cholesterol. At the hospital facility where the Gerson Therapy isadministered, we have seen blood cholesterol levels dropdramatically, in some patients, up to 100 points in just oneweek on the therapy without cholesterol-reducing drugs. Ifthe uptake of insulin is blocked by cholesterol, then itcould be expected that this dramatic reduction in serumcholesterol levels would result in an almost immediatereduction of the requirement for insulin supplementation. Infact, it does. One patient, who also suffered frommetastasized melanoma in the liver, had a fasting blood sugarlevel of 177 on entering the Gerson hospital (the normal level is 120 or below). Intwo days, this level dropped to 120 - without insulin. In oneparticularly dramatic case, we saw a diabetic patient, age46, with sugar levels in his bloodstream of over 200, thatwere uncontrollable with insulin and drugs. This problemcompletely cleared in five weeks. At that time, he was ableto take all the juices of the full Gerson Therapy (carrotjuices contain large amounts of complex carbohydrates)without any further need of insulin. His blood sugar levelreturned to a normal 120, and remained stable. Juvenile Diabetes Juvenile diabetes presents entirely different problems.In juvenile diabetes, as opposed to age-onset diabetes, weare dealing with true insulin deficiency, damage to theIslets of Langerhans (the gland clusters in the pancreas thatproduce insulin). According to an article some years ago, inScientific American, juvenile diabetes is most commonlydiagnosed in children after a severe, long lasting 'flu' thatdoesn't seem to yield to normal treatment. This, it turnsout, was not a flu, but pancreatitis; an infection andinflammation of the pancreas, resulting in damage to theIslets of Langerhans, and the subsequent diabetes. A few daysago, I had a call from a distraught parent who is trying todeal with two children, girls aged 6 and 10, both afflictedwith juvenile diabetes. He did not comprehend the true causeof his children's disease and the progression of theirproblems, starting in early infancy, that led to diabetes. Ihave talked to many parents and can usually reconstruct whathappened. The children are immune deficient from birth. Thisdeficiency is aggravated by immunizations, but it is alsodue, in large part, to the mother's poor nutrition, onelacking in essential nutrients. These already deficient babies are generally notbreast-fed, but instead receive artificial canned, jarred,and processed milk and baby foods. The resulting lack ofnutrients adds to the original immune deficiency, andmanifests as a progression of infections, colds and flu. Thechild is now plied with drugs, including antibiotics andvarious flu medicines. Drugs will temporarily suppress theinfections (in the above case, constant ear infections) butwill not strengthen the immune system. On the contrary, allantibiotics are toxic to some extent and suppress the immunesystem further. So the infections become more frequent andmore severe - until, one day, they become a full fledgedpancreatitis. Not long after that, the child is diagnosedwith juvenile diabetes. We need to consider another point: the liver and thepancreas, since they are such extremely important organs,have their own immune systems, the reticulo-endothelialsystem. If hepatitis or pancreatitis occurs, this aloneproves that the affected organ's immune system is severelydamaged. The weakening of the immune system is causedpartially by frequent doses of antibiotics and/or othermedical drugs - all of which are more or less liver toxic.But once a child develops diabetes and begins taking insulin,this does not overcome the immune weakness. On the contrary,the infections continue and require more and more drugsuppression. Insulin does not produce healing! For many people who have never dealt with the problem,diabetes seems like a mild illness, easily overcome withinsulin injections. That is unfortunately not true. Juvenilediabetes often results in kidney damage, with resulting needfor kidney dialysis. Many of the children afflicted with thisdisease, as they go into early adulthood, are subject toretinal damage which can result in blindness. Young adultswhose kidneys no longer function require kidney dialysis andeventually kidney transplants - which are only good for a fewyears and then fail with deplorable results. In age-onset diabetics, the doctor's suggestion to avoidstarches and sugars and eat more proteins produces otherserious problems. As we have seen above, this disease islargely due to excess cholesterol. But the recommendation of"a high protein diet" is understood by mostpatients to mean that they should eat largely animalproducts. Meat, chicken, fish, cheese, eggs and milk are veryhigh in cholesterol, the very cause of the problem. Theresult for most of these patients is that more seriouscholesterol problems develop: deposits in the arteriesleading to high blood pressure, heart disease and heartattacks; poor circulation with resulting gangrene. Gangrenoustoes, feet and legs often must be amputated. Retinaldetachment problems lead to blindness. Most of the problem is the excess cholesterol as well asexcess animal protein that causes much of the overload on thekidneys and their eventual failure. Few people realize thatdiabetes is the third most frequent cause of death in theUnited States (after cardiovascular disease and cancer) butit is rather easy to overcome with the Gerson Therapy. Sincethe Therapy deals easily and quickly with the cholesteroloverload, the patient's body becomes able to break down andeliminate the arteriosclerosis, the kidney and eye problems,as well as the overload on the heart. We have even seenpainful toes, already cold and white due to lack ofcirculation from arteriosclerosis, turn warm and pink againin a week or two on the Gerson Therapy. Admittedly, it is much easier to deal with age-onsetdiabetes, since it is mostly a cholesterol problem with theresulting arteriosclerosis and kidney damage. When it comesto juvenile diabetes, we must remember that we are dealingwith true pancreatic dysfunction with resultant poor insulinproduction. We have seen some children with juvenile diabetesimprove eyesight, overcome high blood pressure and kidneydamage. But, since the Islets of Langerhans cannot berestored to full function, these people have to stay close tothe Gerson Therapy for the rest of their lives. In childrenand youngsters that is a tall order. On the other hand, wehave seen one patient, who started on the Gerson Therapy with"40% irreversible damage to his eyesight" accordingto his ophthalmologist, with high blood pressure that wasuncontrollable at over 220; with constant kidney pain andsevere edema - be cleared of all these problems using theGerson Therapy . But, after some time, at age 22, he wastired of adhering to this strict diet and felt he could dowell enough without it. He went back to his former ways, thestandard American diet (SAD), and after a few years, wentblind, went on kidney dialysis and eventually died. This terrible scenario is not only curable butpreventable. However, prevention is one of the most difficultapproaches to "sell" to the public. People usuallyfeel that, as long as they are well, nothing can happen tothem, and diseases are for other people. Also, they have astrong resistance to changing their diet and lifestyle.Prevention of juvenile diabetes starts with the mother. Evenprior to conception, her diet matters. The typical high fat,high salt, and high protein American diet is unfortunatelynot conducive to good health. The mother's diet shouldconsist largely of fresh (organic, whenever possible) fruitand vegetables, raw salads and juices and a little non-fatunsalted protein food, such as non-fat yogurt or cottagecheese. Also stimulants and drugs should be omitted: coffee,alcohol and especially cigarettes, not to speak of street orphysician-administered drugs, tranquilizers, sleeping pillsand pain killers. Please note: on a vegetarian, salt-free,low animal protein diet, people will naturally be free ofpain, sleep well, have no colds and flu and require no drugs. The next area of prevention for the mother is, of course,during her pregnancy. She again needs large amounts of freshfruit and vegetables, raw salads, etc. and fresh vegetablejuices. The usual admonition: "take a lot of proteins,drink plenty of milk" is completely wrong and could evenbe dangerous, as it tends to overload the kidneys and producetoxemia. A properly nourished mother will have a baby strongin immune response, free of infections and, if the baby isbreast fed, also free of colic. An easy, relatively painlessbirth is an extra bonus. One of the important preventive reasons why breastfeeding is so essential is the very first fluid which entersthe breast. This is not actual milk, but a transparent fluid,called colostrum. It is nature's gift to this wonderful newlife and helps to build the baby's immune system, thefriendly bacteria in the intestinal tract, etc. It isunfortunate that some pediatricians feel that they knowbetter than nature and tell mothers to discard this firstfluid "since it is not milk" and wait until the"real milk" comes in before breast feeding is tobegin. The next important preventive step, of course, is theactual nutrition of the baby. If the baby is fed good, freshlive foods, first mother's milk, then fresh vegetables,mashed bananas, apples and fresh oatmeal rather than boxed'Pablum' or other artificial cereals, the baby will remainwell with good defenses. One of the first additions to thechild's diet, as early as the second or third month, and evenbefore oatmeal, should be freshly pressed carrot juice, madefrom organic carrots. As the child grows, one must keep itemssuch as ice cream, cookies, cakes, etc., to the barestminimum, only for special occasions. In an earlier HealingNewsletter (Vol. 9, No. 3), we published the devastatingeffects on children of hot dogs and other spiced sausagemeats. It is also most important to avoid bottled softdrinks, especially those containing stimulants, such as thecola drinks. Again, fresh fruit and vegetable juices (carrotand apple, for instance) are best. Adult Diabetes Prevention We now go on to the adult prevention program. Obviously,since age-onset diabetes is caused largely by excesscholesterol, we have to come to the same conclusions: a lowanimal protein and low fat diet, no deep fried foods, minimumsalt and sweet bottled drinks as well as avoidance ofalcohol, cigarettes, and other stimulants. To keep the body'sdefenses at a peak level, with high enzyme function, we mustagain have the best, fresh, organic fruit and vegetables,avoid salt, stimulants and drugs, but use fresh vegetablejuices with only occasional 'treats'. Dr. Gerson wrote about prevention in his book A Cancer Therapy: Results of 50 Cases . He felt that adiet consisting of 75% building and highly nutritiousmaterial, and 25% of "your choice" would beadequate. That was 40 years ago. In the intervening years,technology has damaged the air, water, soil and foods muchmore, with the predictable result that most people'sresistance is much lower. Therefore, I would propose a dietof 90% building and defensive foods (fresh, organic fruit andvegetables) with at most 10% "at liberty" forprevention of disease. The Gerson Therapy Home Page Copyright 1995, 1996(c) The Gerson Institute, All rights reserved. WT02-B03-122IA008-000090-B020-308http://www.gerson.com:80/modern.html 207.158.200.123 19970222123331 text/html 13982HTTP/1.1 200 OKDate: Sat, 22 Feb 1997 12:33:50 GMTServer: Apache/1.2b4Connection: closeContent-Type: text/htmlLast-Modified: Mon, 09 Dec 1996 22:56:06 GMTETag: "83e45b-35ab-32ac9906"Content-Length: 13739Accept-Ranges: bytes  Healing Modern Diseases with the Gerson Therapy Healing Modern Diseases with the Gerson Therapy Chronic Fatigue, Candidiasis, Herpes, Lyme Disease, Salmonella, Legionnaire's Disease, AIDS by Charlotte Gerson, President, The Gerson Institute These days, we hear the names of many diseases that were totallyunfamiliar or actually unknown some ten or twenty years ago. I refer tothem as "modern diseases". Some, such as chronic fatigue syndrome (CFS),are also known as "Yuppy Diseases", after Young Upwardly-mobileProfessionals, those most commonly affected. The victims of thesediseases are most often middle-class whites, two thirds of them women. Chronic Fatigue Syndrome The volume Health Conditions, p. 616, describes Chronic Fatigue Syndromeas "a mysterious infectious illness" that supposedly existed and wasdescribed in the past as "the vapors", and, after World War I, as"soldier's heart". Researchers have failed to find a single cause, butsuspect it to be related to the Epstein-Barr virus infection, withcandidiasis and herpes thrown in. It is almost certainly caused byinfectious agents, whether one or more is relatively immaterial when wetreat it with the Gerson Therapy. According to Dr. Murray R. Susser ofSanta Monica, California, symptoms can include deep fatigue, joint pain orweakness, headache, memory loss, mental confusion, digestive problems,allergies and depression. These can also include anxiety, night sweatsand even irregular heartbeat. A young man (age 28) seen at the hospital had all of these problemsso severely that he had been bedfast for many months, unable to engage inany activity. The doctors accused him of laziness and/or psychiatricproblems and put him into the psychiatric ward. Drugs administered thereworsened his depression so badly he became suicidal. At the hospital, with the intensive Gerson Therapy and detoxification, he was upin a little more than a week, in great good spirits and dancing with hismother! In The Gerson Healing Newsletter, Vol. 9 No. 4, (Nov./Dec.1994), we described another chronic fatigue patient who recoveredcompletely on the Gerson Therapy. He had suffered from almost all of theabove described symptoms. Health Conditions further quotes Dr. Susser, saying that he firmlybelieves that CFS results from "several ongoing, simultaneous infectionsthat weaken the immune system." I believe that it is probably the otherway around: it is a weakened immune system (due to previous infections,antibiotic and other drug treatments, toxicity from foods and theenvironment) that allows various organisms to take up residence in thebody. Once these have damaged the body, it is much easier for otheropportunistic viruses or germs to add to the problem. Dr. Susser adds that in CFS "we often get hidden, concomitant parasite,yeast and viral infections that are the result of a weakened immunesystem." Here is our cue that CFS is not a simple problem but a combination ofimmune deficiency diseases, including candida and possible parasites. Candidiasis Candidiasis, a fungal invasion, has become extremely common. Candida iscommonly found in many body areas, particularly in the gut and vagina.Candidiasis regularly develops in people who have undergone severe orlong-term treatments with antibiotics. The mechanism is quite simple:since candida commonly inhabits the colon, it shares the availablenutrients with friendly bacteria as well as other organisms. Whenpatients are treated with antibiotics, these bacteria are killed off - butthe yeast (Candida) survives and is now no longer deprived of nutrients byother organisms, it has the area and the nutrients to itself. It isimportant to note that patients who receive antibiotic treatments arealready suffering from some infection and are therefore immunecompromised. The weakened immune system is then subject to a massiveinvasion by candida that was unaffected by antibiotics and against whichthe body has no defenses. Candida really becomes a problem when it invades other tissues,particularly the nervous system. The drugs available for treatment, likeall drugs, are often temporarily effective to control the candida - butthey do not heal. On the contrary, all drugs are toxic and further damageand weaken the immune system. The result is that the candida recurs ifand when the drugs have to be discontinued due to toxic liver damage. Since cancer chemotherapy also severely damages the immune system,virtually all cancer patients who were treated with chemo also suffer fromcandidiasis. Furthermore, even those who have not been treated withcytotoxic (chemo) drugs suffer from a damaged immune system: they couldnot have cancer if their immune system were fully functioning. We cantherefore assume that they, too, have some degree of candida infection. Herpes Herpes, or fever sores, have been around for a long time. Genital herpes,on the other hand, is a relatively new sexually transmitted disease (STD).Before the advent of AIDS, it was one of the more serious genitallytransmitted diseases and caused much distress in young people. It, too,defies treatment Herpes simplex is described as an acute viral infection;while genital herpes is known to be caused by Herpes Virus 2. This, too,is clearly an immune deficiency disease and has been overcome by theGerson Therapy. Another form of Herpes, Herpes Zoster or shingles, is also on the rise.Not only does it cause extreme pain which is difficult to control, but itgenerally does not go away. The severity of the attack will subside, butconstant and recurring problems, including pain, may persist. There is noreally effective treatment to overcome and cure this herpes infectionexcept with the intensive Gerson Therapy. Lyme Disease Lyme Disease was first observed and described in Lyme, Connecticut. Itseems to be caused by an infectious agent, transmitted by a tick, andcauses various problems, including in some cases arthritis, erythema(reddening of skin), Bell's palsy, brain and possible heart abnormalities.It has been improved by the administration of penicillin, however manycases persist and develop into serious paralyses, nerve and braindisorders. We have seen only one patient who suffered from this problem.She was in a wheelchair, unable to move or control her limbs, was severelydepressed and her condition was deteriorating. In only a few days on theGerson Therapy her overall problems improved considerably. I have nofollow-up in this case and am unable to report further progress. Salmonella This is a topic that has to be treated separately, and is not really a"modern" disease. It has several forms ranging from mild to severegastro-intestinal inflammation all the way to serious food poisoning.Other species of salmonella are the causative agents of paratyphoid andtyphoid fever. The reason salmonella must be included under "modern" infections is thatin its food poisoning action, it is now killing an increasingly largenumber of people in the U.S. annually. The number of salmonella casesreported in Los Angeles last year, for instance, increased ten times (fromjust over 100, to just over 1,000) over the previous year. The culprit, to a large extent, is the chicken industry. We talked about"The Case Against Chicken" in the Gerson Healing Newsletter, Vol. 9, No.1, (May/June 1994), but this discussion did not include any of the manyinfectious agents found in chicken due to current automated, high-volume,profit-oriented processing. Surely many of our readers saw the article inTime Magazine (Oct. 17, 1994) titled "Something Smells Fowl", anddescribing the horrendous and unsanitary conditions found in today'schicken processing plants. Aside from salmonella, chicken are generallyinfected with Camphylobacter, E. coli or other micro-organisms, accordingto the Time article. "Each year at least 6.5 million and possibly as manyas 80 million people get sick from chicken, and some 1,000 people die,according to conservative estimates". Although cooking the meat properlywill generally kill the infectious bacteria, any kitchen surface orimplement that the infected meat touches can also become contaminated andpotentially dangerous. In discussing the damage done by consuming chicken, neither our ownMay/June issue, nor the Time Magazine article touched on the treatment ofthe animals while they are alive. The incubated eggs are injected beforethey hatch, since they would otherwise not even produce live chicks.Chickens are heavily treated with hormones and antibiotics to keep themalive - and they must generally be slaughtered at a very early age (forchickens) - or they die of disease. Yet, with intensive advertising, theimmense (7 billion chickens are slaughtered in the United States annually)and profitable chicken industry has convinced much of the American publicthat eating this septic, decaying, sick and chemical-laced meat ishealthier and preferable to eating red meat because of its lower fat andcholesterol content. I am by no means advocating the consumption of redmeat, pork or veal - none of which are the slightest bit healthful. I aminstead pointing out that eating chicken is not a reasonable choice for aperson wishing to maintain good health. The above material is presented to give the reader background informationon the increasing dangers of "modern" sources of infection. But, in myopinion, all these modern diseases are really only symptoms of theseriously decreased resistance and damaged immune systems of our currentpopulation. In all these cases, infections are involved, and in many ofthem (Chronic Fatigue Syndrome, Candidiasis, Genital Herpes, LymeDisease), there is no cure by drugs or other orthodox methods. Yet theGerson Therapy has been shown to help people overcome these diseases.This shows that the Gerson Therapy strengthens and restores the immunesystem and thus helps the body to overcome these "incurable" ailments. Legionnaires' Disease Among "modern diseases," Legionnaire's Disease should also be mentioned,especially in connection with impaired immune systems. This "mysteriousnew disease" was first described in a number of cases which afflictedmembers of the American Legion who were attending a convention inPhiladelphia in 1976. The disease is a serious type of pneumonia, yet isoften carried without producing disease. According to the text CurrentMedical Diagnosis, Legionnaires' Disease is caused by an opportunisticgerm (meaning that it attacks weakened or defenseless persons) andgenerally affects the elderly, smokers and people on dialysis or who havebeen given organ transplants. The latter, of course, must be treated withimmune suppressant agents or their bodies would reject the transplants.In other words, their immune systems are severely and intentionallydepressed, and they become susceptible to opportunistic infections. AIDS No discussion of "modern diseases" would be complete without mentioningAcquired Immune Deficiency Syndrome, or AIDS. This, as the nameindicates, is the ultimate failure of the immune system. It stands toreason, then, that since the Gerson Therapy restores the immune system, itcould well overcome this problem, too. At present, it is difficult for meto claim that the Gerson Therapy will cure AIDS. Due to restrictionsimposed by the Mexican health authorities, we are not allowed to acceptAIDS patients. As a result, we have not been able to follow AIDS patientsto observe results. We have seen good recoveries in two cases of patientswho were treated for HIV infections on an out-patient basis. I feeluncomfortable making any curative claims for the Gerson Therapy on thebasis of such a small sample. Yet, one cannot help but assume that, withthe improved immune response produced by the Gerson Therapy as with somany other diseases, AIDS should respond very well. Dr. Gerson was aware very early in his career that his Therapy was able toimprove and restore the immune system - since he was able to curetuberculosis of all types well before the advent of antibiotics. I evenremember a case of infantile paralysis in New York that was reversedalmost immediately with the Gerson Therapy. Obviously the immune systemplays an extremely important role in the treatment of cancer. Therestored immune response is largely credited with helping the body breakdown and dissolve tumor tissue. Conversely, since all the above diseasesare on the rise, we also have to understand that, due to modernagricultural methods, food processing methods, damage to our bodies withtoxins, drugs, alcohol, tobacco, with medical drug treatments, etc., ourimmune systems are more and more seriously damaged or paralyzed. In orderto heal anything we have to work to restore the whole body, and with it,the immune system. And since the Gerson Therapy does just that, it hasbeen able to heal both 'ancient' and 'modern' diseases. The Gerson Therapy Copyright 1994,1995,1996 (c) The Gerson Institute, All rights reserved.WT02-B03-123IA008-000090-B020-340http://www.gerson.com:80/chemo101.html 207.158.200.123 19970222123347 text/html 16557HTTP/1.1 200 OKDate: Sat, 22 Feb 1997 12:34:05 GMTServer: Apache/1.2b4Connection: closeContent-Type: text/htmlLast-Modified: Mon, 09 Dec 1996 22:49:12 GMTETag: "8aaec6-3fba-32ac9768"Content-Length: 16314Accept-Ranges: bytes Chemotherapyand the Gerson Patient Chemotherapy and the Gerson Patient by Charlotte Gerson, President, The GersonInstitute During the mid-fifties, just as Dr. Gerson was demonstrating some of his most dramaticresults with a nutritional treatment for cancer, chemotherapystarted to be used by establishment medicine. The reason wasthe general disillusion with the results of surgery andradiation in the treatment of cancer patients. Thechemotherapeutic drugs were supposed to stop the fastreproduction of tumor cells - and thus stop cancer.Originally, these highly toxic agents were based on themustard gas of warfare of which there was a huge remainingsupply after the end of World War II. When these drugs soonwere found to be too toxic and at best only temporarilyeffective, new combinations were compounded all supposedlystopping or slowing the multiplication of fast growingtissue. But since there are various tissues in the human bodywhich must multiply rapidly (bone marrow producing red andwhite blood corpuscles which constitute a large part of theimmune system) other very serious side-effects were alwayspresent with the chemotherapy treatments: damage to bonemarrow; poisoning of the liver and often destruction of thekidneys, not to speak of damage also to the heart. In spite of over 30 years of use of chemotherapy in thetreatment of cancer patients, and in spite of its status as a'proven' cancer treatment, these drugs have never beenofficially accepted nor do they have the full approval ofFDA. Chemotherapy is still an "experimental"treatment, largely because it has never undergone 'doubleblind' studies. Why not? Chemotherapy was just being introduced toward the end ofDr. Gerson's practice in New York, shortly before hedied. He talks about his experience with Johnny Gunther inAppendix II of A Cancer Therapy Results of 50 Cases, p. 415.(See also John Gunther's book, Death Be Not Proud) Johnny waspossibly the only patient Dr. Gerson treated after he had been given chemotherapy.The book describes the terrible response, the swollen arm,the severe bone marrow depression and the doctor'sexpectation that Johnny would quickly die. Nobody suspectedthat Dr. Gerson could reverse some of the damage. But Dr. Gerson could not have known what the Gerson doctorsin Mexico have discovered after years of working with cancerpatients who had previously been given chemotherapy, namelythat these heavy drugs are released back into the system andcause the prior poisoning symptoms to show up once more. Thisgenerally happens after some six months on the GersonTherapy. That was also Dr. Gerson's experience with JohnnyGunther - but he did not know that it was due to the priorchemotherapy treatment. He took the blame for Johnny's death,assuming that the only cause was the treatment with hormoneswhich he had applied. Oncologists using chemotherapy drugs in the treatment oftheir cancer patients are told that the body, in time,excretes these drugs, and that the damage is thus overcome.It is true that many patients grow hair again after they havelost it; that their blood count comes back up to near normaland their mucous membranes heal after breaking down withulcers due to the chemotherapy treatments. They overcome theterrible nausea and vomiting caused by the toxic drugs, theweakness and depression, etc. (Of course if they suffer alsothe loss of kidney function due to the chemotherapeuticdrugs, this does not reverse. The kidneys, once destroyed, donot recover.) But overcoming the immediate toxicity does notprove that all the toxic materials have left the body. On thecontrary, the Gerson doctors' experience with patients whohave had prior treatment with chemotherapy gives an entirelydifferent picture. When the first Gerson Therapy treatment facility inMexico (La Gloria) was started in 1977, we went as closely aspossible by Dr. Gerson's directions in his book, A Cancer Therapy . But since Dr. Gerson didn't have any experience with chemotherapypatients, his book contains no special directions regardingsuch patients. No special adjustments were made by the Gersondoctors for such patients. Our first serious shock came when,at almost the same time, two patients with previouschemotherapy treatments were admitted and started on theTherapy. They received the full intensive treatment,including the starting medications, five coffee enemas a day,and the castor oil treatment every other day. As the bodiesof these two patients detoxified intensively, they had allthe symptoms of a chemotherapy overdose. Of course the Gersonphysicians had given none of these drugs. So the onlyconclusion was that the drugs still remaining in the bodyfrom treatments many months earlier, were being releasedrapidly, in large amounts, poisoning these patients a secondtime! They landed in intensive care, they were so ill. TheGerson doctors were shocked into the realization thatchemotherapy patients could not be treated with the sameprotocols as those who had received none of these toxicdrugs. It must also be understood that patients treated withchemotherapeutic agents often had recurrences which causedthem to seek alternative therapies. At one point, the results of the Gerson Therapy inpatients with previous chemotherapy treatments were so poorthat we refused to accept such patients. However, in time,some patients begged to be allowed to come. Others, afterchemotherapy, felt that the Gerson Therapy was so logical andbasic that they tried the Gerson Therapy at home on their ownand, to our great surprise, succeeded! So, it became clearthat it could be done. With this empirical evidence in hand, the Gerson Therapyphysicians began to treat patients who had received priorchemotherapy. These patients were given less intensivemedications; they were given only two or three coffee enemasdaily instead of the regular five. They were not given castoroil treatments, in order to avoid sudden and intensivedetoxification and they improved. It was now a questionwhether this less intensive treatment would work fast enoughand well enough to stop the advance of the cancer, yet not sofast as to cause an overdose of the chemotherapeuticchemicals being pushed out of their systems. In many cases,it worked. Admittedly, the results in cases where patientshad received prior chemotherapy were sharply reduced comparedto those who received no such toxic drugs. But, in manycases, we were still able to obtain recoveries. We did find out, however, that certain cancers do notrespond after chemotherapy. Pancreatic cancer, which showsexcellent results on the Gerson Therapy, does not respondafter the patient had received chemotherapy. The same goesfor cancers that have extensively metastasized (spread) intothe liver. Leukemias, after heavy chemotherapy, are alsodifficult to reverse with the Gerson Therapy. Brain tumorsfall into the same category. Melanomas, which usually respondexceptionally well to the Gerson Therapy, do relativelypoorly after chemotherapy. All types of lymphomas dorelatively well on the Gerson Therapy despite chemotherapy;the same goes for ovarian cancers. Of course, all types ofcancer respond much better with no prior toxic drugtreatments. According to various sources, after the administration ofchemotherapy, the patient's body excretes somewhere between35% and 50% of the drugs given. The problem for a researcheris to prove this statement. Unfortunately, there are no truetests for toxicity in the system. I personally feel that theremaining toxic drugs could be lodged in the connective orfatty tissues. They cannot possibly remain in the liver; thisessential organ would be poisoned beyond function. But alldrug tests are performed on serum or blood samples, not solidtissues. Fluids do not show positive for these agents simplybecause the drugs are not circulating, but are lodged in sometissue. The reason we feel so certain that poisons remain in thebody after chemotherapy treatments, even up to two yearslater, is that we see the patients excreting them. In thecourse of the Gerson Therapy, patients typically go throughhealing crises, or "Flare-Ups," described by Dr. Gerson in A Cancer Therapy , pp. 201-203. During these flare-upswe see that the patient's body excretes many accumulatedtoxins. Often, these toxins are readily identifiable by theirodors. When patients who had prior chemo go through thesedetoxifying 'flare-up' days, they experience the samesymptoms they originally felt while they were receiving thechemotherapeutic agents: they feel nauseous, taste thechemicals, smell the drugs in their stool, have some loss ofhair, mouth ulcers, and temporarily depressed red and whiteblood cell counts. Since we have learned to treat anddetoxify these patients cautiously, we find that the heavychemotherapy drug releases can happen at about six monthsinto the Gerson Therapy. At that time the patient eitherrecovers or goes into decline. Since our experience with patients who have had priorchemotherapy is always questionable, we have often refused toadmit patients who had received a "bone marrowtransplant." These patients are treated extremelyheavily with chemotherapeutic chemicals, after their bonemarrow is removed. The marrow is then returned, on the theorythat since it has remained free of the toxic drugs, it willcontinue to function. In fact, that does not happen, sincethe drugs continue to circulate in the body and, of course,soon contaminate the 'clean' bone marrow. One patient, suffering from ovarian cancer, and showingpoor results after several courses of chemotherapy, was givena bone marrow transplant at a cost upward of $150,000.00.This treatment did not control her cancer, which continued tospread. She then called us and wished to be admitted to thehospital for the Gerson Therapy. However, while sheadmitted to being heavily treated with chemotherapy, she didnot tell the Gerson physicians about receiving a bone marrowtransplant. So, with a warning that chemotherapy patients donot respond as well as those who have not been pretreated,she was accepted for the Gerson Therapy. She was given theless intensive therapy, developed specifically for patientswho have had prior chemotherapy, and responded quite well.Her symptoms and blood counts improved. However, as expected,after six months from the start of the Gerson Therapy, shewent into a heavy 'healing reaction'. In her case, thisconsisted of abscesses breaking out all over her body. Theseboils released pus, and, of course, she was veryuncomfortable during a few weeks. Nevertheless, she workedthrough it - and after it was over, was much better. We haveto assume that, in her case, much of the heavy poisoning wasexcreted through the skin. There are more and more reports by establishmentoncologists doubting the value of chemotherapy, even to thepoint of rejecting it outright. One of these, cancerbiostatistician Dr. Ulrich Abel, of Heidelberg, Germany,issued a monograph titled Chemotherapy of Advanced EpithelialCancer in 1990. (See Healing Journal, No. 1-2, Vol.7 of theGerson Institute.) Epithelial cancers comprise the mostcommon forms of adenocarcinoma: lung, breast, prostate,colon, etc. After ten years as a statistician in clinicaloncology, Abel became increasingly uneasy. "A sober andunprejudiced analysis of the literature," he wrote,"has rarely revealed any therapeutic success by theregimens in question in treating advanced epithelialcancer." While chemotherapy is being used more and moreextensively, more than a million people die worldwide ofthese cancers annually - and a majority have received someform of chemotherapy before dying. Abel further concluded,after polling hundreds of cancer doctors, "The personalview of many oncologists seems to be in striking contrast tocommunications intended for the public." Abel citedstudies that have shown "that many oncologists would nottake chemotherapy themselves if they had cancer." (TheCancer Chronicles, December, 1990.) "Even though toxicdrugs often do effect a response, a partial or completeshrinkage of the tumor, this reduction does not prolongexpected survival," Abel finds. "Sometimes, infact, the cancer returns more aggressively than before, sincethe chemo fosters the growth of resistant cell lines."Besides, the chemo has severely damaged the body's owndefenses, the immune system and often the kidneys as well asthe liver. In an especially dramatic table, Dr. Abel displays theresults of chemotherapy in patients with various types ofcancers, as the improvement of survival rates, compared tountreated patients. This table shows: In colorectal cancer: no evidence survival isimproved. Gastric cancer: no clear evidence. Pancreatic cancer: Study completely negative. Longersurvival in control (untreated) group. Bladder: no clinical trial done. Breast cancer: No direct evidence that chemotherapyprolongs survival; its use is "ethicallyquestionable." (That is particularly newsworthy, sinceall breast cancer patients, before or after surgery, aregiven chemotherapy drugs.) Ovarian cancer: no direct evidence. Cervix and uterus: No improved survival. Head and neck: no survival benefit but occasionalshrinkage of tumors. More recently, the Nov. 17, 1994 Wall Street Journal, ina front page article on political pressure being exerted forinsurance companies to pay for bone marrow transplants inadvanced breast cancer, experts give a totally negativereport on this approach. The procedure, called ABMT(Autologous Bone Marrow Transplant) involves temporarilyremoving some of the patient's bone marrow, applying apotentially lethal dose of chemotherapy, then returning themarrow to the patient's body. The cost of this procedure isin excess of $100,000.00 . The University of Colorado's Dr. Jones, continues theJournal, claims that, with conventional chemotherapy, notmore than 2% of patients with spreading breast cancer get apositive response. A non-profit independent technologyassessment agency, the Emergency Care Research Institute(ECRI), says that for the average woman with the mostadvanced form of breast cancer, the high dose ABMT procedureis not only worthless, but also likely to shorten her life.This report by the ECRI is based on an analysis of 40 studiesof ABMT and similar procedures involving a total of 1,017patients, and 61 studies covering 4,852 patients who hadconventional chemotherapy. Dr. Nelson Erlick, the project'slead analyst, concluded that "many patients are led tobelieve that this (ABMT) is a successful therapy. We found noevidence whatsoever that it provides any benefit." Since the Gerson Therapy is often described by orthodoxoncologists as 'quackery', we'd like our readers to considerthis: If quackery describes an expensive treatment that thetechnician knows ahead of time to be ineffective (or evenharmful), what is ABMT (bone marrow transplant)? Yet healthplan providers are being ordered to pay for it by the Officeof Personnel Management, a federal agency. WT02-B03-124IA008-000090-B020-366http://www.gerson.com:80/depress.html 207.158.200.123 19970222123357 text/html 8586HTTP/1.1 200 OKDate: Sat, 22 Feb 1997 12:34:19 GMTServer: Apache/1.2b4Connection: closeContent-Type: text/htmlLast-Modified: Mon, 09 Dec 1996 22:50:02 GMTETag: "83e3e8-2098-32ac979a"Content-Length: 8344Accept-Ranges: bytes  type_Document_Title_here Clinical Depression ... a Biochemical Problem by Charlotte Gerson, President, The Gerson Institute Clinical Depression is a subject that could well have been includedin our last Healing Newsletter as a 'modern disease'. Of coursedepression is not new; it has been plaguing people for centuries.However, recently it has been accepted as a disease syndrome and asbeing 'treatable'. This means that it can be drug treated. It isdepressing just to read the symptoms given: (Current MedicalDiagnosis & Treatment, Krupp & Chatton)o Lowered mood, sadness to intense feelings of guilt and hopelessnesso Difficulty in thinking, inability to concentrate, inability to make decisionso Loss of interest, less involvement with work and recreationo Headache, disrupted sleep, change in appetite, decreased sexual driveo Anxietyo Suicidal tendencies As the disease progresses, the symptoms become more severe. In allorthodox approaches to disease, the symptoms are treated, not theunderlying problems. The present drugs of choice are the moodaltering medications, one example of which is imipramine. Years ago, we saw a patient who had been treated with imipramine forsome 15 years. Her depression and anxiety were still present, buthad been more or less controlled by the drug. The side effects,however, were almost unbearable: she was virtually blind, could justidentify her own hand held in front of her eyes; and she was stilldepressed. But the patient's worst symptom was the constant feelingof worms crawling under her skin and out of all her body openings.Her symptoms intensified if she didn't take the drug. In only a fewdays on the Gerson Therapy, her vision had improved to near normaland her mood was a great deal better. The 'crawling' sensations,however, took longer to relieve. More recently, we had a patient whowas being treated for lymphoma. She had been on the Gerson Therapyfor some time, but came back to the hospital for hyperbaricoxygen treatments. She mentioned, one day, that she was experiencinga crawling sensation under her skin. I asked her if she had everbeen treated for depression with antidepressant drugs. She thought amoment and then replied, yes, some 35 years ago, after the birth ofher daughter. These drugs were still lodged in her system and onlyjust being excreted in the course of a healing reaction on the GersonTherapy. When they reentered the bloodstream, she re-experienced thesame symptoms she felt when the drug was first administered. Sincedrugs do not overcome the underlying problems, they are oftenadministered for years, yet never clear the disease. Brain dysfunctions are generally referred to as mental diseases. Tomany, this classification implies genetic problems, and carries thestigma of being crazy or demented. Often, in fact, these diseasesare metabolic disorders, and therefore curable by healing themetabolism. The brain is an incredibly delicate and finely balanced instrument..It also requires substantially more oxygen than other tissues. Whileit only constitutes only about 6-8% of total body mass, it isbelieved to require as much as 20% of the system's total oxygenintake. As in all chronic diseases, the underlying problems in brainmalfunction are toxicity and deficiency. The Standard American Diet(SAD) is generally at fault. Ross Horne, in his book, The Health Revolution, has reproduced twointeresting photomicrographs from Dr. Ronald Glasser's The Body isthe Hero. In it, we see the effect of a high-fat meal on red bloodcorpuscles (cells). In order to properly fulfill their oxygentransport function, red blood corpuscles should float freely andindependently in the bloodstream, exposing the maximum surface areato adsorb, carry and release oxygen. However, after a high-fat meal,the cells that should float freely (see Figure 2) become stucktogether and clumped into rolls, much like the rolls of coins onegets at the bank, see Figure 1. These rolls are called rouleaux.The photomicrograph shows that a large proportion of red bloodcorpuscles are still forming rouleaux six hours after a high fatmeal. When they are glued together, blood cells have a much reducedtotal surface area, thus can carry much less oxygen. Furthermore,these rouleaux are too large and inflexible to travel through thetiny capillaries (hair vessels) and deliver their life-supportingoxygen to the most remote cells in the circulatory system. With thebrain's high oxygen requirement, it cannot function properly underconditions of oxygen starvation. This explains why people experiencesleepiness and lack of energy after a heavy meal. They often try toovercome the 'depression' by the use of stimulants: coffee, alcoholor cigarettes. It takes some six to ten hours for the body to clearthe fat from the bloodstream and "unclump" the red blood cells.Within six hours, however, most people will have consumed anotherfatty meal: breakfast with eggs and bacon or sausage; lunch with ahamburger or hot-dog; dinner with meat, chicken, cheese, milk,butter, or other high-fat substances. The result is that we live ina constant state of oxygen starvation when we eat diets high in fatcontent. Yet this describes the SAD diet precisely. 40% or more ofthe calories the average American consumes come from the fat contentof our food. Our brains and other vital organs are being slowlystrangled, deprived of their life-giving oxygen. In addition to fat and cholesterol, the SAD diet contains manychemical additives: dyes, preservatives, emulsifiers, flavorenhancers, plus residual pesticides, hormones, and antibiotics fromanimal products. Some 10,000 chemicals are accepted as foodadditives, certified safe by our Food and Drug Administration (FDA).In our opinion, no chemical food additives are safe for dailyingestion! It has been amply demonstrated that hyperactive childrenbecome perfectly normal when they are placed on a diet free of foodadditives. Instead of using this approach, however, orthodox doctorsuse drugs such as phenobarbital to calm these children. Butpsychoactive drugs, used over a period of time, can themselves causebrain damage! All toxic substances, including food additives, areenzyme inhibitors, further depressing the normal functions of braincells. Is it surprising that people become depressed, hyperactive,aggressive, and suicidal? (Suicide is one of the leading causes ofdeath among teenagers.) I must admit that I am always impressed withthe fact that so many people function as well as they do, as long asthey do, given what they eat. But are we really functioning fully? Nathan Pritikin describes how"children whose diets are changed from the typical Western high-fatdiet to a diet low in fat, can perform simple mental tasks 20% fasterand with greater accuracy once their blood is clear of fat."Pritikin asks, "Does our entire population struggle along at about75% of their mental capacity? Is this why our television programsare so infantile?" But what if we go further than eliminating fatsfrom the children's diet? What if we also eliminate food additivesand other toxins and sugar? What if we give our children the besthigh-micronutrient diet, such as a less intensive Gerson Therapy,could we increase their mental capacity by much more than 20%? Andwould this not also hold true for the rest of us? In conclusion, clinical depression is not just treatable (by drugs),it is curable. The answer to chronic disease is always the same:once you understand the underlying problems, deficiency and toxicity,and solve those, the body is capable of healing. Detoxifying andflooding the body with a high nutrient diet, the Gerson Therapy, isthe total approach to healing. Back to Gerson Articles Copyright 1994,1995,1996 (c) The Gerson Institute, All rights reserved.WT02-B03-125IA008-000090-B020-389http://www.gerson.com:80/altern.html 207.158.200.123 19970222123407 text/html 8620HTTP/1.1 200 OKDate: Sat, 22 Feb 1997 12:34:29 GMTServer: Apache/1.2b4Connection: closeContent-Type: text/htmlLast-Modified: Mon, 09 Dec 1996 22:46:32 GMTETag: "8c6b3a-20ba-32ac96c8"Content-Length: 8378Accept-Ranges: bytes Alternative Therapies Alternative Therapies Slowly gaining mainstream acceptance by Charlotte Gerson, President, The Gerson Institute On January 1, 1996, the Los Angeles Times carried a front page article titled New Life for Old Remedies. We felt this to be a very important development. Our members and other friends will surely find it encouraging that "old remedies" (the true healing of herbs, nutrition, acupuncture, homeopathy, etc.), according to this article, are once again finding acceptance. Since orthodox doctors, too, are spokesmen, we would like to report in some detail on this front-page news article. The article"s subtitle reads: "No longer dismissed as fringe ideas, such "traditional" therapies as acupuncture and herbs are going mainstream. Once-wary doctors are using them to complement conventional medicine." The article was written by Marlene Cimons, Los Angeles Times Staff Writer. The article opens with a report on a patient suffering cruelly from one of the most violent pains known: trigeminal neuralgia. The pain is caused by a nerve inflammation in the cheek. Narcotics and nerve blocks gave this patient only little relief, and had severe side effects: the patient was unable to sleep, couldn't concentrate and suffered from depression. The physician who was finally consulted, Dr. Brian Berman in Baltimore used homeopathic remedies, derived from herbs. Within six months, the pain receded by two-thirds. The patient continues to use these remedies, and is able to keep the pain under control. The author continues: "Now many other doctors are beginning to do the same thing. They have discovered that integrating the unconventional with the mainstream not only can provide relief but also can do so with fewer side effects and without more invasive procedures, such as surgery." More and more scientific evidence is strengthening approaches once considered radical or alternative, that are now being considered "complementary". The article claims that many physicians, "even those most resistant to alternative medicine," are now taking a second look. The article quotes Dr. Nancy Dickey, a family practice physician, chair of the board of trustees of the American Medical Association, a most conservative even reactionary organization. Dr. Dickey admitted that "if I had a patient who said, "I quit using codeine since I started doing acupuncture", I'd say, "Terrific"." Since these so-called "alternative" methods are, in fact, the ancient and original approaches to treatment of illness, they are actually "traditional" medicine. Outside of the United States, they are referred to as such. According to the World Health Organization of the United Nations, 65% to 80% of the worlds health care services are what we would call alternative. Dr. Wayne B. Jonas, director of the National Institutes of Health Office of Alternative Medicine (OAM), is quoted as saying that "These become complementary, alternative or unconventional when used in Western countries. Even in countries where modern Western biomedicine dominates, the public makes extensive use of unconventional practices." A 1990 study showed that one in three Americans saw an alternative health care practitioner that year. More than 80% used alternatives in conjunction with conventional medicine, according to the NIH. However, an item in The Cancer Chronicles, published by People Against Cancer, discusses a summer 1993 convention of the AMA, in the course of which delegates proposed a resolution condemning "recognition and endorsement of non-scientific alternative medical care paltriness". This was done in the name of "freedom and patient's rights"! According to the logic of B. J. Kennedy, MD, a delegate from the American Society of Clinical Oncology, "Use of these therapies interferes with patients' access to regular medical care." According to a report under the heading of "Abstracts" in the journal Alternative Therapies in Health and Medicine, January 1996, Vol. 2, No. 1, "A survey by David Eisenberg and colleagues indicated that in 1990, consumers made an estimated 425 million visits to providers of alternative therapies (they also made 388 million visits to primary care physicians) and spent $13.7 billion , mostly out-of-pocket (they spent $12.8 billion out-of-pocket for all hospitalizations during the same period). It was estimated that one of three Americans used alternative therapies in 1990, and most did not tell their physicians they were using these therapies." After the results were in from a carefully designed questionnaire, the journal continues, "180 physicians returned completed questionnaires; 70% to 90% considered many alternative therapies to be legitimate and a majority had referred patients to nonphysicians or used these therapies in their own practice. Of the respondents, 70% expressed interest in training in multiple areas of alternative medicine." Medical schools are beginning to add training in alternative therapies to their curricula. "Insurance companies, health maintenance organizations and other health plans have begun to cover alternative treatments in part," the author continues, "because they often cost less than standard procedures, and also because customers want them." A most interesting item follows: it seems that physicians themselves have become "consumers of alternative medicine" says Dr. James Gordon, chairman of the program advisory council of the NIHs OAM. "I've certainly seen physicians change because they had a health problem that was not helped by conventional therapy." Dr. Gordon had injured his back and obtained no relief from "orthodox" remedies, but was apparently helped by an osteopath. "The NIH's Jonas points out that a new drug's average "half-life" or period of peak use is about 20 years. Homeopathy has been around, unchanged, for almost 200 years, acupuncture for more than 2,000 years, prayer and spiritualism for at least 20,000 years. And if one believes reports of monkeys using plant products to regulate their menstrual cycles, herbalism, probably the oldest, has been around for greater than 200,000 years." Homeopathy was originally introduced from Europe by Dr. Hahnemann and is based on the idea of "like cures like". Homeopathy consists of treating a disease by giving highly diluted preparations of substances that, in larger doses, actually cause the same symptoms. The author of the article quotes several success stories with alternative medicine, including that of the wife of a physician, herself a nurse, who could not stand the side effects of the painkillers she was taking to treat fibromyalgia. She was highly skeptical but, with acupuncture, homeopathy and herbs, she could wean herself off drugs. [The wife of a patient at the Gerson Treatment Center, who was suffering from fibromyalgia, was cleared of her pain in three days by simply eating the organic vegetarian, unsalted foods served at the hospital.] Many doctors are still resistant to alternative medicine, partly because they feel that there is not enough scientific evidence demonstrating its effectiveness, and that most of what evidence there is, though striking, is "anecdotal". Dr. Berman predicts that it will take another decade for society to undergo a major transformation in its acceptance of alternative therapies. He feels it will only happen when there is enough "scientific" evidence to prove these therapies effective. The author also admits that even though doctors are more and more willing to turn to alternative medicine, the medical establishment in the United States is so strong that it is still able to define what "health care" should be. Physicians are still being taught that alternatives are mostly folk medicine, supposedly a "less evolved" form of medicine. The fact remains, however, that the public is becoming demonstrably more disenchanted with the ineffective treatments of allopathic, technological medicine, especially for degenerative diseases, and is "voting with their feet" by their patronage of alternative practitioners, for the ancient methods that still work. Copyright  1996, The Los Angeles Times. Reprinted with permission. WT02-B03-126IA008-000090-B020-411http://www.gerson.com:80/kulwicki.html 207.158.200.123 19970222123414 text/html 4307HTTP/1.1 200 OKDate: Sat, 22 Feb 1997 12:34:37 GMTServer: Apache/1.2b4Connection: closeContent-Type: text/htmlLast-Modified: Mon, 09 Dec 1996 22:53:28 GMTETag: "8d6c02-fe2-32ac9868"Content-Length: 4066Accept-Ranges: bytes Patient Story: Cure of a Brain Tumor Patient Story: Cure of a Brain Tumor by Charlotte Gerson The aim of the Gerson Therapy is always to healand restore people to a normal active life. We sometimes getphone calls and information from some of these cured peoplewith wonderful stories that we need to share with ourreaders. We should also like to stress that we love to hearfrom you people out there after you have been well for sometime. Don't for a moment think that we are no longerinterested in your recovery. On the contrary, the longer youare well, the more important and dramatic the story! Pleasekeep in touch and let us know. One such wonderful success story is that of Nora K. ofNorth Liberty, Indiana. Just weeks from her 10th birthday,she started to suffer from headaches, then vomiting. Hermother took her for a CAT scan and a brain tumor wasdiscovered. She then was taken to the Riley Children'sHospital in Indianapolis and was scheduled for surgery. Thesurgeon removed what he could, but some of the tumor was tooclose to a blood vessel and was only cauterized. This, ofcourse, left the door open to more tumor growth.Subsequently, Nora went for yearly check-ups. When she was13, an MRI (Magnetic Resonance Imaging) showed a recurrence.The doctor said that at this point, he couldn't do anything,"the tumor wasn't big enough to operate". Nora'smother, Mary, felt that she couldn't just sit by and wait forher daughter's tumor to grow. She started to read andresearch. She found the Gerson Therapy. In 1990, Mary and Nora came to the Mexican hospital andstarted the Gerson Therapy. Nora was on the Therapy,strictly, for one and a half years. During this time, withthe frequent coffee enemas and juices, Nora did not go to apublic school, but had home schooling. She also spent a greatdeal of time with coffee enemas on the bathroom floor. Sheused this time constructively: she read all the classics shecould get her hands on, then she read Plato and otherphilosophers, then she went on to read science books andmath. She got a tremendous education. When she took herSAT's, she scored extremely high; on her State equivalencytest her score was almost perfect. With all her backgroundand reading, she also became an excellent writer. At the end of her intensive Therapy, she had anothercheck-up with her neurosurgeon. He took some pictures,studied them, was puzzled, hesitated, took some more pictures- and finally said that he couldn't see any more tumor, justa shadow which he felt was a scar. Nora's mother asked whatNora's prognosis was. The surgeon said that she would neverhave a problem again! Nora was also playing the violin. Thedoctor was very pleased that she could play the violin andthis was a very good sign, since the type of tumor she wassuffering from would affect the fine motor skills. He saidthat she would not be able to play the violin with a tumor inher brain, these delicate motor skills would have beendisturbed. After one and a half years on the strict Therapy, Noraswitched to a maintenance therapy: she was still taking 2 - 3quarts of juice daily and eating organic food. Her motherstarted an organic co-op business, helping to supply herselfand a number of other people in the area with organic food.Mary K. says that she is now helping some 40 people to obtaintheir organic produce. Nora is 19 years old, and has beenadmitted to college. Not only that, but she obtained aPresidential Scholarship, a very high honor, and hopes tostudy medicine - alternative medicine - to help others as shewas helped. return to The Gerson Institute homepage. The Gerson Therapy Copyright 1994,1995 (c) TheGerson Institute, All rights reserved. WT02-B03-127IA008-000090-B020-440http://www.gerson.com:80/clinb101.html 207.158.200.123 19970222123425 text/html 8979HTTP/1.1 200 OKDate: Sat, 22 Feb 1997 12:34:47 GMTServer: Apache/1.2b4Connection: closeContent-Type: text/htmlLast-Modified: Mon, 09 Dec 1996 22:49:18 GMTETag: "83e3e4-2221-32ac976e"Content-Length: 8737Accept-Ranges: bytes From Charlotte Gerson's Clinical Notebook From Charlotte Gerson's Clinical Notebook M.D.s Use Gerson Therapy To Cure Themselves: Colon Cancer, Breast Cancer Colon Cancer with Liver Metastases On Sep. 8, 1994, Yoshihiko Hochino, Professor of Medicine at Japan's Fukushima University Medical School published an article in a Japanese health journal. About four years ago, he found that he had colon cancer, spreading (metastases) to the liver. Since he is a professor of medicine, he was very much aware of the fact that orthodox medicine (surgery or chemotherapy) has nothing to offer patients with this problem. He found Dr. Max Gerson's book, A Cancer Therapy, which was translated into Japanese some 5 years ago. Using this book, he treated and cured himself completely. It is now some four years later, and he remains in good health, 'cured' (by his own claim in the article). Australian Nelly Goldfeld had essentially the same problem. It began with colon cancer four years ago, and was treated with surgery for the removal of the tumor. But, since the tumor is just 'the tip of the iceberg', and removing it doesn't clear the underlying problem, the cancer almost always recurs. It recurred in Nelly's case, in her liver. Like Professor Hochino, she vowed to beat this cancer, even though her doctors gave her little hope of survival. They told Nelly that they could try 'experimental' laser treatment, with little chance of effectiveness. Nelly then learned about the Gerson Therapy. A newspaper report in Doncaster and Templestowe News, an Australian newspaper, on October 5, 1994 tells Nelly's story. She started the Gerson Therapy on Feb. 14th, 'stocking her house full of fresh fruit and vegetables, vitamin supplements, a juicer and water purifier.' We quote from the above newspaper story: "Nelly still remembers the bewildered look on her doctor's face when she went to have an ultrasound just ten days after taking up the diet. They were astounded. The doctor said to me: 'Well it seems you've scared them off, Mrs. Goldfeld.' Three of the cancerous lesions had completely disappeared, and the fourth had substantially decreased in size." "Seven months later, Nelly has returned to being the rosy-cheeked grandmother she once was. She believes she has fulfilled her vow to rid her body of cancer. "It's not easy, but I have my life. For the first two months, I was too weak to do all he work myself, so we got someone in to help us. But after that, I got so much energy and was able to do everything myself. "Nelly's claims are backed up by her medical reports, which show a rapid improvement in her health from the time of her ultrasound. 'My case is not exceptional. There are hundreds like me. I just hope people read about this (Gerson) Therapy before they go and have chemical or radiation treatment.' " Dr. Lorraine Day We had the great pleasure of meeting Dr. Lorraine Day at the annual convention of the Cancer Control Society in September of 1994. At that time, Dr. Day told her story. She had developed breast cancer, but recovered after refusing mutilating surgery, radiation and chemotherapy. Most impressive was her statement that she rejected "traditional" therapies because she studied the medical literature - which proved to her that these treatments are ineffective! Why are patients not given this information, available to professionals? Dr. Day says she came to the common sense conclusion that "you cannot destroy the immune system and get well at the same time." She discovered nutritional healing, the Gerson Therapy, and says: "CANCER DOESN'T SCARE ME ANYMORE!" Dr. Lorraine Day has the courage to defy orthodox medicine by getting up before the entire audience of the Cancer Control Society and testifying, as follows: "I am Dr. Lorraine Day. Some of you know me from the book I wrote: AIDS What the Government Isn't Telling You. Several years ago, I actually spoke here about AIDS. I have been coming to the Cancer Control Society meetings regularly for three years and I have learned more about medicine and how to take care of yourself than I learned in 20 years as an orthodox trauma surgeon. I knew nothing about nutrition as a medical doctor. In the four years of medical school, you don't have one single hour of information on nutrition. I have talked about that and admitted that I, in the past, have told patients that their nutrition has really nothing to do with their health. I was ignorant, I was stupid as many orthodox medical doctors are. Fortunately, I found out what was really going on in the health field by coming to the Cancer Control Society, and I started speaking out about it, studying it and actually had a radio show called "Truth Serum" where I was interviewing many alternative doctors. In the middle of that, I found out that I had breast cancer. I had infiltrating ductal carcinoma and it was spreading through my breast. I went to my first doctor to have the lump taken out. At that time I did not know it was cancer. He refused to take care of me unless I had pre-operative chemotherapy. Even though I told him that I was a physician, and that I would sign any papers releasing him from any legal liability - but that I didn't want chemotherapy. I just wanted the lump taken out and diagnosed. He said, No. His reputation was at stake. So, I walked out of his office realizing that the law considers it acceptable for a physician to abandon a patient if the patient refuses the doctor's prescription. So I went to a former resident colleague, who is a breast cancer surgeon. He took the lump out but he couldn't get all the cancer. He said, 'You have to have your breast removed.' I refused. Then he said, 'If you don't have your breast removed, you must have radiation therapy.' Once again, I declined. Then he said, 'You must have chemotherapy or some other kind of treatment to destroy these cancer cells.' I told him, 'No. I brought you a whole stack of books, if you really want to learn about cancer. Read these books. I won't have any of the orthodox treatments just take the lump out.' He said that he could not get all the cancer. I said, 'Fine. Everybody gets cancer all the time. My body can take care of that!' I immediately went home and called up Marilyn Barnes, whom you just heard earlier. (Marilyn Barnes had just previously testified to her total recovery, now over 14 years, from stage 4 melanoma as well as carcinoma in situ - cervical cancer on the Gerson Therapy.) [Marilyn] came to my house and set me up. She taught a woman I hired how to do the Gerson Therapy. The Gerson Therapy was going to be the basis of my treatment. I started the juices, the enemas, the whole business. In fact, I looked at cancer as a great adventure. Unfortunately, I didn't have the time to take all the different alternatives, but I tried as many as I could. But the Gerson Diet is the basis of all my treatment. I am fine. I am healthy. I don't have any evidence of cancer. It has only been close to a year, but I have absolute confidence that I'll be well and healthy for many, many years to come." Dr. Lorraine Day has impressive credentials. She is an internationally acclaimed orthopedic trauma surgeon and author. She was for 15 years on the faculty of the University of California, San Francisco, School of Medicine as Associate Professor and Vice Chairman of the Department of Orthopedics. She was also Chief of Orthopedic Surgery at San Francisco General Hospital and is recognized world-wide as an AIDS expert. She has been invited to lecture extensively throughout the U.S. and the world; appeared on numerous radio and television shows, including 60 Minutes, Nightline, CNN Crossfire, Oprah Winfrey, and Larry King Live. NOTE: With both a Japanese and an American Professor of Medicine rejecting orthodox treatments for their cancers and curing themselves using the Gerson Therapy, we now see two examples of highly placed medical professionals who are willing to speak out publicly and report their recoveries on alternative cancer treatments. There have been other doctors who used the Gerson Therapy and cured themselves but who would not allow us to use their names, nor did they permit us to refer Gerson Therapy patients to them.WT02-B03-128IA008-000090-B020-455http://www.gerson.com:80/articles.html 207.158.200.123 19970222123433 text/html 1350HTTP/1.1 200 OKDate: Sat, 22 Feb 1997 12:34:57 GMTServer: Apache/1.2b4Connection: closeContent-Type: text/htmlLast-Modified: Mon, 09 Dec 1996 22:46:41 GMTETag: "83e3cd-455-32ac96d1"Content-Length: 1109Accept-Ranges: bytes Gerson Healing Newsletter Gerson Healing Newsletter We publish selected articles of wide interest from the Gerson HealingNewsletter in this space. We will be updating and adding to thearticles every month or two. The Gerson Healing Newsletter, published bimonthly, is the membershiporgan of the Gerson Institute. You may subscribe by becoming a memberof the Gerson Institute for $25.00 per year in the United States, orUS$30.00 per year for foreign subscriptions. Contributions in excess of the base membership fee will receive boththe Newsletter and a gift selection of books, audio and videotapesfrom the tape and book lists, depending on the size of thecontribution. Gerson Institute Membership form The Gerson Therapy Home Page Copyright 1995, 1996 (c) The Gerson Institute, All rights reserved.WT02-B03-129IA008-000090-B021-16http://www.gerson.com:80/subscrib.html 207.158.200.123 19970222123444 text/html 1235HTTP/1.1 200 OKDate: Sat, 22 Feb 1997 12:35:05 GMTServer: Apache/1.2b4Connection: closeContent-Type: text/htmlLast-Modified: Mon, 09 Dec 1996 22:58:42 GMTETag: "83e3f2-3e3-32ac99a2"Content-Length: 995Accept-Ranges: bytes Subscribing to the Gerson Healing Newsletter Subscribing to the Gerson Healing Newsletter The Gerson Healing Newsletter is published bi-monthly, and can beobtained by joining the Gerson Institute with an annual contributionof $25.00 (US$30.00 for foreign memberships) or more. Members whocontribute more than $25.00 receive their choice of one or more audioand video tapes or publications, depending on the size of theircontribution. Back issues of the Gerson Healing Newsletter are available on anindividual basis, or as a complete package (see order form). For moreinformation on back issues, please contact the Gerson Institute. Gerson Institute/Cancer Curing Society Membership form. The Gerson Therapy Copyright 1994,1995, 1996 (c) The Gerson Institute, All rights reserved. WT02-B03-130IA008-000090-B021-45http://www.gerson.com:80/ref.html 207.158.200.123 19970222123501 text/html 6180HTTP/1.1 200 OKDate: Sat, 22 Feb 1997 12:35:20 GMTServer: Apache/1.2b4Connection: closeContent-Type: text/htmlLast-Modified: Fri, 13 Dec 1996 03:04:20 GMTETag: "84c5e4-1732-32b0c7b4"Content-Length: 5938Accept-Ranges: bytes GersonTherapy - Resources JUICER INFORMATION Dr. Gerson was very specific in his requirementsfor special equipment for the best juice extraction forpatients on the Gerson Therapy. He found, and it was laterconfirmed, that centrifugal juicers are not acceptable. Thereare several possible combinations of juicers that fulfillGerson's equirement of a separate grinder and then a press toaccomplish the best extraction: NORWALK JUICER- automatic with hydraulic press connectedto the motor and effortless to operate. Cost $1995-$2095 (4models - different finishes. New models work on 50/60 cycles.Available at the hospital from the local distributor, orcall: Richard Boger at 1-800-405-8423, or outside USA 619 7558423. K & K GRINDER & PRESS - the grinder is connectedto an electric motor; the press is hand operated with a jackand requires some strength of the arm and shoulder. Availablethrough Al Hasser, 14410 Big Canyon Rd, Middletown, CA 95461Telephone 707-928-5970 (Shredder $600, Press $249 + shipping& handling or $825 + S&H if ordered together) CHAMPION - not used as a juicer but as a grinder only;plus the K & K press (see above). Champion cost is about$240. Available through local health food stores.Occasionally, the Gerson Institute has listings of secondhandNorwalks which you may want to consider. Check with us at(619) 585-7600. SOURCE FOR ORGANIC COFFEE A distributor of certified organic coffee hasmade special arrangements for Gerson patients to be able toobtain organic coffee at $5.25 per pound. The name of thefirm is: Harbor House Coffee Co., P.O. Box 1879, ClearlakeOaks, CA 95423. You can call them at 1-800-541-4699. Whenordering, to obtain the special price, mention that you are aGerson Patient. GERSON THERAPY BREAD Bread is allowed on the Gerson Therapy in smallamounts, not to replace a meal, but to provide a little extraif the patient has consumed the full meal of the necessary,building foods. It is generally best not to try to bake yourown bread because it is very time consuming. Since bread isnot such an important part of the patient's intake, it isbest to buy it ready-made. There is some organic sourdoughall-rye bread available now, without salt, which is ideal forthe Gerson patient. It is made and distributed by: Rudolph'sSpecialty Bakeries, 390 Alliance Avenue, Toronto M6N 2H8,Ontario, Canada, (800) 268 1589, and is available in healthfood stores. Nature's Path Foods (an additional source we'vebeen advised of) carries an organic rye-carrot-raisin breadwithout salt: Jim Robitaille, 916 354 1108. SOURCE FOR FLAX OIL Used as part of the Gerson Therapy. Availablefrom Omega Nutrition, 6505 Aldrich Rd, Bellingham, WA 98226,phone 800-661-3529. You must state you are a Gerson patientto receive discounted price of (US customers) $51.00 case of12-12.75oz bottles ($4.25 each, includes shipping). You mayrequest 2nd day air for additional cost. Never cook, bake orfry it. Will keep unopened in freezer up to 6 months, and inrefrigerator 3 months. After opening, keep in refrigerator nolonger than 3 weeks. Mention you are a Gerson patient. SOURCE FOR WATER DISTILLERS Water Plus carries a complete line of countertop and large capacity distillers. They have the capabilityto custom design purification systems on any type ofapplication. Ships UPS worldwide. Call or write for furtherinformation. Water Plus, P.O. Box 1915, Bonita, Ca 91908,(619) 656-9077; Fax (619) 656 6627; E-mail natural@adnc.com . Discounts for Gerson patients. RAINSHOW'R - CHLORINE SHOWER FILTER Protects your family from the harsh toxiceffects of chlorine in your water. Effectively removes 90% ormore of free chlorine in shower water. Protect theenvironment with water and energy conserving shower heads.Easy to install. Several styles to choose from. New: Gard'nGro, for organic gardening! KDF-55 is certified and listedunder NSF Standard 61 for health effects. Ships UPSworldwide. Call or write for further information: Water Plus,P.O. Box 1915, Bonita, Ca 91908; (619) 656-9077; Fax (619)656 6627; E-mail: natural@adnc.com . Mention you are a Gerson Patient.Request a Natural Needs catalog for other natural andholistic products. (619) 656 9077, or email natural@adnc.com . SOURCE OF OZONE MACHINES Water Plus is an authorized independentdistributor of Alpine Living Air ozone machines and airpurifiers. Alpine manufactures a complete line of ozonemachines in a variety of styles, colors, and sizes. Theseunits purify the air, give off ozone and negative ions, whichpromote a healthful environment. For more information:WaterPlus, Intl., P.O. Box 1915, Bonita, Ca 91908; (619) 656-9077;Fax (619) 656 6627; E-mail: natural@adnc.com . Mention you are a GersonPatient. Back to the Gerson Institute Home Page. Copyright 1995, 1996 (c) The Gerson Institute, All rightsreserved. WT02-B03-131IA008-000090-B021-68http://www.gerson.com:80/ward.html 207.158.200.123 19970222123515 text/html 1425HTTP/1.1 200 OKDate: Sat, 22 Feb 1997 12:35:33 GMTServer: Apache/1.2b4Connection: closeContent-Type: text/htmlLast-Modified: Mon, 09 Dec 1996 23:00:41 GMTETag: "83e46b-4a0-32ac9a19"Content-Length: 1184Accept-Ranges: bytes Patricia Spain Ward      Patricia Spain Ward Patricia Spain Ward, author of "History of the Gerson Therapy", is one of abaker's dozen best medical historians in the United States. This paper wasoriginally written by Dr. Ward under a contract to the U.S. CongressionalOffice of Technology Assessment (OTA) during its evaluation of alternativemethods of cancer management. This article, along with two others by Dr.Ward, were suppressed by OTA staff until their release under pressure fromU.S. Senator Charles Grassley of the Technology Assessment Board ofCongress. Her experience with OTA, the process which led to drastic changesin the "Unconventional Cancer Treatments" document, and her impressions ofimportant participants in that process, have had a significant impact onher and on U.S. cancer medicine. Back to History of the Gerson Therapy The Gerson Therapy Copyright 1995, 1996 (c) The Gerson Institute, All rights reserved.WT02-B03-132IA008-000090-B021-94http://www.gerson.com:80/charges.html 207.158.200.123 19970222123524 text/html 2458HTTP/1.1 200 OKDate: Sat, 22 Feb 1997 12:35:48 GMTServer: Apache/1.2b4Connection: closeContent-Type: text/htmlLast-Modified: Mon, 09 Dec 1996 22:49:05 GMTETag: "8450e1-8a9-32ac9761"Content-Length: 2217Accept-Ranges: bytes Programs and Financial Arrangements Programs Available and FinancialArrangements Hospital Meridian provides a variety ofprograms to accommodate individual needs. These include 3-5 dayvisits for rejuvenation or follow-up maintenance, as well as 3-6 weekprograms of intensive therapy for more serious conditions. Allhospital charges listed below are considered to be deposits againstreimbursement by useful private health insurance programs. Hospital Meridian charges include all standard therapies, normal labwork, and most adjunctive therapies. Some other hospitals may chargea lower daily rate, but your billing for additional tests, adjunctivetherapies, and other services can often reach $1,000 per week. AtHospital Meridian, any extra charges are for extraordinary, high-costservices such as Ultraviolet Blood Irradiation, Live Cell Therapy,Surgical Procedures, or similar non-standard services. Our charges are $4,500 per week, or $700 per day for stays of lessthan one week. We strongly encourage patients to bring a companion,as it is very important to have a friend or family member learnthe therapy so that it may be continued at home. Patients who arevery ill or non-ambulatory may require an additional assistant, asprivate nursing care is not provided. The charge for a companion is$44.00 per day, which includes a bed in the patient's room, 3 mealsand 3 juices. Payment may be made by cash, cashiers check, traveler's check,American Express, Visa or MasterCard. A cash deposit of the firstweek's charges will be required upon admission to the hospital.Additional charges (if any) will be collected weekly in advance. Insurance Reimbursement: Although Hospital Meridian does not accept insurance assignment,Meridian Health Systems can process your health insurance claim toassist you in receiving the maximum benefits allowable. For details,contact the hospital administrator. Hospital Meridian is locatedjust 30 minutes from downtown San Diego, California. Copyright 1995, 1996 (c) The Gerson Institute, All rights reserved. Return to the Gerson Therapy homepageWT02-B03-133IA008-000090-B021-122http://www.gerson.com:80/gerson.html 207.158.200.123 19970222123536 text/html 1855HTTP/1.1 200 OKDate: Sat, 22 Feb 1997 12:35:56 GMTServer: Apache/1.2b4Connection: closeContent-Type: text/htmlLast-Modified: Mon, 09 Dec 1996 22:51:02 GMTETag: "8e94cf-64e-32ac97d6"Content-Length: 1614Accept-Ranges: bytes  Gerson Therapy Home Page Pointer gerson gerson gerson gerson gerson gerson gerson gerson gerson gerson gersongerson gerson gerson gerson gerson gerson gerson gerson gerson gerson gersongerson gerson gerson gerson gerson gerson gerson gerson gerson gerson gersongerson gerson gerson gerson gerson gerson gerson gerson gerson gerson gersongerson gerson gerson gerson gerson gerson gerson gerson gerson gerson gersongerson gerson gerson gerson gerson gerson gerson gerson gerson gerson gersongerson gerson gerson gerson gerson gerson gerson gerson gerson gerson gersongerson gerson gerson gerson gerson gerson gerson gerson gerson gerson gersongerson therapy gerson therapy gerson therapy gerson therapygerson therapy gerson therapy gerson therapy gerson therapygerson therapy gerson therapy gerson therapy gerson therapy gerson therapygerson therapy gerson therapy gerson therapy gerson therapy gerson therapygerson therapy gerson therapy gerson therapy gerson therapy gerson therapygerson therapy gerson therapy gerson therapy gerson therapy gerson therapycancer cancer cancer cancer cancer cancer cancer cancer cancer cancercancer cancer cancer cancer cancer cancer cancer cancer cancer cancercancer cancer cancer cancer cancer cancer cancer cancer cancer cancercancer cancer cancer cancer cancer cancer cancer cancer cancer cancercancer cancer cancer cancer cancer cancer cancer cancer cancer cancercancer cancer cancer cancer cancer cancer cancer cancer cancer cancerThis Way to the Gerson Institute informational Home Page.WT02-B03-134IA008-000090-B021-151http://www.gerson.com:80/orderfrm.html 207.158.200.123 19970222123550 text/html 4266HTTP/1.1 200 OKDate: Sat, 22 Feb 1997 12:36:11 GMTServer: Apache/1.2b4Connection: closeContent-Type: text/htmlLast-Modified: Mon, 09 Dec 1996 22:57:07 GMTETag: "80a200-fb9-32ac9943"Content-Length: 4025Accept-Ranges: bytes GersonInstitute Book, Tape and Membership OrderForm Gerson Institute Book, Tape and Membership OrderForm Print this form out, then either fax (619-585-7610) ormail it to The Gerson Institute, Box 430, Bonita, CA 91908,or use it to telephone your order into either our automatedorder line at 888-4-GERSON or our order department at 619-5857600. Name ___________________________ Ship To:_______________________________ Billing Address____________________ ShipAddr.______________________________ City, St, ZIP______________________ City, State, ZIP__________________________ Country__________________________ Country_______________________________ Phone: Day: (___) _________________ Evening:(___)___________________________ Payment: (circle) Check enclosed Visa MasterCard Card#_____________________ Exp. date ____/____ Ship via: (circle) UPS ground (5-7 days) 2 day air Nextday air Qty Item Unit Total ______ __________________________________________________ ____________ ______ __________________________________________________ ____________ ______ __________________________________________________ ____________ ______ __________________________________________________ ____________ ______ __________________________________________________ ____________ ______ __________________________________________________ ____________ ______ __________________________________________________ ____________ Membership Fee $25 per year $______________ Additional Charitable Donation $______________ Subtotal _______________ CA residents add 7.75% Sales Tax _______________ Shipping _______________ TOTAL DUE $______________ Shipping and Handling charges: Domestic: actual shipping charge plus $3 per order(U.S./Canada) Overseas: actual shipping charge plus $5 per order forpackaging and handling. If you are paying by credit card, we willcalculate shipping charges and charge the total amount toyour card. If you are paying by check, please include a checkfor the estimated amount, as follows: Estimated Shipping Charges: UPS ground: 15% of total order amount + $3 per order Second day air: 25% of total order amount + $3 per order. Next day air: Typically $15-35. Please call. International: Please send $25 for shipping. Wewill bill you for any additional postage due, or refund any overpayment. Please review your order carefully. All sales are final.Returns require prior approval. A store credit will be issued, less a25% restocking fee. Please mail your order to The Gerson Institute, P. O. Box430, Bonita, CA 91908-0430, or fax your order to619-585-7610, or call our toll-free automated orderline (24 hours 1-888-4-GERSON), or speak to our orderdepartment from 9am to 5pm, Pacific time, Monday through Friday at619-585-7600. WT02-B03-135IA008-000090-B021-207http://www.gerson.com:80/member.html 207.158.200.123 19970222123617 text/html 2556HTTP/1.1 200 OKDate: Sat, 22 Feb 1997 12:36:41 GMTServer: Apache/1.2b4Connection: closeContent-Type: text/htmlLast-Modified: Mon, 09 Dec 1996 22:55:09 GMTETag: "83e459-90b-32ac98cd"Content-Length: 2315Accept-Ranges: bytes The Gerson Institute - Membership Form The Gerson Institute - Membership Form Click Here for the text version of the Membership form. THE GERSON INSTITUTE/CANCER CURING SOCIETY MEMBERSHIP REGISTRATION ALL MEMBERSHIPS & CONTRIBUTIONS ARE TAX DEDUCTIBLE Please register me (us) as Gerson Institute member(s) for one year.Enclosed is my/our membership contribution. I/we wish to be a:[ ] $1,000.00 -	Institute Sponsor, and receive the "Gerson Healing Newsletter"	PLUS 3 videotapes PLUS The Gerson Therapy Primer            	[ ] $500.00	- Action member, and receive the "Gerson Healing Newsletter"	PLUS Food Preparation videotape PLUS The Gerson Therapy Primer            	[ ] $250.00 - Associate member, and receive the "Gerson Healing Newsletter"	PLUS 1 videotape PLUS The Gerson Therapy Recipe Book[ ] $100.00 - Sustaining member, and receive the "Gerson Healing Newsletter"	PLUS The Gerson Therapy Primer 				[ ] $50.00 - Contributing member, and receive the "Gerson Healing Newsletter"	PLUS 1 audio tape          																		                      [ ] $25.00 - Subscription member, and receive the "Gerson Healing Newsletter" 	[ ] Foreign Memberships: US$30.00							  																								  Name_______________________________________________________________________Address:_______________________________________________Tel:(___)___________City:________________________ State:_____  Zip: _____________ (ZIP + 4, please)                       Manner of payment:     	     Check         MasterCard        VISACredit Card No: ________________________________Card Expiration date ________/________Card Holder's Signature __________________________________________Due to extremely high bank charges for foreign currencies, we canonly accept checks or drafts for US Dollars for memberships, books,video and audiotapes.Please mail or Fax this form to The Gerson Institute, Box 430,Bonita, CA 91908-0430 Tel: (619) 585 7600    Fax: (619) 585 7610 Copyright 1995, 1996 (c) The Gerson Institute, All rights reserved. WT02-B03-136IA008-000090-B018-299http://www.gerson.com:80/ 207.158.200.123 19970222122723 text/html 3272HTTP/1.1 200 OKDate: Sat, 22 Feb 1997 12:27:45 GMTServer: Apache/1.2b4Connection: closeContent-Type: text/htmlLast-Modified: Mon, 09 Dec 1996 22:51:35 GMTETag: "83e3d1-bd7-32ac97f7"Content-Length: 3031Accept-Ranges: bytes  The Gerson Institute The Gerson Therapy The Gerson Therapy is an intensive, nutrition-based and detoxifying medicaltreatment for cancer, heart disease, diabetes and other chronic, degenerative diseases. It worksclosely with nature to help the sick body to rid itself of disease through the supportive effects ofsimple foods, juices, and non-toxic medication. Its successes in curing the dread diseases of ourtimes for the past 75 years have no parallel in the conventional medical context. The Gerson Institute is a non-profit organization dedicated to the holistic treatment of degenerative diseases. We strive to educate the public on the benefits of holistic healing through worldwide lectures and seminars, publication and distribution of literature on the Gerson Therapy, Training programs for Physicians, Healthcare practitioners, and home care assistants, and through establishing ties to approved clinics and treatment centers. This site is our mirror site, containing the exact information as our primary site, www.gerson.org, but with a little less formatting. The Therapy Information on the Therapy Events Upcoming Gerson Therapy Conventions and Lectures Care Centers About the Therapy Centers Histories Case Histories and Survival Rates Training Gerson Practitioner Training programs News Gerson News and Announcements Information Gerson Books, Audio Tapes and Video Tapes Newsletters Selections from the Gerson Healing Newsletter Resources Suggested Resources from the Gerson Institute Links Related Internet Resources and Organizations We welcome all comments. Please contact us at: The Gerson Institute and Cancer Curing Society Box 430 Bonita, CA 91908 Please direct email to: info@gerson.org tel: (619) 585 7600 Toll Free: (888) 4-GERSON fax: (619) 585 7610 Copyright 1994,1995,1996 (c) The Gerson Institute. All rights reserved. This page v3.6, last updated 12/6/96. Questions, comments or problems with this page? Please send to email to webmaster@gerson.org WT02-B03-137IA095-001024-B009-155http://www.cdt.org:80/ 205.177.10.31 19970214234322 text/html 6875HTTP/1.0 200 OKDate: Fri, 14 Feb 1997 23:42:01 GMTServer: Apache/1.1.1Content-type: text/html The Center for Democracy and Technology This site looks best when viewed by Netscape Navigator 2.0 or Internet Explorer 3.0 Friday February 14, 1997 18:42:02 EST Welcome to the Center for Democracy and Technology home page! The Center For Democracy and Technology is a non-profit public interest organization based in Washington, DC. CDT's mission is to develop and advocate public policies that advance constitutional civil liberties and democratic values in new computer and communications technologies. | Issues | | Publications | | About CDT | | Stay Informed | HEADLINES Rep. Goodlatte Reintroduces SAFE Crypto Bill [February 13, 1997] House Telecommunications Subcommittee Holds Hearing on Wireless Privacy Issues [February 6, 1997] FBI Issues Surveillance Capacity Notice [Updated February 14, 1997] FBI Surveillance Activity Data Now Available! FCC Considers Digital Access Issues: Bandwidth, Access Charges [Updated February 10, 1997] Upcoming Hearings Explore Health Information Privacy Options [February 2, 1997] Government, Pro-CDA Forces File Briefs with Supreme Court [January 28, 1997] Issues Net-Censorship Issues Includes Text Of Current Proposals, CDT Analysis, Information about user empowerment technologies, including PICS, What You Can Do, and More... CIEC: Citizens Internet Empowerment Coalition Information about the CIEC and the Communications Decency Act lawsuit. Includes transcripts and bulletins from the trial in Philadelphia, text of the Federal Court decision, and more. Cryptography Policy Issues Includes "Why Should I Care About the Cryptography Debate?", Cryptography headlines, CDT position papers, and other relevant material. Privacy Issues Includes information about CDT's Privacy Demonstration and Clearinghouse, Health Information Privacy, Children's Privacy Issues and more. Congress and The Net Information about the Congressional Internet Caucus, online chats with members of Congress, and more. Digital Telephony Issues Includes the recent news, background materials, the text of the Digital Telephony Statute, and more. Counter Terrorism Issues Includes Administration and Congressional Documents, Legislation, Analyses, and Testimony. International Issues Includes information about the Internet Freedom Network. Digital Infrastructure Issues Includes recent information about Digital Access issues, such as access charges, affordable bandwidth, and more. Publications Back Issues of CDT Policy Posts & Position Papers About CDT Join the CDT Policy Posts distribution list 1996-97 Prospectus -- Who is CDT? Staff and Board Information CDT Links to Other Useful Internet Resources The Center For Democracy And Technology 1634 Eye Street NW, Suite 1100 Washington, DC 20006 (v) +1.202.637.9800 (f) +1.202.637.0968 info@cdt.org This Page Last Updated 02/14/97 || For more information, write webmaster@cdt.org CDT's site was chosen as a February 1996 winner of the "Top 100 On the Planet" by the reviewers of 2ask. WT02-B03-138IA095-001024-B009-176http://www.cdt.org:80/ciec/ 205.177.10.31 19970214234333 text/html 20069HTTP/1.0 200 OKDate: Fri, 14 Feb 1997 23:42:14 GMTServer: Apache/1.1.1Content-type: text/html Citizens Internet Empowerment Coalition Court Challenge to the CDA Citizens Internet Empowerment Coalition The Fight for Free Speech Online at the Supreme Court! || Supreme Court News || The Philadelphia Trial || Background on the Lawsuit || Court Documents || Supreme Court Appeal News Government, Pro-CDA Groups File Briefs With Supreme Court; Court Sets Hearing Date for March 19, 1997 [Posted on January 21, 1997 | Updated on January 28, 1997] On Tuesday January 21, the Justice Department and a coalition of "pro-family" groups who support the Communications Decency Act filed briefs in support ofthe statute before the Supreme Court. These filings beginthe formal process of Supreme Court review a lower court ruling which heldthe CDA unconstitutional in June of 1996. The Citizens Internet Empowerment Coalition and ACLU plaintiffs will filebriefs on February 20th. Also on Tuesday (1/21), the Supreme Court set the date to hear oral arguments in the CDA case. Arguments are set to be heard on Wednesday March 19 at 10:00 am. Department of Justice brief, filed on Tuesday January 21 Amici Curiae brief from Enough is Enough and Other Pro-CDA Groups Amici Curiae brief from pro-CDA Members of Congress More information will be posted here shortly -- please continue to visit. WHAT YOU CAN DO: It's not to late to join the Citizens Internet Empowerment Coalition. Over 55,000 Netizens have already joined the fight to preserve free speech online, HAVE YOU? Supreme Court Agrees to Hear CDA Appeal [December 6, 1996] The United States Supreme Court today agreed to hear the government'sappeal of a landmark legal challenge to the Communications Decency Act.The case, which will determine the future of freedom of speech incyberspace, is expected to be heard in March or April. A special panel offederal judges in Philadelphia ruled the CDA unconstitutional in June. CIEC Bulletin No. 16 - Supreme Court Agrees to Hear CDA Appeal CIEC Files Document in CDA Appeal [October 31, 1996] On October 31, the Citizens Internet Empowerment Coalition (CIEC) filed papers withthe Supreme Court in the landmark legal challenge to the CommunicationsDecency Act, formally beginning the next phase in the battle over thefuture of the First Amendment in Cyberspace. The documents were filedresponse to the government's jurisdictional statement submitted in lateSeptember, and represents the first indication of the substantive argumentsin the appeal stage of the case. Text of CIEC Response to the Department of Justice's Jurisdicitional Statement CIEC Update No. 15 Department of Justice Files Appeal of CDA decision On July 1, the Department of Justice officially filed an appeal of the recent Philadelphia Federal Court ruling that struck down the Communications Decency Act (CDA). The Justice Department had announced its plans in a letter to Senator Exon on June 26. CIEC welcomes the government's decision to appeal the case and we are confident of victory in the Supreme Court. The Supreme Court arguments are expected to occur sometime in the late Fall or ealy Winter, with a decision coming in the spring of 1997. Text of DoJ Notice of Appeal Text of the DoJ letter to Sen. Exon Help protect free speech online -- Join the CIEC! Second Federal Court Blocks CDA July 30, 1996 On Monday July 29, a panel of three federal judges in New York issued a ruling findingthe CDA unconstitutional. In Shea v. Reno, the Manhattan court ruled unanimously that the CDA bans constitutionally protected speech. New York Times CyberTimes article about the court decision (must be registered with New York Times web site to read article) CNN Interactive article about decision Victory in CDA Case! On Wednesday June 12 at 9:00 am, a panel of three federal judgesin Philadelphia, PA granted the Citizens Internet Empowerment Coalition's (CIEC) request for a preliminary injunctionagainst the Communications Decency Act (CDA). In a unanimous decision,the judges ruled that the CDA would unconstitutionally restrict speech onthe Internet. This is a major victory for Netizens! The ruling soundly rejectsCongressional attempts to censor the Internet. However, the governmentwill most certainly appeal this case to the Supreme Court, so the battleagainst the CDA is not yet over. All Internet users are encouraged tojoin the fight against the CDA as the case moves to the Supreme Court. Full text of the decision (VERY LARGE file) Compressed file of decision text - .zip (PC) format Biography of CIEC Lead Counsel Bruce Ennis CIEC Press Release regarding Court Decision CIEC Update - Court Halts CDA! Join Online Chat Tomorrow (6/13)! Statement by President Clinton in reaction to Court Decision Press Releases regarding Court Decision: Senator Patrick Leahy Senator Russ Feingold Representative Christopher Cox Representative Rick White Senator Jim Exon - chief architect and proponent of the CDA Family Research Council Selected Press Clips HotWired's Netizen Special Report San Jose Mercury News CDA Report Audio transcript of Virtual Victory Party, a post-decision online chat featuring CIEC lead counsel Bruce Ennis; Jerry Berman, CDT Executive Director; Bill Burrington, assistant general counsel, America Online; and Judith Krug, director of the Office For Intellectual Freedom, American Library Association Information on how you can join the CIEC Court Challenge As of October 31, nearly 55,000 Internet users have joined the CIEC. Post-Trial Developments Court Orders Feds To Cease "Reviewing" Internet Complaints PendingDecision in CDA Case (May 16, 1996) In response to a complaint filed last week by the CIEC, a Federal Judge inPhiladelphia Wednesday ordered the Justice Department to stop all "reviews"of complaints under the Communications Decency Act until the three-judgepanel rules on the constitutionality of the law. The order was issued byJudge Stewart Dalzell, one of the three judges presiding over the case. Text of the May 15th court order CIEC Bulletin No. 12 - Court Orders DOJ to Halt "Reviews" Under the CDA CIEC Press Release regarding court order Text of Department of Justice letter responding to the American Family Association request for an investigation of CompuServe --- the catalyst for the court order New York Times CyberTimes article about the court order (must be registered with New York Times web site to read article) TRIAL BULLETINS Read CDT eyewitness summaries of the Philadelphia court proceedings, as well as updates on the progress of the court case COURT TRANSCRIPTS Transcripts from all Federal Court proceedings are available. Background on the CDA Case Internet Users, Publishers, Online Service Providers, Non-Profit Groups, and Civil Liberties Advocates Fight The CDA in Court CDA is unconstitutional, Fails to Recognize Unique Nature of the Internet A coalition representing a broad spectrum of Internet users, Libraries publishers, content providers and access providers filed a lawsuit on Monday February 26, 1996 in a Federal Court in Philadelphia, PA seeking to overturn the Communications Decency Act. The challenge argued that the Internet is a unique communications technology which deserves First Amendment protections at least as broad as those enjoyed as by the print medium. The group, known as the Citizens Internet Empowerment Coalition (CIEC -pronounced "seek") is coordinated by the Center for Democracy andTechnology, America Online, and the American Library Association, andothers, including People for the American Way. Its 35 members include libraries, book publishers, newspaper publishers, editors, advertisers, commercial online service providers, ISP's, non-profit groups, and civil liberties advocates. Join the Fight To Protect Free Speech and the Future of the Internet! CIEC is inviting individual Internet Users to join this landmark case to help protect freedom of speech and the future of the Internet as a viable means of free expression, education, and commerce. If you post messages to a public listserv, Usenet newsgroup, participatein an IRC or chat session, or maintain your own World Wide Web page, ftp orgopher archive, you could potentially face $250,000 fines or 2 years in jail if someone, somewhere considers the material you post to be "indecent" or "patently offensive" Nearly 55,000 Internet Users have already joined! (Last Update 10/31) It's not too late to join! Information on how you can join the CIEC Court Challenge The Complaint On Monday, February 26, the Citizens Internet Empowerment Coalition, the American Library Association, America Online, Compuserve, Prodigy, Microsoft, NETCOM, The Commercial Internet eXchange, The Newspaper Association of America, Wired Magazine, Hotwired, Families Against Internet Censorhip, and several other plaintiffs filed suit in a Federal Court in Philadelphia, PA seeking to overturn the Communications Decency Act on the grounds that it is a violation of the First Amendment rights of all Internet users. In a 73-page complaint that details the history of the Internet andoutlines how the network operates, the CIEC intended to educate the courton how the Internet functions and why the broad content regulations imposedby the CDA threaten the very existence of the Internet as a viable mediumfor free expression, education, and commerce. Among other things, the CIEC challenge argued that: The Internet is a unique communications medium which deserves First Amendment protections at least as broad as those afforded to print media. Individual users and Parents, not the Federal Government, should determine for themselves and their children what material comes into their homes based on their own tastes and values. The CDA will be ineffective at protecting children from "indecent" or "patently" offensive material online. The CIEC challenge is separate from the case brought by the ACLU, EFF,EPIC, Planned Parenthood, and several other plaintiffs in the samePhiladelphia court on February 8, 1996. The CIEC casewill reinforce the ACLU's efforts while focusing on the unique nature ofthe Internet and alternatives to government content regulations. On February 27, the ACLU and CIEC cases were officially consolidated. Both the ACLU and CIEC attorneys are closely coordinating their efforts. In order to demonstrate the nature of the Internet and the effectiveness of user empowerment technologies, CIEC arranged to wire the court room directly to the Internet. The Center for Democracy and Technology, with the help of Bell Atlantic and Philadelphia law firm Schnader, Harrison, Segal & Lewis (an amicus counsel in the case), has installed a T-1 circuit and a small local area network in the Ceremonial Room of the Philadelphia court. To the best of our knowledge, this was the first time in history that a Federal Courtroom has been wired to the Net for the purposes of a Trial. The outcome of the legal challenges to the CDA will likely determine thelegal status of speech on the Internet and the future of the FirstAmendment in the Information Age. CIEC Court Documents An HTML Index of the complaint filed on February 26, 1996 Text of memo supporting the motion for preliminary injunction on CDA filed on March 1, 1996 (Large file - 160k) An HTML Index of hearing transcripts Post-hearing brief (Large file - 110k) Brief filed by the National Law Center for Children and Families (NLC), Family Research Council, et.al., in support of the CDA CIEC response to the NLC brief Other Relevant Information and Related Court Challenges CDT Policy Post 2.10 - DEADLINE EXTENDED to join CDA legal challenge CDT Policy Post 2.8 - CIEC Files Motion to Overturn CDA CDT Policy Post 2.7 - Coalition Challenges CDA, Net Users Join Fight CDT's Communications Decency Act Issues Page Information about the ACLU, EFF, EPIC, Planned Parenthood, and Other Plaintiffs' Challenge The Department of Justice's Response to the ACLU's Request for a Temporary Restraining Order Text of Judge Ronald Buckwalter's decision to partially grant the ACLU's request for a Temporary Restraining Order Text of Janet Reno's statement about the Department of Justice's policy regarding the abortion-related speech prohibitions contained withinthe Telecommunications Reform Bill Press clips about the challenge HOTWIRED's special report on the court challenge Lew Koch column in Upside Magazine Hotwired's Netizen interview with Daniel Weitzner, CDT Deputy Director (Must have RealAudio software to hear interview) Citizens Internet Empowerment Coalition Members and Plaintiffs The Citizens Internet Empowerment Coalition is a large and diverse group of Internet users, businesses, non-profit groups, and civil liberties advocates, who share the common goal of protecting the First Amendment and the viability of the Internet as a means of free expression, education, and commerce. CIEC members believe that parents, not the United States Government, are the best and most appropriate judges of what material is appropriate for themselves and their children. Named Plaintiffs in the CIEC Challenge to the Communications Decency Act American Library Association America Online, Inc. American Booksellers Association American Booksellers Foundation for Free Expression American Society of Newspaper Editors Apple Computer, Inc. Association of American Publishers Association of Publishers, Editors and Writers Citizens Internet Empowerment Coalition Commercial Internet eXchange Compuserve, Inc. Families Against Internet Censorship Freedom to Read Foundation HotWired Ventures Ltd. Interactive Digital Software Association Interactive Services Association Magazine Publishers of America, Inc. Microsoft Corporation Microsoft Network NETCOM On-Line Communications Services, Inc. Newspaper Association of America OpNet Prodigy, Inc. Society of Professional Journalists Wired Ventures Ltd. Members of the Citizens Internet Empowerment Coalition Association of American University Presses, Inc. Association of National Advertisers Association of Research Libraries Center for Democracy and Technology Coalition for Networked Information Media Access Project Media Institute Microsystems Software, Inc. National Association of State Universities & Land Grant Colleges National Newspaper Association People for the American Way Recording Industry Association of America Software Publishers Association Special Libraries Association Surfwatch Software, Inc. University of California Santa Barbara Library And You! Last Update January 28, 1997 || For more information, write ciec@cdt.org Return to the CDT Home Page Return to CDT's Net-Censorship Issues PageWT02-B03-139IA095-001024-B009-222http://www.cdt.org:80/crypto/legis_105/SAFE/ 205.177.10.31 19970214234350 text/html 2559HTTP/1.0 200 OKDate: Fri, 14 Feb 1997 23:42:34 GMTServer: Apache/1.1.1Content-type: text/html CDT | Cryptography Issues - 105th Congress: H.R. 695 (SAFE) 105TH CONGRESS H.R. 695 - The "SAFE" Bill First Posted on February 13, 1997 | Latest News | | Background | LATEST NEWS Rep. Goodlatte Reintroduces "SAFE" Crypto Bill [February 13, 1997] On Wednesday February 12, Congressman Bob Goodlatte (R-VA) reintroduced a bill to ease encryption export controls. The bill (H.R. 695) is identical to H.R. 3011, the Security and Freedom Through Encryption (SAFE) Act, which Goodlatte championed in the last Congress. H.R. 3011 enjoyed broad bi-partisan support, and was the subject of a September hearingbefore the House Judiciary Committee. The current Goodlatte bill, with 55 original co-sponsors, enjoys similar broad bi-partisan support. More information will be posted on as soon as it becomes available. Text of H.R. 695 List of H.R. 695 Co-Sponsors Bill Summary, from Rep. Goodlatte's office Background on SAFE More information about H.R. 3011, the previous SAFE bill (104th Congress), including information about the House Judiciary hearing held to consider it. Back to the CDT Cryptography Page Back to the CDT Home Page This Page Last Updated 02/13/97 || For more information, write webmaster@cdt.orgWT02-B03-140IA095-001024-B009-240http://www.cdt.org:80/digi_tele/ 205.177.10.31 19970214234358 text/html 6575HTTP/1.0 200 OKDate: Fri, 14 Feb 1997 23:42:41 GMTServer: Apache/1.1.1Content-type: text/html CDT | Digital Telephony CDT's Digital Telephony Page | Latest News | | Background | | News Archives | FBI Surveillance Activity Data Now Available! Latest News House Telecommunications Subcommittee Holds Hearing on Wireless Privacy Issues [Posted on February 6, 1997] On Wednesday, February 5, 1997, the House Telecommunications Subcommittee held ahearing to consider cellular privacy issues. CDT Executive Director JerryBerman, along with FBI Assistant Director James Kallstrom, Deputy AssistantAttorney General Robert Litt, Cellular Telecommunications IndustryAssociation President Thomas Wheeler, and others testified before the panel. Highlights of CDT Executive Director Jerry Berman's testimony: Preliminary findings of a Digital Privacy and Security Working Group (DPSWG) study of communications privacy, focusing on the effectiveness and coverage of ECPA, the implementation of CALEA, the potential of strong encryption technologies to protect privacy and security and prevent crime, and other issues. The study is being conducted at the request of Senators Arlen Specter (R-PA) and Patrick Leahy (D-VT) and will be completed later this year; Issues relating to the implementation of CALEA, including concerns about the FBI's latest capacity notice; and Technical solutions to privacy, including the need for encryption policy reform. Rep. Billy Tauzin (R-LA), the Subcommittee Chairman, spoke strongly about the need for strong privacy protections in wireless data networks, and also announced that the House Telecommunicatinos Subcommittee will hold hearings on the Encryption issue in the comming months. Text of CDT's Testimony House Commerce Committee web page FBI Issues Scaled Back Surveillance Capacity Notice -- Cost and Capability Issues Remain [Posted on January 17, 1997 | Updated on February 14, 1997] On Tuesday January 14, 1997, the FBI issued a revised notice of proposedsurveillance capacity as required by the 1994 Communications Assistance forLaw Enforcement Act (CALEA - a.k.a. Digital Telephony). The notice detailsprojected increases in law enforcement wiretapping and other electronicsurveillance activity in the coming years. While the latest notice appears far less expansive than the FBI's firstcapacity notice issued in October of 1995, and while this notice, byincluding the unprecedented release of baseline surveillance information ona county-by-county basis, goes a long way towards satisfying some of CDT'sobjections to the first notice, many serious issues remain. The new notice is subject to a 30 day comment period, in which telephonecompanies, privacy advocates and members of the public can submit comments.Any person can submit comments, directing them to the TelecommunicationsIndustry Liaison Unit, FBI, P.O. Box 220450, Chantilly, VA 20153-0450. TheBureau has not made arrangements for on-line submissions. Hard-copycomments must be submitted by mail, in triplicate. CDT Policy Post 3.01: FBI Issues Scaled Back Surveillance Capacity Notice FBI Press Release regarding Notice Statement by FBI Assistant Director James Kallstrom FBI Surveillance Activity Data listed by county (for wire line systems), Metropolitan Statistical Areas (MSAs) (for cellular systems), and Metropolitian Trading Areas (MTAs) (for PCS systems). U.S. Map showing historical surveillance activity by county (for wire line systems) [85k file] U.S. Map showing historical surveillance activity by MSAs (for cellular systems) [72k file] Background on Digital Telephony An overview of the public accountability and privacy protection provisions of the Digital Telephony statute. The Text of the Digital Telephony Statute A Detailed description of the transactional information privacy protection provisions of the Digital Telephony statute. News Archive FBI Demands for Broad New Surveillance Power Rejected on Privacy Grounds [Posted on 9/20/96] Clinton Administration, Congress Propose Sweeping Anti-Terrorism Initiatives [Posted on 8/1/96] FBI Announces Initial Surveillance Capacity Request [10/16/95] CDT Home Page Last Update 02/14/97 || For more information write webmaster@cdt.orgWT02-B03-141IA095-001024-B009-260http://www.cdt.org:80/digi_tele/intercept_data/ 205.177.10.31 19970214234406 text/html 6960HTTP/1.0 200 OKDate: Fri, 14 Feb 1997 23:42:49 GMTServer: Apache/1.1.1Content-type: text/html CDT | FBI Surveillance Activity Data - Index FBI Surveillance Activity Data On January 14, 1997, the FBI issued a notice setting forth projectedincreases in law enforcement wiretapping and other electronicsurveillance activity in coming years. Under legislation adoptedin 1994, the federal government can require telephone companiesto install additional equipment ("capacity"), at governmentexpense, to accommodate these projected increases in electronicsurveillance activity. The narrative portion of the notice was printed in the FederalRegister. However, the very detailed appendices, which embodythe government's proposed requirements, were made available onlyin hard copy to reporters in New York and at the FBI "readingroom" in Washington, DC. CDT has obtained the files in electronic form and we have loadedthe entire 81 page appendix for wireline services. The appendixhas three components: A baseline showing the one-day peak in electronic surveillanceactivity for each county in the nation during the period 1/1/93to 3/1/95 -- that is, for each county, the total number of interceptsthat were conducted simultaneously by federal, state and localauthorities on the busiest surveillance day in the study period.On the accompanying charts, this one day peak is the third columnof numbers. A projection, based on past growth, of anticipated one-daypeaks of surveillance activity for each county in 1998. On theaccompanying charts, this is the first column of numbers. A projection, based on past growth, of anticipated one-daypeaks of surveillance activity for each county in the year 2004.On the accompanying charts, this is the middle column of numbers. We have established a separate file for each state. Alabama Alaska Arizona Arkansas California Colorado Connecticut Delaware Florida Georgia Hawaii Idaho Illinois Indiana Iowa Kansas Kentucky Louisiana Maine Maryland Massachusetts Michigan Minnesota Mississippi Missouri Montana Nebraska Nevada New Hampshire New Jersey New Mexico New York North Carolina North Dakota Ohio Oklahoma Oregon Pennsylvania Rhode Island South Carolina South Dakota Tennessee Texas Utah Vermont Virginia Washington West Virginia Wisconsin Wyoming Washington, D.C. U.S. Territories COMING SOON Cellular Data by Metropolitian Statistical Areas (MSAs) PCS Data by Metropolitan Trading Areas (MTAs) and Basic Trading Areas (BTAs). Back to the CDT Digital Telephony Page. CDT Home Page.WT02-B03-142IA095-001024-B009-282http://www.cdt.org:80/digi_infra/ 205.177.10.31 19970214234415 text/html 5156HTTP/1.0 200 OKDate: Fri, 14 Feb 1997 23:42:59 GMTServer: Apache/1.1.1Content-type: text/html CDT's Digital Infrastructure Issues Page CDT's Digital Infrastructure Issues Page LATEST NEWS FCC Considers Digital Access Issues: Bandwidth, Access Charges [Updated February 10, 1997] On January 23, 1997, the Federal Communications Commission (FCC) held an open forum toexplore the issue of congestion on the Internet. That issue is partof a larger debate over whether Internet service providers (ISPs) andcommercial online service providers should be charged access fees for theuse of the local telephone network. CDT along with other public interestreprsentatives, telephone companies, ISPs, and commercial online serviceproviders spoke at the forum: CDT's Presentation to the FCC Bandwidth Forum FCC Bandwidth Forum Web Site "Bell Atlantic Calls on FCC to Consider Internet Impact on Telephone Network" - Bell Atlantic web site Internet Access Coalition, an organization of industry groups opposed to the imposition of access charges for the use of local telephone networks. The FCC bandwidth forum comes amidst an FCC inquiry on the current state ofthe Internet infrastructure. Recently, several regional bell companieshave raised concerns that Internet usage is creating significantcongestion problems on their networks, and have suggested access charges asa solution. Online service providers and ISP's argued that the impositionof access charges would harm the future growth of the Net. CDT believes this issue is critically important to the future of theInternet, and is working to ensure that the future Internet infrastructuredevelops in a way that maximizes the democratic potential of the Net andencourages a decentralized, open architecture. In the coming months we willbe holding public forums and other education events. Please continue tovisit this page for more information. Response to the FCC Notice of Proposed Rulemaking (NPRM) from CDT, Media Access Project, the Benton Foundation, Electronic Frontier Foundation, and Voters Telecommunications Watch. Excerpt from the FCC's NPRM that considers whether to "permit incumbent LECs to assess interstate access charges on information service providers." FCC Notice of Inquiry -- requesting comments on information service providers impact on local telephone systems Full text of the FCC's Notice of Proposed Rulemaking, Third Report and Order, and Notice of Inquiry [Large file - 360k] PREVIOUS HEADLINES CDT Files Comments in Opposition to ACTA FCC Petition[May 10, 1996] In comments submitted on Wednesday (5/8) to the FederalCommunications Commission (FCC), CDT urged the Commission to rejecta request by the America's Carriers Telecommunications Association(ACTA), an association of small long distance companies, to regulateInternet voice telephony products and services. CDT argued thatan FCC ruling in this area would immediately restrict the abilityof Internet users to choose Internet software applications, andwould require the FCC to take "... intrusive and unprecedentedsteps in the regulation of ... the Internet." CDT Policy Post 2.17 regarding the ACTA petition comments Text of CDT's comments on the ACTA petition Text of ACTA's petition FCC Public Notice regarding the ACTA petition CDT Home Page. Last Update February 10, 1997 || For more information,write webmaster@cdt.orgWT02-B03-143IA095-001024-B009-293http://www.cdt.org:80/privacy/health/ 205.177.10.31 19970214234424 text/html 10299HTTP/1.0 200 OKDate: Fri, 14 Feb 1997 23:43:07 GMTServer: Apache/1.1.1Content-type: text/html CDT's Health Information Privacy Issues Page CDT's Health Information Privacy Issues Page HEADLINES Upcoming Hearings Explore Health Information Privacy Options [February 2, 1997] On February 3-4 and February 18-19, the National Committee on Vital and Health Statistics (NCVHS) Subcommittee on Privacy and Confidentiality will hold public hearings to discuss the various options for implementing health information privacy standards. The subcommittee is holding these hearings so it may develop recommendations to give to the Secretary of Health and Human Services (HHS) in preparation for an HHS report to Congress regarding privacy standards of individually identifiable health information. This report is required by the "Administrative Simplification" subtitle of the "Health Insurance Portability and Accountability Act of 1996" (Pub. L. 104-191, Section 264). Issues covered at the hearing will include the full range of fair information practices, patient rights, limitations on use and disclosure of identifiable information, health identification number, preemption of state laws, and privacy-enhancing technology. The hearings will be held on February 3-4 and February 18-19 from 9 a.m.-5 p.m. at the Hubert H. Humphrey Building (200 Independence Avenue, SW), Room 503A, Washington, D.C. The hearings are open to the public, but seating is limited. The public is also invited to send written comments to the subcommittee. All comments to the subcommittee must be received by February 19th. Federal Register Notice About the Meetings Previous Headlines New Electronic Health Information Provisions Pose Privacy Risks [August 16, 1996] While S. 1360 (the Bennett-Leahy bill) remains in limbo,Congress did take some action that impacts medical records privacy before they began the summer recess. The recently-passed Kennedy-Kassebaum Health Insurance Portability andAccountability Act of 1996 (HR 3103) contains a section known as "Administrative Simplification." This section of the Act mandates thedevelopment and adoption of standards for electronic exchanges of health information. It also mandates that Congress or the Secretary of Health andHuman Services develop privacy rules to govern such electronic exchanges; however, these rules may not be in place before the electronic system is implemented. More details about "Administrative Simplification" -- CDT Policy Post 2.30 Washington Post Article about the New Electronic Health Information Provisions Washington Post Editorial CDT Testifies at Congressional Hearing regarding Medical Records Confidentiality [June 14, 1996] CDT was one of four witnesses to testify at the House Government Management, Information and Technology Subcommittee hearing held on medical records confidentiality on June 14, 1996. Two bills are currently being considered in the House: Rep. Gary Condit (D-CA) introduced the Fair Health Information PracticesAct (H.R. 435) in January, 1995, and Rep. Jim McDermott recently introduced the "Medical Privacy in the Age of New Technologies Act." Joining CDT as witnesses at the hearings were the American Health Information Management Association, the American Psychiatirc Association, and the National Association of Chain Drug Stores. Text of CDT's testimony Supreme Court Recognizes Psychotherapy-Patient Privacy Rights [June 14, 1996] On June 13, the U.S. Supreme Court held in a 7-2 decision that notes of conversations takenduring sessions between a patient and a social worker/therapist areprotected from compelled disclosure in court. In Jaffee v. Redmond, theCourt recognized that preserving the privilege of confidentiality in therelationship between a therapists and patients is critical to developingtrust and thus ensuring successful treatment. Given the recent trend toward computerization of medical information, including medical health records, CDT hails the Jaffee decision as a great step in protecting the privacy of those records. Summary of Court Decision Opinion Dissent Mark-up of Medical Privacy Bill Postponed Indefinitely. [May 13, 1996] The mark-up of The Medical Records Confidentiality Act (S.1360), originally scheduled for April 24, has been postponed indefinitely by the Senate Labor and Human Resources Committee. The Committee has delayed action on S.1360 (also known as the Bennett-Leahy bill after its chief sponsors) to give the pharmaceutical industry and health data companies an opportunity to express their concerns about the privacy provisions in the bill. Following recommendations from CDT and other privacy and consumer groups seeking to strengthen the bill, a new version of S.1360 was drafted by Senators Nancy Kassebaum (R-KA) and Edward Kennedy (D-MA). The new version was released April 10. (See CDT Policy Post 2.14 - April 12, 1996.) CDT opposes any weakening of the current version of S.1360. CDT has sent a letter of support for the Bennett-Leahy bill to Senators Kassebaum and Kennedy. The letter was signed by a wide variety of consumer, privacy and patient advocates, as well as health care providers, researchers, employers, and information technology companies. Text of S.1360 via Thomas Large file - 60k Text of CDT's letter of support CDT Policy Post 2.14 - Key Senators Strengthen Medical Privacy Bill: Mark-up Set for April 24. April 12, 1996 CDT Policy Post 2.11 - CDT Proposes Changes to Improve Med-Privacy Bill March 21, 1996 Key Senators Strengthen Medical Privacy Bill: Mark-up Set for April 24. April 12, 1996 On April 24, 1996, the Senate Labor and Human Resources Committee will consider S. 1360, the "Medical Records Confidentiality Act". A recently strengthened S. 1360 would create strong, comprehensive privacy safeguards for the health data of all Americans. CDT supports the Bennett-Leahy bill and believes that its enactment would create strong, enforceable privacy protections where few currently exist. When the bill was first introduced in October 1995, some in the privacy policy community argued that the bill did not go far enough. CDT, along with other public interest advocates and consumer groups, recommended changes to the bill to strengthen the proposal and ensure that individuals are better able to control access to and disclosure of their private health records. The revised bill, rewritten by Senators Nancy Kassebaum (R-KA) and Edward Kennedy (D-MA), incorporates many of the key changes recommended by CDT, the CDT-led coalition, and others in the public interest community, including Public Citizen and EPIC. Landmark Health Privacy Legislation Introduced On Tuesday, October 24, 1995 Senator Robert Bennett (R-UT), along with Majority Leader Bob Dole (R-KS), Labor and Human Resources Committee Chair Nancy Kassebaum (R-KS), Edward Kennedy (D-MA), and Patrick Leahy (D-VT) introduced the "Medical Records Confidentiality Act" (S. 1360). The bill is designed to create strong, comprehensive privacy safeguards for the health data of all Americans. CDT Policy Post No. 27 - Landmark Privacy Legislation Introduced in Senate Link to Text of the Bennett/Leahy Bill (S. 1360) via Thomas CDT's summary of the bill CDT's section-by-section analysis of the bill Senate Labor and Human Resources Committee Holds Hearing on S. 1360 The Senate Labor and Human Resources Committee, chaired by Sen. Nancy Kassebaum (R-KS and co-sponsor of S. 1360) held a hearing on November 14, 1995 to consider the Medical Records Confidentiality Act. CDT Deputy Director Janlori Goldman testified before the panel. CDT Deputy Director Janlori Goldman's Testimony Last Update February 2, 1997 || For More Information, write webmaster@cdt.org Back to the CDT Privacy Issues Page Back to the CDT Home Page WT02-B03-144IA095-001024-B009-315http://www.cdt.org:80/cda.html 205.177.10.31 19970214234535 text/html 11785HTTP/1.0 200 OKDate: Fri, 14 Feb 1997 23:43:51 GMTServer: Apache/1.1.1Content-type: text/html Stop The Communications Decency Act CDT's Communications Decency Act Issues Page Due to the fast moving nature of this issue, updates to this page are made frequently. Please continue to visit. The Latest News Last Update June 18, 1996 Victory in the CDA Case! On Wednesday June 12 at 9:00 am, a panel of three federal judges in Philadelphia, PA granted the Citizens Internet Empowerment Coalition's (CIEC) request for a preliminary injunction against the Communications Decency Act (CDA). In a unanimous decision, the judges ruled that the CDA would unconstitutionally restrict speech on the Internet. The latest information about the Philadelphia court decision and about CIEC: Citizens Internet Empowerment Coalition Congress Passes Online Indecency Bill - Makes Net Most Heavily Regulated Communications Medium in the United States! CDT, others Prepare Court Challenge CDT's Statement on the Vote The Latest Text of the CDA CDT's Preliminary Analysis of the Final CDA approved by Congress Web Goes Dark to Protest Online Indecency Law For 48 hours after President Clinton signed the Telecommunications Refrom bill, CDA and all, into law on Feb. 8, thousands of world wide web pages went black in protest in order to show the far reaching imact of the new law. The 48 hour protest, organized by CDT and VTW, was the single larges demonstration from the Internet community in history. More Information, Including a list of participating sites, can be found on the Protest Page Statements from Members of Congress about the CDA from Debate on the Bill Senator Leahy Condems the CDA, votes NO See VTW's Bill Watch No. 35 for Excerpts from the Debate More than 20,000 net.citizens Protest Internet-Censorship Bills Details on the National Day of Protest What You Can Do to Fight Net-Censorship House Conference Committee Approves Sweeping Online "Indecency" Provision On December 6, 1995, members of the House Telecommunications Reform Conference Committee voted to approve broad anti "indecency" restrictions on the Internet and other Interactive media. In casting this vote, the Committee was choosing between several proposals. The text of these are included below. Final provision that emerged from this vote is detailed above Read CDT's Statement On the Committee's Vote Text of Various Proposals before the Conference Committee Text of Sen. Exon's Proposal Text of Rep. Hyde's Proposal and a letter of support from representatives of the Religious Right, including Ralph Reed and Ed Meese. Text of Sen. Grassley's Proposal Important Background Information Members of Congress Speak out Against the CDA Senator Leahy Speaks Out Against Online Indecency Provisions December 5, 1995 House Speaker Newt Gingrich says CDA is a "clear violation of free speech rights". Statements of Senator Feingold will be posted soon) Industry/Public Interest Coalition, Conservative Libertarian Groups, Support Free Speech Online: CDT-led Coalition November 9 letter to the Conferees A letter from conservative/libertarian organizations (including Progress and Freedom Foundation, CATO Institute, American Enterprise Institute, and others) urging support for the Cox/Wyden Approach. A Detailed analysis of Constitutional issues, the state of current law, and available technological alternatives to government regulations of the Internet, prepared by the CDT-led Interactive Working Group (IWG). The Cox/Wyden/White Internet Freedom and Family Empowerment Bill On June 30, 1995, Representatives Chris Cox (R-CA) and Ron Wyden (D-OR) and Rick White introduced HR 1978, an alternative to the Exon Communications Decency Act. The bill would prohibit the FCC from imposing content regulations on the Internet and remove disincentives to deploying technologies to empower parents to block material which may be inappropriate for their children. CDT's statement on the House Passage of Cox/Wyden Text of the Cox Wyden Bill as Passed Text of new Unconstitutional Indecency Statute Also Passed By The House Examples of Parental Empowerment Technologies Interactive Working Group report PICS, a joint Industry, public interest gorup, and MIT initiative to develop common standards to facilitate user choice and parental control in interactive media. CDT co-chairs the public policy committee. Dole/Grassley Anti-Online Indecency Bill (S. 892) Text of the Dole/Grassley Bill Testimony from the July 24, 1995 Senate Judiciary Committee Hearing on S. 892 The Senate Passed Bill CDT's Analysis of the Senate Passed CDA Text of the Senate Passed Bill Text of 47 USC Sec 223 with the proposed amendment Petition Update The petition in support of Senator Leahy's alternative is now closed. The petition generated over 115,000 signatures in just over 5 months! Thank you to those who signed -- YOU MADE A DIFFERENCE! During the Senate debate on the CDA on June 14 1995, Senator Leahy displayed the over 1500 printed pages to his senate colleagues on the Senate Floor. And the petition was a critical factor in persuading 420 members of the House of Representatives to pass the Cox/Wyden bill. As the House and Senate move toward a conference committee agreement, the net.community must be ready to turn up the pressure. Please continue to visit this page, as well as the petition page The Leahy/Klink Alternative Leahy's Statement on the Introduction of S. 714 Text of Leahy's Proposal (also sponsored in the House by Rep. Ron Klink (D-PA) Earlier Versions of the CDA Exon/Gorton Communications Decency Act Text of the CDA as Introduced in March 1995 May 19, 1995 -- Senator Exon Unveils New Draft CDA HR 1004 -- House Of Representatives Version of the CDA Text of the Bill (identical to the Senate Version) House CDA Sponsor Urges "Go-Slow" approach, calls for hearings CDT Analyses of Earlier CDA CDT's Analysis of the Revised Communications Decency Act CDT's Analysis of the Original Proposal A Constitutional Analysis by CDT and People For The American Way Relevant CDT Policy Posts on The CDA Other Relevant Documents Interactive Working Group Report To Senator Leahy The Interactive Working Group is a coalition of public interest and industry representatives concerned with government content regulations in interactive media. This report was completed at the request of Senator Leahy and describes currently available parental control technologies, the state of current law, and the constitutional issues raised by content regulations in new media House Speaker Newt Gingrich says CDA is a "clear violation of free speech rights". Earlier Statement from Gingrich Opposing Exon bill June 6 1995 Court Decision Further Demonstrates Unconstitutionality of the Exon Bill Department Of Justice 5/3/95 Letter. Says CDA Threatens First Amendment and Privacy Rights. Christian Coalition Pledges to Restrict Availability of Pornography On The Net Other Pro-Family Groups also concerned about CDA. American Family Association Letter to Sen. Exon American Family Association Letter to Sen. Pressler Morality In Media Statement Against the Bill Clinton Administration Comments on the Senate Telecommunications Reform Bill, including a section on the CDA. Press Clips Transcript of June 22, 1995 Debate between CDT Executive Director Jerry Berman and Senator Exon on PBS's MacNeill/Lehrer News Hour June 1 Communications Daily article on the latest Exon draft Return To The CDT Home Page Last Update 06/18/96 | For More Information write webmaster@cdt.org WT02-B03-145IA095-001024-B009-326http://www.cdt.org:80/crypto/ 205.177.10.31 19970214234543 text/html 7640HTTP/1.0 200 OKDate: Fri, 14 Feb 1997 23:44:28 GMTServer: Apache/1.1.1Content-type: text/html CDT | Cryptography Policy Issues Page CDT Cryptography Policy Issues Page Why Should I Care About The Cryptography Policy Debate? Cryptography products are the locks and keys of the Information Age, enabling individuals and businesses to protect sensitive information as it is transmitted over the Internet. The ability to protect and secure information is vital to the growth of electronic commerce and to the growth of the Internet itself. HEADLINES Rep. Goodlatte Reintroduces "SAFE" Crypto Bill [February 13, 1997] Senators Burns, Leahy, Wyden and Others to Re-Introduce Pro-CODE Crypto Bill [February 2, 1997] Circuit Court Hears Challenge to Crypto Regulations [January 9, 1997] New Commerce Department Crypto Rules Spell Trouble For Privacy [January 9, 1997] Leading Software Companies Frustrated with Administration Encryption Plan Court Decision Challenges Constitutionality of Crypto Export Controls [December 18, 1996] Join Jim Barksdale and Many Others in Signing the Petition to Protect Privacy and Security Online Legislative Efforts to Bring Privacy and Security to the Net 105th Congress: 1997 "Pro-CODE" Bill [Not formally introduced] H.R. 695, the "SAFE" Bill introduced by Rep. Goodlatte on February 12, 1997 104th Congress: 1995-96 S. 1726, the Burns/Leahy "Pro-CODE Bill" introduced on May 2, 1996 H.R. 3011, the "SAFE" Bill introduced by Reps. Goodlatte and Eshoo in March 1996 S.1587, introduced by Sens. Burns and Leahy in March 1996 Clinton Administration Policy Initiatives Clipper 3.1.1 (Administration Announcement - October 1, 1996) Clipper III (Administration draft report - May 21, 1996) NIST Private Key Escrow Encryption Initiative (Clipper II) The Clipper Chip Government Key Escrow Proposal Other Relevant Background Information Previous Headlines National Research Council Report on the State of U.S. Encryption Policy Encryption Experts Call For Much Longer Key Lengths CEO's Criticize Encryption Export Policies, Warn of Economic Harm Commerce Department Releases Study on Availability of Encryption Abroad State Department Publishes Personal Use Exemption for Encryption Exports Justice Department Drops Case Against Phil Zimmermann, PGP Author What You Can Do Join CDT's Policy Post List for news and information on this and otherInternet issues. To join the list, simply type your email address in the form below. Your E-mail address:   Join the fight for secure communications online Show your support for repealing exportcontrols The Internet Privacy Coalition Protecting Your Privacy - Tools for Internet Users Where to Get PGP Anonymous Remailers Links to Encryption Resources The Encryption Policy Resource Page The Internet Privacy Coalition Electronic Frontier Foundation's(EFF) Crypto Archive Electronic Privacy Information Center's(EPIC) Crypto Resources Voters Telecommunications Watch (VTW) RSA Cryptography FAQ - An excellent Net resource on the technical aspects of cryptography Background and Information about Key Escrow from the National Institute of Standards and Technology's [NIST] Computer Security Resource Clearinghouse Links to Other Useful Internet Resources A Cyber-Rights Now Rant by CDT Policy Analyst Jonah Seiger on the need to Reform US Encryption Policy from the June 1996 issue of Wired Magazine Visit the Audio/Photo Archives of the SAFE Forum Forum Transcripts also online!! CDT Home Page Last Updated 02/13/97 || For more information write webmaster@cdt.org WT02-B03-146IA095-001024-B009-337http://www.cdt.org:80/privacy/ 205.177.10.31 19970214234551 text/html 4697HTTP/1.0 200 OKDate: Fri, 14 Feb 1997 23:44:35 GMTServer: Apache/1.1.1Content-type: text/html CDT Privacy Issues Page CDT Privacy Issues Page HEADLINES Upcoming Hearings Explore Health Information Privacy Options [February 2, 1997] Privacy Issues Wrap-Up: Some Progress, Some Disappointments [November 5, 1996] Congress Requests Federal Reserve Study in Response to P-Trak Controversy [November 5, 1996] Previous Privacy-Related Headlines CDT Privacy Demonstration Page Who's Watching You and What are You Telling Them?? (If you are having problems accessing the site from an online service, go here.) Link to the CDT Privacy Demonstration Page Please help us educate others about online privacy issues. We encourage you to add our "eye" button to your web page: http://www.13x.com/cgi-bin/cdt/snoop.pl "How Did You Know That?" A behind-the-scenes explanation of the CDT Privacy Demonstration. CDT Policy Post 2.21 - CDT Unveils Privacy Demonstration and Clearinghouse CDT Online Privacy Clearinghouse To raise the public's awareness of privacy issues in the interactive age, CDT is developing a clearinghouse on privacy policies that contain the policies adopted by various entities operating on the Internet and in other interactive communications media. Currently the Clearinghouse will allow you to examine the privacy policies of the four major commercial online service providers. In the future, CDT will be providing information on the privacy policies of a range of Internet players. Eventually you will be able to look for a particular company or web site by name in our Policy Warehouse, or get an overview of policies within specific industries such as commerical online service providers, Internet service providers, Internet web browsers, commercial web sites, political web sites, non-profit web sites, telecommunication services, and financial services. Online Services Policies Chart [You must have a frames-capable browser to view the chart] Definition of Terms Children's Privacy Issues Health Information Privacy Issues Links to Privacy-Related Sites Special Thank Yous Back to the CDT Privacy Demonstration Page Back to the CDT Home Page Last Updated 02/02/97 || For more information, write webmaster@cdt.org WT02-B03-147IA095-001024-B009-350http://www.cdt.org:80/net_congress/ 205.177.10.31 19970214234559 text/html 5209HTTP/1.0 200 OKDate: Fri, 14 Feb 1997 23:44:42 GMTServer: Apache/1.1.1Content-type: text/html CDT | Congress and The Net Congress and The Net Last updated December 11, 1996 Calendar of Events CDT and Voters TelecommunicationsWatch (VTW) are coordinating a series of online events with members of Congress. These events are designed to encourage members of Congress to work with theNet.community on vital Internet policy issues and to bring the InternetCommunity into the debate about those issues. No events are currently scheduled, but check back soon for details about the next event. Previous Events On Thursday July 25, 1996, the Full Senate Commerce Committee held a hearingto consider S. 1726, the 'Pro-CODE' bill designed to relax export controlson encryption. FBI Director Louis Freeh and other high-rankingAdministration officials testified before the committee. A second panel ofcomputer industry leaders, including Netscape CEO Jim Barksdale and others,will also gave testimony. More information, including photos and an audio transcript, is available. On June 26, 1996, HotWired, DIGEX, VotersTelecommunications Watch, and the Center for Democracy and Technology organized the first ever interactive hearing on Capitol Hill. Sen. Conrad Burns (R-MT) chaired a hearing of the Senate Commerce Subcommittee on Science, Space and Technology; the hearing focused on U.S. encryption policy, specifically on Sen. Burns's own "Pro-CODE" legislation. An audio transcript of the event is available. On June 11, 1996, Senator Burns discussed his "Pro-CODE" encryption legislation on HotWired's WiredSide Chat. An audio transcript of that chat session is available. (Must have RealAudio properly configured on your browser to listen to the transcript.) Congressman Rick White (R-WA) discussed the Communications Decency Act court case, current cryptography policy, and other Internet issues on HotWired's WiredSide chat on June 5, 1996. An audio transcript is now available. (Must have RealAudio properly configured on your browser to listen to the transcript.) Senator Patrick Leahy (D-VT) discussed encryption policy and other Internet issues on HotWired's WiredSide chat on May 22, 1996. An audio transcript is now available. (Must have RealAudio properly configured on your browser to listen to the transcript.) Senator Burns discussed his "PRO-Code" encryption legislation in America Online's News Room Auditorium on May 6, 1996. The transcript of that chat session is available. The Internet Caucus On March 29, 1996, a bi-partisan group of members from both the House and Senate announced the formation of the Congressional Internet Caucus. The group, co-founded by Reps. Rick White (R-WA), Rick Boucher (D-VA), Senators Larry Pressler (R-SD) and Patrick Leahy (D-VT) will work to educate members of Congress about how the Internet works, bring more members of Congress online, and encourage the use of the Net to facilitate better communication between members of Congress and their constituents. CDT Policy Post 2.13 - Net-Friendly Legislators Form Internet Caucus The Internet Caucus web site Back to the CDTHome Page Last Update September 18, 1996 | For More Information, write webmaster@cdt.orgWT02-B03-148IA095-001024-B009-367http://www.cdt.org:80/policy/terrorism/ 205.177.10.31 19970214234608 text/html 6663HTTP/1.0 200 OKDate: Fri, 14 Feb 1997 23:44:51 GMTServer: Apache/1.1.1Content-type: text/html CDT's Counter-Terrorism issues page CDT's Counter-Terrorism Issues Page UPDATE [updated August 5, 1996] Safe for Now: Senate to Vote on Revised Counter-Terrorism Bill in September On Friday August 2, the House of Representatives passed a revised counter-terrorism bill by a margin of 389 to 22. The bill does not contain provisions relating to encryption or expanded wiretapping authority. However, the Senate did not vote on the bill before they recessed for the month. The Senate will take up consideration of the bill when Congress returns in September. So while the current version of the bill does not contain the privacy-threatening provisions that were previously discussed, they will likely resurface when the Senate considers the bill. In the coming days and weeks, CDT will work with Congressional leaders, privacy advocates, and the net.community to ensure that constitutional civil liberties and the openness of the Internet are protected as Congress considers counter-terrorism measures. Thanks to everyone who called Congress to object to the new sweepingsurveillance provisions that were dropped from the bill! More information about the revised counter-terrorism bill that passed the House "House Passes Anti-Terror Bill", Washington Post article [August 3, 1996] Read CDT Policy Post 2.29 for more details about the proposals. [August 1, 1996] Alert!: Congress Posed to Enact Surveillance Legislation [August 1, 1996] Administration Fact Sheet on Anti-Terrorism Proposals written on July 29, 1996. S. 1762, the Department of Defense Authorization Act for Fiscal Year 1997, contains a provision that makes it illegal to disseminate information on how to construct explosives knowing that the information will be used in furtherance of a federal crime.. This provision uses the same language as the modified Feinstein amendment to S. 735. S. 1762 passed the Senate on July 10, 1996. Transcript of July 28, 1996 CNN interview with Sen. Dianna Feinstein (D-CA) and Rep. Bob Barr (R-GA). The interview included a discussion of the proposed counter-terrorism measures. Previous Initiatives Administration Documents Clinton Administration Counter-Terrorism Initiative announced April 27, 1995. Legislation S. 735, the "Antiterrorism and Effective Death Penalty Act of 1996", as passed by the Congress and signed by President Clinton on April 24, 1996. Full text (very large file - 380k) Compressed file - Mac self-extracting/BinHex (145k) Compressed file - PC/Zip (88k) Senator Dianne Feinstein (D-CA) proposed an amendment to S. 735 to prohibit the distribution of bomb making information on the Internet. Her amendment was modified and added to the bill on June 5, 1995. Ultimately, this amendment was not included in the final version of S. 735 signed by President Clinton in April 1996. On May 5, 1995, Senators Tom Daschle (D-SD), Joseph Biden (D-DE), Herb Kohl (D-WI), Dianne Feinstein (D-CA), and Christopher Dodd (D-CT) introduced S. 761, the Omnibus Counterterrorism Act of 1995. S. 735, the Comprehensive Terrorism Prevention Act of 1995, as introduced by Sen. Bob Dole (R-KS) and others on April 27, 1995. S. 390, the Senate Omnibus Counter-Terrorism Act of 1995, as introduced on February 10, 1995 by Sen. Joseph Biden (D-DE) and others. H.R. 896, the House Omnibus Counter-Terrorism Act of 1995, as introduced on February 10, 1995 by Rep. Charles Schumer (D-NY) and others. CDT Testimony CDT's Executive Director Jerry Berman on 'Free Speech and the Internet in the Wake of Oklahoma City Bombing'. May 11, 1995 hearing of the Senate Judiciary Subcommittee on Terrorism, Technology, and Government Information. Other Testimony from the May 11, 1995 Judiciary Subcommittee Hearing on the availability of bomb making materials on the Internet. Analyses Center For National Security Studies (CNSS) Report on the new Anti-Terrorism Law that was passed on April 24, 1996 (Pub. L. 104-132.) Center For National Security Studies (CNSS) Analysis of Omnibus Counter-Terrorism Act of 1995. Center For National Security Studies (CNSS) Analysis of Current FBI Authority to Combat Terrorism. Center For National Security Studies (CNSS) Report on Recent Trends in Domestic and Foreign Terrorism. Return to CDT Home Page Last Update 08/05/96 || For more information, write webmaster@cdt.org