WT02-B05-1IA095-001027-B028-18http://www.cdt.org:80/policy/freespeech/doj_050395.ltr.html 205.177.10.31 19970215004332 text/html 16273HTTP/1.0 200 OKDate: Sat, 15 Feb 1997 00:42:16 GMTServer: Apache/1.1.1Content-type: text/html Justice Department Letter on CDA May 3, 1995Honorable Patrick J. LeahyUnited States SenateWashington, DC  20510Dear Senator Leahy:I write to respond to your letter of March 1, 1995 concerning our prosecution of violations of federal child pornography and obscenity laws and your April 21, 1995 request for the views of the United States Department of Justice on the "Communications Decency Act," which has been incorporated as title IV of the proposed "Telecommunications Competition and Deregulation Act of 1995," S. 652. In accordance with your request, the analysis of the Communications Decency Act focuses on sections 402 and 405 of the bill.The Department's Criminal Division has, indeed, successfully prosecuted violations of federal child pornography and obscenity laws which were perpetrated with computer technology.  In addition, we have applied current law to this emerging problem while also discovering areas where the new technology may present challenges to successful prosecution.  While we agree with the goal of various legislative proposals designed to keep obscenity and child pornography off of the information superhighway, we are currently developing a legislative proposal that will best meet these challenges and provide additional prosecutorial tools.  Thislegislative package is being developed while taking into consideration the need to protect fundamental rights guaranteed by the First Amendment.With respect to the communications Decency Act, while we understand that section 402 is intended to provide users of online services the same protection against obscene and harassing communications afforded to telephone subscribers, this provision would not accomplish that goal.  Instead, it would significantly thwart enforcement of existing laws regarding obscenity and child pornography, create several ways for distributors and packages of obscenity and child pornography to avoid criminal liability, and threaten important First Amendment and privacy rights.Similarly, while we understand that section 405 of this bill is intended to expand privacy protections to "digital" communications, such communications are already protected under existing law.  Moreover, this provision would have the unintended consequences of jeopardizing law enforcement's authority to conduct lawful, court-ordered wiretaps and would prevent system administrators from protecting their systems when they are under attack by computer hackers.Despite the flaws in these provisions, the Administration applauds the primary goal of this legislation:  prevent obscenity from being widely transmitted over telecommunications networks to which minors have access.  However, the legislation raises complex policy issues that merit close examination prior to Congressional action.  We recommend that a comprehensive review be undertaken of current laws and law enforcement resources for prosecuting online obscenity and child pornography, and the technical means available to enable parents and users to control the commercial and non commercial communications they receive over interactive telecommunications systems.The following are the Department's primary objections to sections 402 and 405 of the pending telecommunication bill:First, Section 402 of the bill would impose criminal sanctions on the transmission of constitutionally protected speech.  Specifically, subsections 402(a)(1) and (b)(2) of the bill would criminalize the transmission of indecent communications, which are protected by the First Amendment.  In _Sable Communications of Cal. v. FCC_, 492 U.S. 115 (1989), the SupremeCourt ruled that any restrictions on the content of protected  speech in media other than broadcast media must advance a compelling state interest and be accomplished by the "least restrictive means."  By relying on technology relevant only to 900 number services, section 402 fails to take into account less restrictive alternatives utilizing existing and emerging technologies which enable parents and other adult users to control access to content.Nearly ten years of litigation, along with modifications of the regulations, were necessary before the current statute as appliedto audiotext services, or "dial-a-porn" calling numbers, was upheld as constitutional.  See _Dial Information Services v. Thornburg_, 938 F. 2d 1535 (2d Cir. 1991).  The proposed amendment in section 40-2 of the bill would jeopardize the enforcement of the existing dial-a-porn statute by inviting additional constitutional challenges, with the concomitant diversion of law enforcement resources.Second, the definition of "knowingly" in section 402 of the bill would cripple obscenity prosecutions.  Under subsection 402(e), only those persons with "actual knowledge" of the "specific content of the communication" could be held criminally liable.  this definition would make it difficult, if not impossible, to prove guilt, and the standard is higher than the prevailing knowledge requirements under existing obscenity and child sexual exploitation statutes.  Under _Miller v. California_, 413 U.S. 629 (1973), the government must only prove that a person being prosecuted under an obscenity statute had knowledge of the general nature of the material being distributed.  Large-scale distributors of child pornography and other obscene materials--among the most egregious violators -- do not read or view each obscene item they distribute.  the proposed definition in subsection 402(e) would make it nearly impossible for the government to establish the necessary knowledge requirement and would thereby severely handicap enforcement of existing statutes.Third, section 402 would add new terms and defenses that would thwartongoing enforcement of the dial-a-porn statute.  Currently, the government is vigorously enforcing the existing dial-a-porn statute.  It took more thanten years for the government to be able to do so, due to constitutional challenges.  The proposed amendment to this statute fundamentally changes its provisions and subjects it to renewed constitutional attack which would hinder current enforcement efforts.Fourth, section 402 would do significant harm by inserting new and sweeping defenses that may be applied to nullify existing federal criminal statutes.  The government currently enforces federal criminal laws preventing the distribution over computer networks of obscene and other pornographic material that is harmful to minors (under 18 U.S.C. section 1465, 2252 & 2423 (a)), the illegal solicitation of a minor by way of a computer network (under 18 U.S.C. section 2252), and illegal "luring" of a minor into sexual activity through computer conversations (under 18 U.S.C. section 2423(b)).  These statutes apply to all methods of "distribution" including over computer networks.  The new defenses proposed in subsection 402(d) would thwart ongoing government obscenity and child sexual exploitation prosecutions in several important ways:* The first defense under subsection 402 (d)(1) would immunize from   prosecution "any action" by a defendant who operates a computer   bulletin board service as an outlet for the distribution of   pornography and obscenity so long as he does not create or later the   material. In fact, this defense would establish a system under which   distributors of pornographic material by way of computer would be   subject to fewer criminal sanctions than distributors of obscene   videos, books, or magazines.* The second defense provided in subsection 402(d)(2) would exculpate   defendants who "lacked editorial control over the communications."   Such a defense may significantly harm the goal of ensuring that   obscene or pornographic material is not available on the Internet or   other computer networks by creating a disincentive for operators of   public bulletin board services to control postings on their boards.  Moreover, persons who provide critical links in the pornography and   obscenity distribution chains by serving as "package fulfillment   centers" filling orders for obscene materials, could assert the   defense that they lack the requisite "editorial control." This   proposed defense would complicate prosecutions of entire obscenity   distribution chains.* The third defense provided in subsection 402 (d)(3), containing five   subparts, would be available to pornographic bulletin boards operators   who take such innocuous steps as (A) directing users to their "on/off"   switches on their computer as a "means to restrict access" to certain   communications; (B) warning, or advertising to, users that the could   receive obscene material; and (C) responding to complaints about such   minimum, this proposed defense would lead to litigation over whether   such actions constitute "good faith" steps to avoid prosecution for   violating the section 402, and could thwart existing child pornography   and obscenity prosecutions.* The fourth defense provided in subsection 402 (d)(4) would exculpate   defendants whose pornography business does not have the "predominate   purpose" of engaging in unlawful activity. This defense would severely   undercut law enforcement's efforts to prosecute makers and   distributors of noncommercial pornography and obscenity.* The fifth defense provided in subsection 402 (d)(5) would preclude any   cause of action from being brought against any person who has taken   good faith steps to, _inter_alia_, "restrict or prevent the   transmission of, or access to," a communication deemed unlawful under   section 402. This defense would encourage intrusion by on-line service   providers into the private electronic mail communications of   individual users. The defense actually promotes intrusions into   private electronic mail by making it "safer" to monitor private   communications than to risk liability. At the same time, this defense   would defeat efforts by the government to enforce federal privacy   protections against illegal eavesdropping.Finally, but no less significantly, section 405 amends the federal wiretap statute in several respects, each of which creates considerable problems. First, it amends the wiretap statute to add the term "digital" to 10 USC section 2511 (see footnote #1), without considering the effect of this amendment on other statutory provisions.  For example, 10 USC section 2516 (1) provides that certain government officials may authorize an application for a wiretap order for wire or oral communications while 18 USC section 2516 (3) provides that other government officials may authorize an application for a wiretap order for electroniccommunications. Since section 405 does not amend 10 USC section 2516, to include the term "digital," it would appear that _no_ government official has the authority to authorize an application for a wiretap order for digital communications. This is particularly problematic, sincethis investigative tool is reserved for the most serious cases, including those involving terrorists, organized crime, and narcotics.Equally disconcerting, the amendment serves to protect computer hackers at theexpense of all users of the National Information Infrastructure (NII), including businesses, government agencies and individuals. Prior to 1994, wiretap statute allowed electronic communication services providers to monitor _voice_ communications to protect their systems form abuse. 18 USC section 2511 (2)(a)(i) (1986 version). Thus, when hackers attacked computer systems and system administrators monitored these communications, they had no clear statutory authority to do so. In October 1994, Congress finally remedied this defect by amending 10 USC section 2511 (2)(a)(i) to permit the monitoring of electronic (i.e., digital, non-voice) communications. If section 405 is enacted and these hacker communications are deemed digital, system administrators will once again be denied the statutory authority to monitor hacker communications. It would bemost unfortunate if, at the same time Congress is encouraging the widespread use of the NII, it passed a law giving system administrator's a Hobson's choice: either allow hackers to attack systems unobserved or violate federal law.There are three other concerns as well. First, by adding the term "digital" without amending the suppression provisions of 18 USC section 2515, voice communications -- if they are deemed "digital" -- will no longer be protected by the statute's exclusionary rule. This would serve to reduce the privacy protections for phone calls.Second, section 405 would replace the words "oral communication" with "communication" in 18 USC section 2511 (1)(B). This would have undesirable consequences for law enforcement because it would criminalize the interception of communications as to which there was no reasonable expectation of privacy (see footnote #2).From the law enforcement perspective, there is simply no sound reason for eliminating this highly desirable feature of present law. Additionally, the amendment might also impact upon the news gathering process. For example, ifthe conversation of two individuals shouting in a hotel room were recorded by a news reporter standing outside the room, the reporter would, under section405, be violating the wiretap statute. Under current law, of course, the individuals could not complain about the recording because, by shouting loud enough to be heard outside the room, they lack any reasonable expectation of privacy.Last, the provision in section 402 (d)(5) provides that "no cause of action maybe brought in any court ... against any person on account of any action which the person has taken in good faith to implement a defense authorized under this section ...." This would seem to suggest that any person can freely engage in electronic surveillance otherwise prohibited under Title III so long as they claim to be implementing a section 402 defense. AS such, section 402 (d)(5) severely weakens the privacy protections currently offered by the wiretap statute.In sum, sections 402 and 405 of the bill would hamper the government's ongoing work in stopping the dissemination of obscenity and child pornography and threaten law enforcement's continued ability to use court-authorized wiretaps. We believe that a comprehensive review be undertaken to guide response to the problems that the Communications Decency Act seeks to address.I assure you that the Department is aware of the growing use of computers to transmit and traffic obscenity and child pornography. The Criminal Division's Child Exploitation and Obscenity Section is aggressively investigating and prosecuting the distribution of child pornography and obscenity through computer networks, and the use of computers to locate minors for the purpose of sexual exploitation. AS we have discussed with your staff in a meeting focused on these issues, we remain committed to an aggressive effort to halt the use of computers to sexually exploit children and distribute obscenity.Sincerely,{sig}Kent MarkusActing Assistant Attorney General--------------------------------------FOOTNOTES(1) It should be noted that "digital" communications are already covered by the wiretap statute. Under current law, a "digital" communications is either a wire communication under 18 USC sec 2510 (1) (if it contains voice) or an "electronic communication" under 18 USC sec 2510 (12) (if it does not contain voice). Since such communications are already covered, the reason for enacting section 405 is unclear, and it is difficult to predict how the courts will interpret the amendment.(2) The definition of "oral communication" in 18 USC sec 2510 (2) contains a requirement that the communication to be protected must have been made under circumstances justifying an expectation of privacy. Return to the CDT Home Page WT02-B05-2IA095-001027-B028-58http://www.cdt.org:80/policy/freespeech/amfam_exon.ltr.html 205.177.10.31 19970215004357 text/html 3767HTTP/1.0 200 OKDate: Sat, 15 Feb 1997 00:42:37 GMTServer: Apache/1.1.1Content-type: text/html American Family Association Letter to Exon April 4, 1995The Honorable James ExonUnited States Senate528 Hart Senate Office BuildingWashington, DC  20510re:  Exon Computer Pornography BillDear Senator Exon:I write to express my great concern regarding a bill authored by you titled the "Communication Decency Act of 1995."  In its original form, the bill, which is now attached to the telecommunications bill and soon will be considered on the floor of the Senate, was a laudable attempt to, as you said, protect the Information Superhighway from becoming a red light district.  In its current form however, the bill would provide protection for the red light district of the Information Superhighway from federal and state prosecution.  I am confident that the pro-family movement in America will uniformly oppose your bill and, if necessary, the telecommunications bill to which it is attached, unless significant changes are made prior to a vote on the Senate floor.Let me clarify, as the former Section Chief of the Child Exploitation and Obscenity Section, Criminal Division, U.S. Department of Justice, that the federal dial-a-porn law, in my opinion, currently prohibits commercial distribution of obscenity via computers.  Therefore it is unnecessary to change that law as your bill would do, unless you are seeking to clarify this point and add improvements to the law.  Also, it is my opinion, although this point may not be as clear or settled as the first, that federal criminal law, specifically Title 18 Sections 1462 and 1465 prohibits distribution of obscenity via computer whether or not for commercial purpose.  Further, it is my opinion that a primary problem regarding computer pornography is the lack of leadership and enforcement on this issue by the Clinton Administration.  While current laws could be improved, the Administration could make substantial progress in protecting children in particular from both obscenity and child pornography by using existing law to prosecute illegal pornographers who use the Internet if it had the will to do so.Here are my primary objections to your bill, in its current form:  it provides several defenses against prosecution which have the effect of gutting the current dial-a-porn law, making it useless for the prosecution of computer obscenity crimes.  Your bill now also contains a state pre-emption provision that would prohibit states from providing stronger protection to children, should they choose to do so, than the weak provisions now contained in your bill.  The scienter or knowledge provision contained in your bill would give pornographers protection they don't now have.  The provision titled "Scrambling of Cable Channels for Non-subscribers" only codifies current cable company practice in most cities and does not provide protection to children who may be exposed to pornography transmitted over cable systems.  In your original bill you would have required a complete blockage of both the audio and video signal for non-subscribers of pornographic channels.  In your current bill, you merely require cable companies to block such material upon subscriber request.  There are other parts of your bill that are problematic.Because I know that you are truly intent on providing protection to children from exposure to pornography, I hope that you will make significant changes to your bill to accomplish this goal.Most Sincerely,{sig}Patrick A. TruemanDirector of Governmental Affairs Return to the CDT Home PageWT02-B05-3IA095-001027-B028-80http://www.cdt.org:80/policy/freespeech/amfam_pressler.ltr.html 205.177.10.31 19970215004409 text/html 4439HTTP/1.0 200 OKDate: Sat, 15 Feb 1997 00:42:51 GMTServer: Apache/1.1.1Content-type: text/html American Family Association Letter to Pressler April 26, 1995The Honorable Larry PresslerUnited States Senate243 Russell Senate Office BuildingWashington, DC 20510Dear Senator Pressler:In response to a request from your staff I am writing this letter to set forth my concerns regarding the Exon Amendment, titled the "Communications Decency Act of 1995," which has been attached to the telecommunications bill. While I believe that Senator Exon had the best of intentions in proposing this legislation which was intended to protect children from pornographic images available on the Internet, the bill has been perverted in an attempt to placate online service companies and others. I am confident that in its current form the bill is opposed by substantially all pro-family groups in America.Prior to my current position, I served as section chief of the Child Exploitation and Obscenity Section in the Criminal Division in the US Department of Justice, the office responsible for prosecuting violators of obscenity and child pornography laws. I am familiar with the current state of law regarding prohibitions on computer pornography. I my opinion the current federal dial-a-porn law (which the Exon bill amends) alreadyprohibits commercial distribution of obscenity via computers. It is also my opinion (although this point is not as clear in the law as the first) that federal criminal, specifically Title 18, sections 1462 and 1465 prohibit distribution of obscenity via computer whether or not for commercial purpose. The only purpose of additional legislation in this area, therefore, should be to clarify current law and perhaps strengthen penalties. It was my understanding that this was the original intentionof Senator Exon. Now, however, the Exon bill weakens the federal dial-a-porn law. The following represents my particular objections to the most egregious parts of the bill:1. The bill provides numerous defenses to prosecution to those companies    which provide access to the Internet which are necessary because such    companies are not liable unless they knowingly aid in the commission of    a violation. If they are knowingly participating in a violation, then    they _should_ be subject to the law, and congress should not provide a    defense to protect them.2. The bill provides an additional defense for those who knowingly transmit    obscenity of indecency but are not engaged in a commercial activity, the    predominant purpose of which is the transmission of obscenity or indecency.    Under this provision, the burden would be on the prosecutor to demonstrate    that the predominant commercial activity of the defendant is the transmission    of obscenity and indecency. This is too great a burden for the prosecutor and    is entirely unique in law.3. The bill includes a pre-emption clause which may limit states from    providing greater protections to children than the Exon bill.4. The scienter or knowledge requirement contained in the bill is entirely    unreasonable. The bill requires that the defendant had "actual knowledge of    the specific content" of the material. It would be impossible for a prosecutor   to demonstrate that the defendant had the requisite knowledge in most every case.   The current knowledge requirement in obscenity cases is that the prosecutor must   show that the defendant knew or had reason to know of the _general nature and    character of the work_.While I have other objections to the bill, the above states my objections to provisions which would weaken current federal law regarding the prosecution of illegal pornography.I have met with Senator Exon and several members of his staff who are workingon this bill. I am certain that the Senator is genuinely trying to provide effective legislation in this important area.  Perhaps before the telecommunications legislation reaches the floor he will propose amendmentswhich will remove objectionable portions of the bill. If not, I hope you will do what you can to amend the telecommunications bill to remove the Exon provisions.Most Sincerely,{sig}Patrick A. TruemanDirector of Governmental Affairs Return to the CDT Home PageWT02-B05-4IA095-001027-B028-128http://www.cdt.org:80/policy/legislation/admin_s652_comnts.html 205.177.10.31 19970215004522 text/html 29462HTTP/1.0 200 OKDate: Sat, 15 Feb 1997 00:43:42 GMTServer: Apache/1.1.1Content-type: text/html Administration Concerns on S.652 ADMINISTRATION CONCERNS REGARDING S. 652: THE TELECOMMUNICATIONS COMPETITIONAND DEREGULATION ACT OF 1995 Chick here to skip directly to concerns about the Communicaitons Decency Act amendments. I. Introduction The Administration takes this opportunity to comment upon S. 652, the Telecommunications Competition and Deregulation Act of 1995, as reported by the Senate Commerce Committee. The Administration believes that the key test for any telecommunications reform measure is whether it helps the American people. Legislation should provide benefits to consumers, spur economic growth and innovation, promote private sector investment in an advanced telecommunications infrastructure, and create jobs. However, unleashing monopolies before real competition exists could cause higher prices for consumers and hinder competition. During the transition, safeguards are needed to bring real competition and all its benefits. While significant portions of the bill are consistent with these principles, in critical respects the bill does too little to promote competition and too little to ensure that consumers are not hurt by monopolistic behavior. The Administration urges the Senate to amend the legislation to ensure a truly competitive telecommunications marketplace by addressing our major concerns with the bill as currently drafted before Senate passage. II. Cable Rate Regulation The Administration is particularly concerned about provisions in the Senate bill that could: (1) substantially reduce Federal Communications Commission (FCC) oversight of the rates for "cable programming services" charged by cable systems not subject to effective competition; and (2) significantly loosen the 1992 Cable Act's definition of "effective competition." While some relief may be appropriate for small and rural cable systems, the broader changes that the bill would make could potentially have serious adverse affects for cable subscribers. Reduced Regulation of Cable Programming Services: Section 204 of the bill would preclude FCC scrutiny of a rate for cable programming services (commonly known as "expanded basic services") unless that rate "substantially exceeds the national average rate for comparable cable programming services." This provision could result in cable rates increases for a large number of consumers. In addition, consumers of basic service could see many services moved to the less regulated upper tiers. The provision could also permit cable systems to escape regulation through concerted increases in their expanded basic service rates. Every rate increase by an individual cable system would raise the nationwide average rate for expanded basic services and, therefore, pave the way for subsequent rate increases not only by that system but every other cable system. Redefinition of "Effective Competition": Section 204 of the Senate bill also would amend the Cable Act to declare that a cable system faces "effective competition" if a local exchange carrier (LEC) "offers video programming services directly to subscribers" within the system's franchise area, whether over a common carrier video platform or as a conventional cable operator. This provision appears to deregulate upon the merest potential of competition from the LECs, without regard to whether or not such competition really exists on any significant scale. If there are legitimate concerns that the current multichannel competitor test for "effective competition" is too stringent, that provision should be changed in a way that still takes actual subscribership to competing services into account. III. Telco/Cable Provisions Although the Administration strongly supports the bill's repeal of the telco/cable crossownership restriction, we are nonetheless concerned about the associated provisions that would: (1) permit mergers and joint ventures between telephone companies (telcos) and cable systems in the telcos' local service areas; (2) give telcos the option of providing video programming either via a common carrier video platform or as a conventional cable system; and 3) not require a separate subsidiary for video programming services. Absence of an Anti-Buyout Restriction: The Senate bill would allow telephone companies to buy out local cable companies in the telco's local service area. While telcos and cable systems are potential competitors in the video services market, technological change and aggressive plant modernization have positioned cable operators to become viable providers of local telephone service as well. Permitting widespread mergers between telcos and cable systems, therefore, could undermine this potential competition in both the video and telephony markets before it begins, potentially raising telephone and cable prices paid by consumers. This movement to a "one-wire world" potentially would leave antitrust litigation as the only barrier to anti-competitive behavior. For this reason, the Administration has consistently advocated a strong ban on acquisitions and joint ventures between telcos and cable systems in the telcos' local service area, subject to a limited exception in rural areas and authority for the FCC to review the ban after a certain number of years. Optional Provision of a Common Carrier Video Platform: The Senate bill would allow telcos to provide video programming services either on a common carrier video dialtone (VDT) basis or as a conventional cable operator. The Administration is concerned that, in the latter case, telcos would not be required to provide common carrier VDT facilities to unaffiliated programmers. A common carrier VDT platform cannot be merely an option for telcos, but rather should be a required aspect of their entry into the video programming market. As long as telcos continue to control the poles and conduits that cable companies need to provide service, and as long as telcos remain regulated and dominant providers of local telephone service, there is a substantial risk that telcos may be able to gain an unwarranted competitive advantage in the video services market through discrimination and cross-subsidization. Requiring telcos to provide common carrier VDT facilities to unaffiliated programmers would ensure that programmers have ample opportunities to market services directly to subscribers, without having to go through a conduit- controlling gatekeeper. This would foster additional competition in the provision of video to the home, with the concomitant benefits of lower prices, more programming choices, and improved customer service. Separate Subsidiaries for Video Programming: The bill as currently drafted does not require that the Bell Operating Companies (BOCs) establish a separate subsidiary for video programming provided on a common carrier basis, but instead relies on the BOCs not to cross subsidize between the provision of video programming and telecommunications services. Structural separation would be a better approach to ensure detection of such cross- subsidies. IV. Local Competition/Interconnection Requirements The Administration is concerned that the provisions for interconnection may not set the stage for effective local competition. With respect to both procedure and substance, the bill does not do enough to ensure that opportunities for local competition will be available to all in a rapid timeframe. Application of Interconnection Requirements: With respect to interconnection, the bill defines the relevant market -- for identifying an entity with market power subject to the interconnection requirements -- to include all providers of local telephone service, regardless of the technology applied. As a result, wireless services would be included, even if the price disparity between the two technologies ensured that they did not compete for the same customers. It would also include every provider of service to discrete customer niches, even if that provider offers no competition whatsoever for the vast majority of customers. This is contrary to accepted principles of market definition, as embodied in the 1992 Horizontal Merger Guidelines of the Department of Justice and the Federal Trade Commission. The bill's market definition, therefore, could seriously understate the market share of an incumbent LEC, and result in a failure to apply interconnection duties to a carrier that does, in fact, possess market power. Interconnection Agreement via Negotiation: In allowing carriers to fulfill their duty to interconnect by negotiating agreements with other carriers, the bill does not ensure timely interconnection for competitors. Since these negotiated agreements need not satisfy the list of minimum standards outlined in section 251(b), and since a State has very limited power to reject a negotiated agreement, a BOC monopolist may be able to make use of its vastly superior bargaining power, particularly since a sole negotiated agreement may serve as a BOC ticket into the long distance market in a given area. The strongest competitors, therefore, may be the last to obtain interconnection agreements. Limits on Resale: The bill's provisions on resale would allow a State to limit the resale of subsidized universal service, allowing a company to sell services to other carriers based on actual cost, exclusive of universal service support. This would apparently be allowed even if the first carrier keeps the revenues that provide such universal service support, enabling a carrier to collect its cost twice -- once from the carrier that purchases service for resale, and once from the source of universal service support. This provision should therefore be modified to prevent such "double" collection. Waivers for Local Carriers: Under certain conditions, the FCC or a State may waive or modify the minimum interconnection standards laid out in Section 251. There is a problem, however, in how the bill defines carriers eligible for such a waiver -- those "with fewer than 2% of the Nation's subscriber lines installed in the aggregate nationwide." The Administration believes that the 2% figure is too large because, except for most of the BOCs and GTE, almost every other provider of local exchange service in the United States would potentially be eligible for an exemption from the interconnection requirements of Section 251. Rural Issues: The bill mandates that for interexchange carriers which serve both rural and urban areas, rates must be no more expensive in rural areas than in urban areas. This may have several adverse effects on competition: 1) it may discourage urban providers from expanding into rural areas, limiting customer choice in those areas; and 2) providers that are already in rural and urban areas will be unable to lower urban rates to competitive levels because they are tied to the same rate changes in the rural areas. This provision may thus actually contribute to higher urban rates instead of lower rural rates. Also, Section 309 of the Committee bill would permit States to restrict competitive entry in rural areas, unless new entrants agree to serve an area comparable to the incumbent's on similar terms and conditions. Such a provision could severely hamper the growth of competition and the resulting consumer benefits. The Administration shares the Committee's concern that competition be encouraged in a way that does not cause dislocations for consumers, wherever they reside. We believe, however, that the best way to address this concern is not by restricting competition, but by adopting universal service policies, on a competitively neutral basis, to protect those relatively few consumers that may not fully benefit from competition. The Potential for Price Squeezes: The bill provides little protection against price squeezes by the BOCs, which could significantly damage both local and long distance competition. While a BOC subsidiary would be required to "pay" or impute the cost of inputs obtained from its parent company, the nominal amount it pays for these inputs is relatively unimportant, since it is really just a transfer payment from one part of the company to another. Thus the BOC parent could inflate its rates for local service inputs without causing any real harm to its long distance affiliate. For competitors, however, such inflation could be devastating. They would have to pay the BOC the inflated prices for local service inputs, but they would be unable to match the competitive retail rates offered by such a BOC, since its costs are recovered elsewhere in the company. In this way a BOC would have the capability to drive any competitors from the market.V. MFJ/Long-Distance Relief The Administration believes that the bill may allow the BOCs to enter the long distance market before there are real opportunities for local competition and under circumstances where entry might impede competition in adjacent and more competitive markets. This could endanger competition and could represent a lost opportunity to create appropriate incentives to open monopolized markets. As currently drafted, the bill relies on one principal safeguard -- the public interest test as administered by the FCC; the Department of Justice has no decision-making role to apply its unwavering focus and expertise to facilitate the vital transition from monopoly to competition. Long-Distance Entry: The provisions in the Senate bill on long distance entry may allow BOC entry before real competitive opportunities exist in a given local market. To obtain relief, a BOC need not enter into interconnection arrangements with all, or even several, of its potential competitors, and it need not reach agreement with any significant competitor. It must show only that it has entered into an interconnection agreement that satisfies the "competitive checklist" in the bill. A BOC could negotiate an agreement with one weak competitor that satisfied the "competitive checklist," thereby obtaining long distance entry a year or more before it enters into an interconnection agreement with any serious competitor. It is not required to show that real competitive opportunities or actual competition exits. While the bill moves toward requiring the BOCs to fulfill both the important minimum interconnection requirements set forth in section 251 and the partially overlapping requirements of the "competitive checklist" (section 255) in order to obtain long distance relief, BOC entry could occur without satisfying the minimum interconnection requirements of section 251. Section 251(c) allows negotiation of interconnection agreements which do not satisfy the minimum interconnection standards of section 251(b). Thus, the BOC could obtain long distance entry without agreeing to interconnect at any technically feasible point in the network, and without agreeing to provide nondiscriminatory access to facilities and information necessary for interoperability of the networks. Department of Justice Role: Throughout this century, the Department of Justice (DOJ) has played a major role in promoting telecommunications competition. Particularly in the last 25 years, the Department has developed, through investigation, litigation and oversight of the AT&T divestiture, deep knowledge and expertise in the area. This has been reinforced by the Department's investigations with respect to telecommunications mergers and other matters. Given the Antitrust Division's expertise, the Department of Justice should be assigned a decision-making role in the process, rather than the consulting role that the bill currently dictates. The Department should be required to assess market facts and determine that entry could indeed promote competition without endangering the progress already achieved in enabling adjacent markets to become competitive. This entry test could be applied at the same time and by the same date as the FCC's more broadly focused entry test so as to ensure no delay. Immediate Out-of-Region Entry: Out-of-region service is not defined in the bill; it is unclear whether long distance service that originates out-of-region but terminates in-region would be permitted. If service that terminates in-region is included in the definition, then there should be a separate subsidiary and other requirements to guard against discrimination, especially since the BOCs are permitted to provide out-of-region service before implementing unbundling and interconnection. Also, some services may technically originate out-of-region but are more appropriately considered as in-region services. Extending the Competitive Checklist: The bill prevents the FCC from extending the terms of the competitive checklist. This could pose a serious problem if it means that the FCC must consider the checklist satisfied even if, for example, the prices at which unbundled network elements would be offered would not permit competition. A niche carrier could accede to high prices in order to reach a negotiated settlement and avoid protracted arbitration or intervention, yet the resulting competitive conditions might not be at all conducive to general competition throughout the area in which the BOC wished to provide interLATA service. Equal Access for Wireless Carriers: The bill's elimination of equal access requirements for wireless carriers would result in severe harm to competition. The bill would call into question the recent AT&T McCaw settlement with DOJ, which demanded equal access in the merger of AT&T and McCaw to avoid anticompetitive effects in the cellular and interexchange markets. These protections were intended to prevent AT&T, which has a very large market share for cellular interexchange service, from obtaining exclusive control over McCaw's cellular customers. The bill would also undo the DOJ's proposal regarding equal access requirements for the BOCs if they are permitted to enter the interexchange market from their cellular operations. VI. Preemption The Administration believes that the bill should not halt or roll back state efforts to open telecommunications markets to competition. As currently drafted, however, the bill does just that in important respects. In certain markets, the bill would extend or preserve the BOCs' local monopolies, delaying competition in these monopolized markets until the BOCs enter the long distance market -- a market which already provides consumers with some of the benefits of competition. The Administration also believes that the federal government should not dictate to the states which form of telephone rate regulation is best to protect state consumers under the different circumstances and levels of competition that will develop in each state. Rate Regulation: The Administration believes that price caps, or similar forms of incentive regulation, may often be superior to conventional rate-of-return regulation. The FCC and the States should have the flexibility to explore which forms of regulation would best serve consumers in markets that are not yet fully competitive. States in particular have been innovative in introducing competition into the marketplace, while at the same time protecting consumers, improving incentives for efficiency, and encouraging the most effective deployment of the information highway. Almost half of the States already use alternatives to rate-of-return regulation. The Administration therefore opposes the provision in the bill that would deprive the FCC and the States of this flexibility. IntraLATA Dialing Parity: The Senate bill bars States from ordering intraLATA dialing parity until the resident BOC has obtained long distance relief. This provision could curtail competition in significant intraLATA toll markets now monopolized or dominated by BOCs because several progressive States (such as Minnesota, Michigan and New York) are enhancing or are about to enhance competition in these markets by requiring implementation of dialing parity. By preempting State prerogatives, the bill would: 1) extend monopoly control over these intraLATA toll call markets, which would hurt consumers; 2) diminish rather than increase the monopolists' incentives to open their markets to competition as rapidly as possible; and 3) put significant pressure on the FCC to approve BOC interLATA applications regardless of other market conditions. Joint Marketing: The bill bars most BOC competitors from marketing long distance services together with resold local service until the BOCs are permitted to offer long distance service in-region. This may deter some competitors from engaging in resale competition at all, and those who choose to compete may charge higher prices to consumers as a result. Several companies have been providing such service for years to small and mid-size business customers; this will hurt those providers and their customers. The provision also could diminish the monopolists' incentives to interconnect their local monopolies as quickly as possible and may delay, until after long distance entry, resolution of the considerable problems which may be involved in reselling the BOCs' local service. The provision would impede the efforts of many States to encourage "one-stop shopping," and raises the probability that the FCC will be under pressure to find the public interest test satisfied regardless of market conditions. Finally, the bill imposes upon companies lacking monopoly power in any telephone market all of the costs and inefficiencies of separate marketing, with no corresponding benefit to consumers. Bars Court Review of State PUC Interconnection Decisions: The bill bars State court review of PUC interconnection agreements. While this may speed the process, it vests tremendous power in State agencies that may be understaffed and may lack the resources necessary to make the many decisions required by the bill. Moreover, it is unclear whether the bill permits FCC review in place of court review, in what circumstances this might occur, and whether FCC decisions would, in turn, be reviewable. VII. Foreign Ownership The current legislation fails to specify the Executive Branch's role in determining whether Section 310(b) foreign ownership restrictions should be lifted for a particular country. The Administration feels strongly that the legislation should explicitly take into account the Executive Branch's broad statutory authority and expertise for matters relating to U.S. trade, foreign relations, foreign investments, antitrust policy, and national security by ensuring that the FCC takes notice of and accords deference to the policy determinations of the Executive Branch when making its Section 310(b) determinations. The legislation should also provide flexibility for the U.S. government to consider, consistent with international obligations, all competitive conditions in foreign markets. The current legislation is too restrictive and should be revised to allow the Executive Branch, in advising the FCC on Section 310(b) matters, to look at the ability of U.S.- owned carriers to supply telecommunications services in all market segments in the foreign country and should include a national interest exception. The Executive Branch also needs flexibility to continue its ongoing bilateral and multilateral consultations and negotiations to open overseas telecommunications services markets. Therefore, the legislation's "snapback" provision, which presents a unilateral threat to remove negotiated benefits, should be deleted. In addition, the bill should make clear that any authority provided by the legislation be exercised in a manner consistent with international obligations, including most favored nation commitments. VIII. Broadcasting The Administration is concerned that the Senate bill would allow greater concentration in the broadcast industry and less rigorous and timely oversight of broadcast licensees by the FCC. The provisions relaxing limits on local and national ownership concentration and limiting license review could impede competition and diversity of voices by enabling existing owners to concentrate control over expanding broadcast capacity. Media Concentration:The Senate bill would allow for greater concentration in the broadcast industry, and in the media industry generally, by increasing from 25 to 35 percent the national audience one broadcast owner can reach, and by removing the broadcast-cable crossownership ban. The result could be greatly expanded media concentration at the national and local levels. Such changes should be considered by the FCC in the context of the coming expansion of broadcast capacity through digital television. The uncertain impact of the move to digital compression and other technological advances argue for delaying any changes in the multiple or local ownership rules pending further study. License Terms Extension: The Administration is concerned that the Senate bill extends the term from five to ten years for television licenses and from seven to ten years for radio licenses. The bill also removes the opportunity for "comparative review" at the end of a license term. These provisions seriously weaken the FCC's ability to enforce a broadcaster's obligation to provide service in the public interest. In particular, the provisions deprive the FCC of its traditional authority to consider applications from competing entities who argue that they will do a better job of serving the public. Broadcast Flexibility: The Administration generally agrees with the concept of providing broadcasters greater spectrum flexibility although there are a number of issues to be considered. For example, if the FCC awards a second channel to existing broadcasters for development of advanced television service, the Senate bill should require the broadcasters to surrender one of their two licenses at the end of an appropriate transition period. IX. First Amendment and Law Enforcement Issues The Administration shares the Committee's goal of preventing obscenity from being widely transmitted over networks. However, the legislation raises complex policy issues that merit close examination prior to Congressional action. These include the impact of additional regulation on the development of the National Information Infrastructure, the ability of industry to develop technological solutions to the problems the legislation is intended to address, the effect on First Amendment and privacy considerations, and the increasingly global nature of the infrastructure. The piecemeal approach taken in this legislation is inadvisable. Instead, a comprehensive review should be undertaken, including Congressional hearings. By criminalizing the transmission of material outside the scope of the legal definition of "obscenity," the Amendment will be subject to First Amendment challenge. Moreover, the Amendment creates certain new defenses to prosecution that will hamper the ability of the Justice Department to prosecute computer obscenity under current statutes. For instance, it could expose to prosecution online service providers who make a good faith effort to keep their systems free from pornography, while providing immunity to providers who knowingly carry pornography, but make no effort to exercise editorial control. Section 5 of the Amendment is unnecessary and could have unintended consequences. In particular, the addition of a new, undefined category of "digital" communications to the wiretap statute would only cause confusion. In fact, digital communications are already covered by the statute. In addition, the section could have an unintended effect on the standard of criminal liability, reaching into communications not now covered because they do not evince a reasonable expectation of privacy. This standard is in itself shifting in the face of a continual erosion of that expectation caused by emerging technologies. However, this statute is not the place to raise or deal with this complex issue, and the Section would only foster confusion and unnecessary litigation. X. Universal Service Issues One of the main principles of the Administration's National Information Infrastructure initiative is to preserve and advance universal service to avoid creating a society of information "haves" and "have nots." For this reason, the Administration supports the goal of universal service, including access for classrooms, libraries, hospitals, and clinics to the National Information Infrastructure, including in rural areas. Congress should also consider adding appropriate language to the bill that would prevent "redlining" in the provision of telecommunications and information services. Return to the CDT home page WT02-B05-5IA095-001027-B028-297http://www.cdt.org:80/crypto/why.html 205.177.10.31 19970215004747 text/html 2984HTTP/1.0 200 OKDate: Sat, 15 Feb 1997 00:46:24 GMTServer: Apache/1.1.1Content-type: text/html CDT | Why Should I Care About The Cryptography Debate? Why Should I Care About The Cryptography Policy Debate? Cryptography products are the locks and keys of the Information Age, enabling individuals and businesses to protect sensitive information as it is transmitted over the Internet. The ability to protect and secure information is vital to the growth of electronic commerce and to the growth of the Internet itself. Current encryption policy prohibits US companies from selling strongencryption products on the world market. As a result, very few strong,easy to use, privacy and security tools are available to Internet users,and your personal communications and financial transactions are leftvulnerable to the prying eyes of hackers, foreign governments, and - yes - even rogue law enforcement agents. Worse yet, the Clinton Administrationcontinues to push unworkable key-escrow policies such as the Clipper andClipper II proposals. Until the cryptography policy debate is resolved, privacy and security onthe Internet remain hostage to outdated, Cold War-era regulations thatthreaten privacy and security online. CDT's Cryptography Policy page is devoted to answering this question. Please browse around our page, then check out these other links for more information about this important policy debate. The Encryption Policy Resource Page The Internet Privacy Coalition Electronic Frontier Foundation's(EFF) Crypto Archive Electronic Privacy Information Center's(EPIC) Crypto Resources Voters Telecommunications Watch (VTW) RSA Cryptography FAQ - An excellent Net resource on the technical aspects of cryptography Back to the CDT Cryptography Page Back to the CDT Home Page This Page Last Updated 06/10/96 | For more Information, write webmaster@cdt.orgWT02-B05-6IA095-001027-B029-10http://www.cdt.org:80/crypto/legis_105/pro_CODE/ 205.177.10.31 19970215004755 text/html 2437HTTP/1.0 200 OKDate: Sat, 15 Feb 1997 00:46:39 GMTServer: Apache/1.1.1Content-type: text/html CDT | Cryptography Issues - 105th Congress: Pro-CODE 105TH CONGRESS The Pro-CODE Bill First Posted on January 28, 1997 || Updated on February 2, 1997 | Latest News | | Background | Show your support for the new Pro-CODE bill Sign the Petition to Protect Privacy and Security Online! LATEST NEWS Senators Burns, Leahy, Wyden and Others to Re-Introduce Pro-CODE bill [Updated February 2, 1997] At a news conference Tuesday, January 28, Senators Conrad Burns (R-MT), Patrick Leahy(D-VT), and Ron Wyden (D-OR) announced that they will re-introduce the"Promotion of Commerce Online in the Digital Era" (Pro-CODE) bill. The "Pro-CODE" bill,which attracted significant bi-partisan support last year, would relaxexports controls on encryption technologies and promote the widespreadavailability of strong, easy-to-use privacy and security technologies forthe Internet. The bill is expected to be officially introduced in the coming weeks. More information will be posted on as soon as it becomes available. Press Release by Senator Conrad Burns (R-MT) Background on Pro-CODE Background and text of the previous Pro-CODE bill (104th Congress) Back to the CDT Cryptography Page Back to the CDT Home Page This Page Last Updated 02/02/97 || For more information, write webmaster@cdt.orgWT02-B05-7IA095-001027-B029-24http://www.cdt.org:80/crypto/970109_Karn_Court.html 205.177.10.31 19970215004804 text/html 1965HTTP/1.0 200 OKDate: Sat, 15 Feb 1997 00:46:47 GMTServer: Apache/1.1.1Content-type: text/html CDT | Karn Circuit Court Arguments, 1/9/97 Circuit Court Hears Challenge to Crypto Regulations First Posted on January 9, 1997 The U.S. Court of Appeals for the D.C. Circuit hears oral arguments Friday (Jan. 10) in a challenge to the encryption export control regulations. Plaintiff Phil Karn is arguing that the encryption licensing scheme -- which prohibits his export of encryption source code on a disk, but allows the export of identical source code when printed -- is an unconstitutional priorrestraint on free speech and is unlawfully arbitrary and capricious as applied. This is the first encryption challenge to be heard at the Circuit Court level. It comes on the heels of a California federal court ruling in a similar case that export controls are an unconstitutional prior restraint. Phil Karn's archive of the case The latest brief in the case from Karn's attorneys at Venable, Baetjer. Cryptography Issues Page CDT home page This Page Last Updated 01/09/97 || For more information, write webmaster@cdt.orgWT02-B05-8IA095-001027-B029-50http://www.cdt.org:80/crypto/clipper311/ 205.177.10.31 19970215004817 text/html 5506HTTP/1.0 200 OKDate: Sat, 15 Feb 1997 00:47:01 GMTServer: Apache/1.1.1Content-type: text/html CDT | Clipper 3.1.1 Clipper 3.1.1 First Posted on October 1, 1996 || Updated on January 9, 1997 | Latest News | | Background | | News Archives | LATEST NEWS Commerce Department Issues New Crypto Regs, Maintains Export Controls onStrong Encryption [Updated January 9, 1997] The Administration has released regulations that continue exportcontrols on strong encryption while shifting those controls to the CommerceDepartment. The new rules would permit export of moderately stronger 56-bitencryption systems -- but for the next two years only, and only bycompanies that make "satisfactory commitments" to develop and market "keyrecovery" products. The rules also provide a first look at detailed newregulations and criteria for government-approved exportable key recoverysystems. The new rules take effect immediately; however, comments on the new Commerce Department regulations may be submitted to the Department until February 13. Text of the rule amending the Commerce Department's Export Administration Regulations [EAR]. This rule establishes new encryption regulations under the Commerce Department. Text of the rule amending the International Traffic in Arms Regulations [ITAR]. This rule transfers jurisdiction of most encryption products from the State Department to the Commerce Department. Leading Software Companies Frustrated with Administration Encryption Plan [Posted on December 5, 1996] On December 2, the Business Software Alliance, a Washington, D.C.-based trade organization of software manufacturers, sent a letter to Vice President Gore raising questions about the implementation of the Administration's new encryption proposal. In the letter, BSA President Robert Holleyman warns the Vice President that unless the Administration "radically changes its approach immediately, ... the new policy is destined to fail just like its predecessor Clipper efforts." BSA Letter to Vice President Gore BSA Letter to the Interagency Working Group on Encryption, dated November 8 Background on Clipper 3.1.1 Law Enforcement Gets Keys; Internet Users Left Out in the Cold On Tuesday October 1, the Clinton Administration announced its plan to ease export controls on strong encryption. Technology companies would be able to export products that use 56-bit encryption for the next two years - contingent on the companies' promise to distribute "key recovery" products after that two-year period. CDT Policy Post 2.35 - Latest Admin Crypto Policy Pushes Key Escrow Text of Vice President Gore's Press Statement Statement by Sen. Conrad Burns (R-MT) regarding the proposed policy Statement by Sen. Patrick Leahy (D-VT) regarding the proposed policy "Clinton Encryption Plan Is Generating Resistance" - New York Times article [October 2, 1996] [Must be registered with NYT web site to access article] "White House Releases Encryption Export Plan" - Interactive Week article [October 1, 1996] "U.S. to Ease Encryption Restrictions" - Washington Post article [October 1, 1996] Information about the "Clipper III" proposal Information about the "Clipper and Clipper II" proposals Back to the CDT Cryptography Issues Page CDT Home Page This Page Last Updated 1/09/97 || For more information, write webmaster@cdt.orgWT02-B05-9IA095-001027-B029-68http://www.cdt.org:80/crypto/961218_Bernstein_ruling.html 205.177.10.31 19970215004825 text/html 1856HTTP/1.0 200 OKDate: Sat, 15 Feb 1997 00:47:09 GMTServer: Apache/1.1.1Content-type: text/html CDT | Bernstein Ruling, 12/18/96 Court Decision Challenges Constitutionality of Crypto Export Controls First Posted on December 18, 1996 A Federal judge in San Francisco has issued an opinion in Dan Bernstein's challenge to U.S.encryption laws, invalidating export control provisions on encryption source code as anunconstitutional prior restraint on free speech. CDT Analysis of the Decision Electronic Frontier Foundation's Archive on the Bernstein case "Encryption Software Curbs Ruled Unconstitutional" - Washington Post article [December 19, 1996] Previous CDT Headline: Important Hurdle Cleared in Bernstein Case [April 17, 1996] Cryptography Issues Page CDT home page This Page Last Updated 12/19/96 || For more information, write webmaster@cdt.orgWT02-B05-10IA095-001027-B029-81http://www.cdt.org:80/crypto/pro_CODE.html 205.177.10.31 19970215004834 text/html 4662HTTP/1.0 200 OKDate: Sat, 15 Feb 1997 00:47:19 GMTServer: Apache/1.1.1Content-type: text/html CDT | Cryptography Issues - 104th Congress: Pro-CODE 104TH CONGRESS S. 1726 - the Pro-CODE Act of 1996 First Posted on May 2, 1996 | Last Updated on January 28, 1997 | Background | | News Archives | Show your support for the new Pro-CODE bill Sign the Petition to Protect Privacy and Security Online! Background on Pro-CODE In a move to replace the Cold War-era regulations on encryption withpolicies that make sense for the global Internet, Senators Conrad Burns (R-MT),Bob Dole (R-KS), Patrick Leahy (D-VT), Larry Pressler (R-SD), Ron Wyden(D-OR), Patty Murray (D-WA), and others introduced legislation on May 2, 1996 to roll back the restrictions prohibiting the exportof strong encryption technology. The bill, entitled the "Promotion of Commerce On-Line in the Digital Era(Pro-CODE) Act of 1996", was designed to encourage the widespreadavailability of strong, easy-to-use privacy and security technologies forthe Internet. It was similar to a bill introduced in March by Senators Leahyand Burns, though the new bill did not contain criminal provisions orprovisions imposing liability for third party key holders. The Senate Commerce Committee vote on the bill that was scheduled for Thursday September 12 was postponed indefinitely. Information about the "Pro-CODE" hearings that were cybercast can be found in the "Pro-CODE" News Archives. Text of S. 1726 CDT Resources CDT's Analysis of S.1726 CDT Policy Post 2.15:Legislation Challenges Clinton's Grip on US Crypto Policy CDT Policy Post 2.16:Senator Burns Goes Online to Discuss Crypto Bill A CDT-led public interest and industrycoalition letter in support of Pro-CODE was sent to the "Pro-CODE" sponsors on May 2, 1996 On September 9, 1996, CDT sent a letter to Senate Commerce Committee members urging them to report the "Pro-CODE" bill out of the committee without amendment. Statements by Senators upon the bill's introduction Sen. Conrad Burns Sen. Larry Pressler Sen. Bob Dole Sen. Patrick Leahy Congress Goes To The Net Sen. Patrick Leahy sends an open letterto the Net encrypted with PGP -- the first time a member of Congresshas encrypted an official communication. An open Letter to the Net communityfrom Senator Conrad Burns on the introduction of S. 1726. CDT's Congress and The Net Page Press Clips PoliticsUSA/National Journal article - "Unshackling the Net?" May 17, 1996 Visit the Audio/Photo Archives of the SAFE Forum Forum Transcripts also online!! Back to the CDT Cryptography Page Back to the CDT Home Page This Page Last Updated 01/28/97 || For more information, write webmaster@cdt.orgWT02-B05-11IA095-001027-B029-97http://www.cdt.org:80/crypto/clipper311/index.html 205.177.10.31 19970215004842 text/html 5506HTTP/1.0 200 OKDate: Sat, 15 Feb 1997 00:47:26 GMTServer: Apache/1.1.1Content-type: text/html CDT | Clipper 3.1.1 Clipper 3.1.1 First Posted on October 1, 1996 || Updated on January 9, 1997 | Latest News | | Background | | News Archives | LATEST NEWS Commerce Department Issues New Crypto Regs, Maintains Export Controls onStrong Encryption [Updated January 9, 1997] The Administration has released regulations that continue exportcontrols on strong encryption while shifting those controls to the CommerceDepartment. The new rules would permit export of moderately stronger 56-bitencryption systems -- but for the next two years only, and only bycompanies that make "satisfactory commitments" to develop and market "keyrecovery" products. The rules also provide a first look at detailed newregulations and criteria for government-approved exportable key recoverysystems. The new rules take effect immediately; however, comments on the new Commerce Department regulations may be submitted to the Department until February 13. Text of the rule amending the Commerce Department's Export Administration Regulations [EAR]. This rule establishes new encryption regulations under the Commerce Department. Text of the rule amending the International Traffic in Arms Regulations [ITAR]. This rule transfers jurisdiction of most encryption products from the State Department to the Commerce Department. Leading Software Companies Frustrated with Administration Encryption Plan [Posted on December 5, 1996] On December 2, the Business Software Alliance, a Washington, D.C.-based trade organization of software manufacturers, sent a letter to Vice President Gore raising questions about the implementation of the Administration's new encryption proposal. In the letter, BSA President Robert Holleyman warns the Vice President that unless the Administration "radically changes its approach immediately, ... the new policy is destined to fail just like its predecessor Clipper efforts." BSA Letter to Vice President Gore BSA Letter to the Interagency Working Group on Encryption, dated November 8 Background on Clipper 3.1.1 Law Enforcement Gets Keys; Internet Users Left Out in the Cold On Tuesday October 1, the Clinton Administration announced its plan to ease export controls on strong encryption. Technology companies would be able to export products that use 56-bit encryption for the next two years - contingent on the companies' promise to distribute "key recovery" products after that two-year period. CDT Policy Post 2.35 - Latest Admin Crypto Policy Pushes Key Escrow Text of Vice President Gore's Press Statement Statement by Sen. Conrad Burns (R-MT) regarding the proposed policy Statement by Sen. Patrick Leahy (D-VT) regarding the proposed policy "Clinton Encryption Plan Is Generating Resistance" - New York Times article [October 2, 1996] [Must be registered with NYT web site to access article] "White House Releases Encryption Export Plan" - Interactive Week article [October 1, 1996] "U.S. to Ease Encryption Restrictions" - Washington Post article [October 1, 1996] Information about the "Clipper III" proposal Information about the "Clipper and Clipper II" proposals Back to the CDT Cryptography Issues Page CDT Home Page This Page Last Updated 1/09/97 || For more information, write webmaster@cdt.orgWT02-B05-12IA095-001027-B029-111http://www.cdt.org:80/crypto/clipper_III/index.html 205.177.10.31 19970215004859 text/html 2701HTTP/1.0 200 OKDate: Sat, 15 Feb 1997 00:47:35 GMTServer: Apache/1.1.1Content-type: text/html CDT - Clipper III Clipper III Due to the fast moving nature of this issue, updates to this page are made frequently. First Posted on May 21, 1996 Last updated on June 10, 1996 Clipper III: On the Rocks Already? Clinton Administration releases draft of latest proposal to regulate encryption technology Text of the Proposal Thanks to Pat Farrell and John Young for transcribing the document. CDT's Analysis of the Draft Proposal CDT Policy Post 2.20 - Clinton Administration Floats Clipper III Draft "Clipper III Strikes Out": Sen. Conrad Burns (R-MT) criticizes Administration draft proposal Press Clips about Clipper III C|NETNews article May 20, 1996 Interactive Weekarticle by Will Rodger May 18, 1996 Information on the previous Clipper proposals Back to the CDT Cryptography Page Back to the CDT home page This Page Last Updated 06/10/96 | For more information, write webmaster@cdt.orgWT02-B05-13IA095-001027-B029-139http://www.cdt.org:80/crypto/clipper.html 205.177.10.31 19970215004939 text/html 4474HTTP/1.0 200 OKDate: Sat, 15 Feb 1997 00:47:53 GMTServer: Apache/1.1.1Content-type: text/html CDT - Clipper Chip/Clipper II Clipper/Clipper II Archive Clinton Administration Continues to Push For Flawed Crypto Export Policy The Clinton Administration has continued to push its latest key escrow cryptography export proposal, despite a chorus of disapproval from civil liberties advocates and the computer and communications industry. At a public meeting at the National Institute for Standards and Technology (NIST) on December 5, 1995, Administration officials presented a revised version of their proposed Key Escrow Export Criteria (initially proposed in September 1995). The proposal keeps in place the current export ban on strong cryptography, and allows for the export of moderately stronger (64-bit key length) systems meeting strict key escrow criteria. The proposal was roundly criticized by civil liberties organization, companies, and individuals at the December 5, 1995 meeting on the grounds that it would create a barrier to security and privacy on the Net. It is expected that the Administration will soon move forward to formally adopt the proposal as part of its current export criteria for cryptography. Text of Revised Criteria Other NIST documents relating to the revised policy CDT-led Public Interest/Industry Coalition Says Administration Crypto Policy Flawed CDT's Policy Post Announcing the Letter Text of CDT-led Coalition Letter Taxpayer Coalition for Computer Privacy Letter to House Speaker Newt Gingrich opposing the Administration's policy. Clipper II: Clinton Administration Crypto Policy (announced in September 1995) At a conference held at the National Institute of Standards and Technology on September 6-7, 1995, the Clinton Administration announced its revised cryptography policy. Click here to read CDT's statement on the new policy. Relevant Documents from the NIST Conference CDT Testimony before NIST conference on new crypto policy NIST Conference Discussion Papers NIST Discussion Paper No. 3 -- The Proposed Crypto Policy NIST Discussion Paper No. 2 -- Desirable Characteristics for Escrow Agents NIST Discussion Paper No. 1 -- General Issues Other conference documents, including testimony of other participants, can be found here. Press Clips New York Times Reporter Peter Lewis on the NIST conference Clipper Chip proposal Vice President Gore's July 1994 letter to former Rep. Maria Cantwell pledging to re-examine US cryptography policy. The EFF Clipper Archive. Contains NSA documents, testimony by Jerry Berman (now CDT Executive Director), and other relevant materials relating to the failed Clipper Chip Government Key Escrow proposal. (Most of CDT's staff was working at EFF at the time of the Clipper Chip proposal.) Back to the CDT Cryptography Page Back to the CDT home page This Page Last Updated 05/02/96 | For more Information, write webmaster@cdt.orgWT02-B05-14IA095-001027-B029-167http://www.cdt.org:80/crypto/prev_hlines/index.html 205.177.10.31 19970215005008 text/html 1982HTTP/1.0 200 OKDate: Sat, 15 Feb 1997 00:48:51 GMTServer: Apache/1.1.1Content-type: text/html CDT | Previous Crypto Headlines PREVIOUS CRYPTO HEADLINES More of the Same: Gore Announces Administration Statement on Encryption Policy [July 12, 1996] National Research Council Report Calls Administration Crypto Policy into Question [May 31, 1996] Clipper III: Clinton Administration releases draft of its latest encryption policy proposal [May 21, 1996] Twenty-Seven Members of Congress Call on President to Abandon Key Escrow [May 16, 1996] Senators Burns, Dole, Leahy, and Pressler Introduce Legislation to Challenge Clinton Administration's Encryption Export Controls [May 2, 1996] Important Hurdle Cleared in Court Battle to Overturn Crypto Export Controls [April 17, 1996] Back to the CDT Cryptography Page CDT Home Page This Page Last Updated 09/09/96 || For more information, write webmaster@cdt.orgWT02-B05-15IA095-001027-B029-182http://www.cdt.org:80/crypto/NRC_report.html 205.177.10.31 19970215005017 text/html 2559HTTP/1.0 200 OKDate: Sat, 15 Feb 1997 00:49:01 GMTServer: Apache/1.1.1Content-type: text/html CDT - NRC Crypto Report National Research Council Report Calls Administration Crypto Policy into Question First Posted on May 31, 1996 || Last Updated on June 10, 1996 On Thursday May 30, the Computer Science and Telecommunications Board (CSTB) of the National Research Council (NRC) released its comprehensive report on the state of U.S. encryption policy. The report, "Cryptography's Role in Securing the Information Society," not only highlights the need for strong, reliable encryption, it calls the Administration's current cryptography policy in question. Among other things, the report describes how the current US encryptionpolicy is not working, notes that classified information is not relevant tothe policy debate, and outlines the adverse impact export restrictions havehad on the domestic market. In addition, the study emphasizes that marketforces and user choices, not law enforcement or national securityinterests, should drive the development of encryption technologies and thedebate over US cryptography policy. NRC Report Overview and Recommendations Opening Statement given by Kenneth Dam, Chair of the CSTB Committee that issued the Report, upon the release of the report CDT Policy Post 2.22 - NRC Report Calls Admin Crypto Policy Into Question Back to the CDT Cryptography Page Back to the CDT home page This Page Last Updated 06/10/96 | For more Information, write webmaster@cdt.orgWT02-B05-16IA095-001027-B029-203http://www.cdt.org:80/crypto/backg_info.html 205.177.10.31 19970215005026 text/html 4063HTTP/1.0 200 OKDate: Sat, 15 Feb 1997 00:49:09 GMTServer: Apache/1.1.1Content-type: text/html CDT - Crypto Background Info Other Relevant Background Information Encryption Experts Call For Much Longer Key Lengths Seven leading experts on cryptography have released a joint report arguing that dramatically stronger encryption is needed to provide adequate privacy and security for computer users. The study calls for the deployment of 75- to 90-bit key length encryption systems, in contrast to the 40-bit systems currently exportable under Administration policies. The report, "Minimal Key Lengths for Symmetric Ciphers to Provide Adequate Commercial Security" was written by cryptography and computer security experts Matt Blaze, Whitfield Diffie, Ronald Rivest, Bruce Schnier, Tsutomo Shimomura, Eric Thompson, and Michael Weiner. The study joins the mounting body of evidence showing that products exportable under the Clinton Administration's encryption policies do not provide adequate privacy and security. The report argues that computer products with 40-bit encryption keys "offer virtually no protection at this point" from brute force attacks. "To provide adequate protection against the most serious threats... keys used to protect data today should be at least 75 bits long. To protect information adequately for the next 20 years .... keys in newly-deployed systems should be at least 90 bits long." Feb. 1996 CEO's Criticize Encryption Export Policies, Warn of Economic Harm The CEO's of 13 large technology companies published a highly critical report outlining the dangers of current U.S. encryption export control policies. "Perspectives On Security In The Information Age," by the Computer Systems Policy Project, finds that U.S. information industries could lose $30 to $60 billion in annual revenues by the year 2000 due to export controls. Jan. 1996 Commerce Department Releases Study on Availability of Encryption Abroad The Department of Commerce has released its long-awaited study on the foreign availability of encryption products. Jan. 1996 Administration Publishes Personal Use Exemption for Encryption Exports The State Department has published a "personal use exemption" for the export of cryptography, for the first time allowing computer users to take their encryption tools with them while travelling abroad. Feb. 1996 Justice Dept. Drops Case Against Phil Zimmermann, PGP Author A tremendous personal victory for Phil Zimmerman, though fundamental privacy issues remain unresolved. CDT's statement on the decision to drop the case and the unresolved privacy issues left in its wake Press Release Announcing DoJ's Decision to Drop the Case Back to the CDT Cryptography Page Back to the CDT Home Page This Page Last Updated 05/02/96 | For more Information, write webmaster@cdt.orgWT02-B05-17IA095-001027-B029-221http://www.cdt.org:80/crypto/priv_tools.html 205.177.10.31 19970215005035 text/html 1406HTTP/1.0 200 OKDate: Sat, 15 Feb 1997 00:49:19 GMTServer: Apache/1.1.1Content-type: text/html CDT - Privacy Tools Protecting Your Privacy - Tools for Internet Users Access to Encryption Tools -- Where to Get PGP Download your own copy of Pretty Good Privacy, the highly touted public-key encryption program. Read The FAQ First: Frequently Asked Questions About PGP U.S.-only Distribution via MIT Distribution Outside of the U.S. (Information) Back to the CDT Cryptography Page Back to the CDT Home Page This Page Last Updated 05/02/96 | For more Information, write webmaster@cdt.orgWT02-B05-18IA095-001027-B029-235http://www.cdt.org:80/privacy/health/index.html 205.177.10.31 19970215005045 text/html 10299HTTP/1.0 200 OKDate: Sat, 15 Feb 1997 00:49:29 GMTServer: Apache/1.1.1Content-type: text/html CDT's Health Information Privacy Issues Page CDT's Health Information Privacy Issues Page HEADLINES Upcoming Hearings Explore Health Information Privacy Options [February 2, 1997] On February 3-4 and February 18-19, the National Committee on Vital and Health Statistics (NCVHS) Subcommittee on Privacy and Confidentiality will hold public hearings to discuss the various options for implementing health information privacy standards. The subcommittee is holding these hearings so it may develop recommendations to give to the Secretary of Health and Human Services (HHS) in preparation for an HHS report to Congress regarding privacy standards of individually identifiable health information. This report is required by the "Administrative Simplification" subtitle of the "Health Insurance Portability and Accountability Act of 1996" (Pub. L. 104-191, Section 264). Issues covered at the hearing will include the full range of fair information practices, patient rights, limitations on use and disclosure of identifiable information, health identification number, preemption of state laws, and privacy-enhancing technology. The hearings will be held on February 3-4 and February 18-19 from 9 a.m.-5 p.m. at the Hubert H. Humphrey Building (200 Independence Avenue, SW), Room 503A, Washington, D.C. The hearings are open to the public, but seating is limited. The public is also invited to send written comments to the subcommittee. All comments to the subcommittee must be received by February 19th. Federal Register Notice About the Meetings Previous Headlines New Electronic Health Information Provisions Pose Privacy Risks [August 16, 1996] While S. 1360 (the Bennett-Leahy bill) remains in limbo,Congress did take some action that impacts medical records privacy before they began the summer recess. The recently-passed Kennedy-Kassebaum Health Insurance Portability andAccountability Act of 1996 (HR 3103) contains a section known as "Administrative Simplification." This section of the Act mandates thedevelopment and adoption of standards for electronic exchanges of health information. It also mandates that Congress or the Secretary of Health andHuman Services develop privacy rules to govern such electronic exchanges; however, these rules may not be in place before the electronic system is implemented. More details about "Administrative Simplification" -- CDT Policy Post 2.30 Washington Post Article about the New Electronic Health Information Provisions Washington Post Editorial CDT Testifies at Congressional Hearing regarding Medical Records Confidentiality [June 14, 1996] CDT was one of four witnesses to testify at the House Government Management, Information and Technology Subcommittee hearing held on medical records confidentiality on June 14, 1996. Two bills are currently being considered in the House: Rep. Gary Condit (D-CA) introduced the Fair Health Information PracticesAct (H.R. 435) in January, 1995, and Rep. Jim McDermott recently introduced the "Medical Privacy in the Age of New Technologies Act." Joining CDT as witnesses at the hearings were the American Health Information Management Association, the American Psychiatirc Association, and the National Association of Chain Drug Stores. Text of CDT's testimony Supreme Court Recognizes Psychotherapy-Patient Privacy Rights [June 14, 1996] On June 13, the U.S. Supreme Court held in a 7-2 decision that notes of conversations takenduring sessions between a patient and a social worker/therapist areprotected from compelled disclosure in court. In Jaffee v. Redmond, theCourt recognized that preserving the privilege of confidentiality in therelationship between a therapists and patients is critical to developingtrust and thus ensuring successful treatment. Given the recent trend toward computerization of medical information, including medical health records, CDT hails the Jaffee decision as a great step in protecting the privacy of those records. Summary of Court Decision Opinion Dissent Mark-up of Medical Privacy Bill Postponed Indefinitely. [May 13, 1996] The mark-up of The Medical Records Confidentiality Act (S.1360), originally scheduled for April 24, has been postponed indefinitely by the Senate Labor and Human Resources Committee. The Committee has delayed action on S.1360 (also known as the Bennett-Leahy bill after its chief sponsors) to give the pharmaceutical industry and health data companies an opportunity to express their concerns about the privacy provisions in the bill. Following recommendations from CDT and other privacy and consumer groups seeking to strengthen the bill, a new version of S.1360 was drafted by Senators Nancy Kassebaum (R-KA) and Edward Kennedy (D-MA). The new version was released April 10. (See CDT Policy Post 2.14 - April 12, 1996.) CDT opposes any weakening of the current version of S.1360. CDT has sent a letter of support for the Bennett-Leahy bill to Senators Kassebaum and Kennedy. The letter was signed by a wide variety of consumer, privacy and patient advocates, as well as health care providers, researchers, employers, and information technology companies. Text of S.1360 via Thomas Large file - 60k Text of CDT's letter of support CDT Policy Post 2.14 - Key Senators Strengthen Medical Privacy Bill: Mark-up Set for April 24. April 12, 1996 CDT Policy Post 2.11 - CDT Proposes Changes to Improve Med-Privacy Bill March 21, 1996 Key Senators Strengthen Medical Privacy Bill: Mark-up Set for April 24. April 12, 1996 On April 24, 1996, the Senate Labor and Human Resources Committee will consider S. 1360, the "Medical Records Confidentiality Act". A recently strengthened S. 1360 would create strong, comprehensive privacy safeguards for the health data of all Americans. CDT supports the Bennett-Leahy bill and believes that its enactment would create strong, enforceable privacy protections where few currently exist. When the bill was first introduced in October 1995, some in the privacy policy community argued that the bill did not go far enough. CDT, along with other public interest advocates and consumer groups, recommended changes to the bill to strengthen the proposal and ensure that individuals are better able to control access to and disclosure of their private health records. The revised bill, rewritten by Senators Nancy Kassebaum (R-KA) and Edward Kennedy (D-MA), incorporates many of the key changes recommended by CDT, the CDT-led coalition, and others in the public interest community, including Public Citizen and EPIC. Landmark Health Privacy Legislation Introduced On Tuesday, October 24, 1995 Senator Robert Bennett (R-UT), along with Majority Leader Bob Dole (R-KS), Labor and Human Resources Committee Chair Nancy Kassebaum (R-KS), Edward Kennedy (D-MA), and Patrick Leahy (D-VT) introduced the "Medical Records Confidentiality Act" (S. 1360). The bill is designed to create strong, comprehensive privacy safeguards for the health data of all Americans. CDT Policy Post No. 27 - Landmark Privacy Legislation Introduced in Senate Link to Text of the Bennett/Leahy Bill (S. 1360) via Thomas CDT's summary of the bill CDT's section-by-section analysis of the bill Senate Labor and Human Resources Committee Holds Hearing on S. 1360 The Senate Labor and Human Resources Committee, chaired by Sen. Nancy Kassebaum (R-KS and co-sponsor of S. 1360) held a hearing on November 14, 1995 to consider the Medical Records Confidentiality Act. CDT Deputy Director Janlori Goldman testified before the panel. CDT Deputy Director Janlori Goldman's Testimony Last Update February 2, 1997 || For More Information, write webmaster@cdt.org Back to the CDT Privacy Issues Page Back to the CDT Home Page WT02-B05-19IA095-001027-B029-260http://www.cdt.org:80/publications/pp_2.37.html 205.177.10.31 19970215005056 text/html 17426HTTP/1.0 200 OKDate: Sat, 15 Feb 1997 00:49:38 GMTServer: Apache/1.1.1Content-type: text/html CDT Policy Post 2.37 - Privacy Issues Wrap-Up -----------------------------------------------------------------------------    _____ _____ _______   / ____|  __ \__   __|   ____        ___               ____             __  | |    | |  | | | |     / __ \____  / (_)______  __   / __ \____  _____/ /_  | |    | |  | | | |    / /_/ / __ \/ / / ___/ / / /  / /_/ / __ \/ ___/ __/  | |____| |__| | | |   / ____/ /_/ / / / /__/ /_/ /  / ____/ /_/ (__  ) /_   \_____|_____/  |_|  /_/    \____/_/_/\___/\__, /  /_/    \____/____/\__/   The Center for Democracy and Technology  /____/     Volume 2, Number 37----------------------------------------------------------------------------      A briefing on public policy issues affecting civil liberties online---------------------------------------------------------------------------- CDT POLICY POST Volume 2, Number 37                      November 5, 1996 CONTENTS: (1) End of Session Wrap-Up of Online Privacy Issues           (2) P-Trak Update           (3) How to Subscribe/Unsubscribe           (4) About CDT, contacting us  ** This document may be redistributed freely with this banner intact **        Excerpts may be re-posted with permission of <editor@cdt.org>         ** This document looks best when viewed in COURIER font **-----------------------------------------------------------------------------(1) END OF SESSION WRAP-UP OF ONLINE PRIVACY ISSUESWith Congress adjourned and the campaign season behind us, we have a chance to step back and look at online privacy issues.  While there were somedisappointments during the year, there were also signs of progress.  The issue of personal privacy itself was consistently on the public radar screenover the past year.  The media's spotlight is increasingly focused oninformation privacy.  CDT's privacy demonstration site continues to receive over 1000 hits a day, and a number or recent studies indicate growing publicconcern with the loss of privacy.Numerous federal agencies have launched privacy intiatives focused on the impact of new technologies.  Several members of Congress introduced legislation on privacy issues ranging from the protection of medical information, to the development of privacy-enhancing technology.  The Administration appears poised to create a yet-to-be-defined "privacy entity" that would, at least, coordinate the Administrations' privacy efforts or, at best, advocate on behalf of individual privacy.In addition, there has been some market response to public outcries over theloss of personal privacy --- forcing one company to revise a product and anumber of other companies to step forward with a policy to provide consumerswith a bit more control over their personal information.  Progress made in protecting personal privacy:*  LEGISLATION:  Provisions in three recently passed laws begin to address   privacy concerns in personal information regarding individuals' telephone    usage, individuals personal health information, and personal information    held by credit bureaus.           CUSTOMER PROPRIETARY NETWORK INFORMATION (CPNI):  A relatively     unknown part of the recently enacted Telecommunications Reform Act of     1995 is a win for personal privacy.  The CPNI provisions limits the      use and disclosure of CPNI -- information which relates to the      quantity, technical configuration, type, destination, and amount of use     of a telecommunications service by a customer and is available to the      carrier solely by virtue of the carrier-customer relationship -- to the      telecommunications service for which the information was collected or      for other services that are necessary to or used in the provision of      that service.  The law also provides individuals a legal right to access     their own CPNI.         The CPNI provisions are an important step forward in recognizing     an individual privacy interest in transactional information.  Similar to     the provisions regulating law enforcement access to transactional data      under the Digital Telephony Bill (CALEA), the CPNI provisions recognize      that individuals have a privacy interest in transactional data, akin to      the privacy interest in the actual contents of their communications.  In     addition, the CPNI rules set an important precedent by regulating the      private sectors use of transactional information.  The Federal      Communications Commission (FCC) issued a proposed rule in June, 1996 and      received comments.  The final rule on the implementation of this      provision should be issued shortly.          HEALTH INFORMATION:  The recently-passed Kennedy-Kassebaum "Health      Insurance Portability and Accountability Act of 1996" included the first     guarantee of a federal policy to govern the privacy of health      information in electronic form.  While provisions of the Act mandating      the speedy development and adoption of standards for electronic      exchanges of health information are troublesome given the lack of      strong, enforceable laws protecting patient privacy, the law contains a     mandate that privacy rules be enacted by either the Congress or the      Executive Branch within the next four years.         CREDIT INFORMATION:  The public outcry over the sale of personal      information by Lexis-Nexis's P-Trak service prompted Congress to request     a Federal Reserve Board study examining the risk of fraud raised by the      disclosure of personal information.  In addition, the P-Trak furor may      have played a roll in nixing an industry-backed exemption to the Fair      Credit Reporting Act (FCRA) which would have allowed credit reports to      be used to generate target marketing lists.  This type of credit report      use is currently against FTC rules interpreting the FCRA.   Privacy-related bills introduced during the 104th Congress:        HEALTH INFORMATION:  Late last year, Sen. Robert Bennett (R-UT) and     Sen. Patrick Leahy (D-VT) introduced S. 1360, the "Medical Records      Confidentiality Act".  A complimentary bill was introduced by Rep. Jim      McDermott (D-WA), the "Medical Privacy in the Age of New Technologies      Act".        ONLINE PRIVACY:  This past June, Congressman Ed Markey (D-MA)     introduced the "Communications Privacy and Consumer Empowerment Act".       This bill was designed to address concerns over the collection and use      of personal information generated and collected online.  Late in the      session, Rep. Bruce Vento introduced "The Consumer Internet Privacy      Protection Act of 1996", also aimed at protecting the privacy of      information collected and generated during online activities.         CHILDREN'S PRIVACY:  A hearing was held on Rep. Bob Frank's bill,      "The Children's Privacy Protection and Parental Empowerment Act of      1996."  As noted by CDT, People For the American Way, the Electronic      Frontier Foundation, and Voters Telecommunications Watch, the CPPPEA      raises a number of privacy and First Amendment problems for the      Internet.  *  GOV'T AGENCIES FOCUS ON PRIVACY:  Federal agencies, such as the Federal    Trade Commission (FTC) and the NTIA (National Telecommunications and    Information Administration), have turned the spotlight on the impact of    technological advances on individual privacy.  In June, the FTC held a    workshop on online consumer privacy.  Privacy advocates, industry    representatives, and FTC officials gathered to discuss the privacy issues   posed by the evolving online world, and potential policy and technology    solutions.*  PUBLIC CONCERN AND NEWS COVERAGE:  The mainstream media's coverage of    privacy issues has increased dramatically.  The Lexis-Nexis P-Trak    controversy and the threats to medical records privacy garnered national    headlines.  A number of recent reports, such as a Georgia Tech survey    and Louis Harris poll, point to a growing public concern with the loss of    personal privacy in and out of the online world.   *  CDT PRIVACY DEMO AND CLEARINGHOUSE:  Launched in June, CDT's Privacy    Demonstration and Privacy Policy Clearinghouse seeks to educate the    public about the extent to which personal information can be revealed    online.  When an Internet user visits the Privacy Demo, it displays    information about the user such as the kind of web browser and type of    computer they use, even the user's location and e-mail address.  The    Privacy Demo continues to receive an average of 1,000 hits a day.  *  MARKET RESPONSES:  In some instances, the market has responded to public    outcries over threats to personal privacy.  This summer, information    service Lexis-Nexis was forced to revise a new online database, P-Trak,    suppressing social security numbers.  A number of Internet companies,    including Four11, I/PRO, and Match.com, formed a group called "Privacy    Assured" -- the members of the group agreed to a set of privacy    principles relating to the personal information that is collected, used,    and disseminated at their web sites.*  FEDERAL GOV'T PRIVACY ENTITY:  Last month, Sally Katzen, head of the    Office of Management and Budget's Office of Information Regulatory    Affairs, announced that the Administration was considering various    options for the creation of a federal privacy entity, or coordinating    function, within the Executive Branch.  Pressure from privacy advocates    and the public, coupled with the European Union's Data Protection    Directive has created a climate where privacy issues may be given the    consideration and deliberation they deserve at the national deserve.     A report discussing the options will be made available for public    comment after the elections.Privacy setbacks:*  HEALTH INFORMATION:  The failure to enact comprehensive privacy    legislation to protect health information, such as the proposed    Bennett-Leahy "Medical Records Confidentiality Act", was a    disappointment.  The push to automate our health information embodied    in the Kennedy-Kassebaum "Health Insurance Portability and    Accountability Act of 1996," raises the stakes in the battle to protect    personal health records.*  GOV'T COLLECTION OF PERSONAL INFORMATION:  Despite growing public    concern over attacks on personal privacy, Congress passed legislation    that will escalate the collection of personal information by the    government.  Pressure to prevent fraud, to more effectively allocate    sparse government dollars, and to ensure that people are who they claim    to be, led to the enactment of laws that track and monitor the behavior    of individuals in order to identify "dead-beat dads", illegal immigrants,   welfare cheats and others defrauding the public trust.  Massive record   sharing, extension of existing data systems and the creation of new    highly-intrusive people tracking systems are core components of recently    passed welfare and immigration laws.*  CELLULAR PHONE TRACKING:  A battle is being waged to ensure that our    nation's telecommunications system does not become the tracking device    of law enforcement.  The FBI recently requested technical specifications    that would require cellular carriers to have the capability to track and    monitor the whereabouts of anyone carrying a phone -- whether it was in    use or not -- and provide location and other information to law    enforcement on demand.  The proposed standards were rejected by the    cellular industry in September, but other battles over law enforcement's   desire to increase its wire-tapping capability continue, promising to    keep privacy advocates on the watch.When Congress is sworn in this January, CDT will be ready to work with other privacy advocates in building upon this past year's progress on privacy issues.  For more information and updates about these privacy issues, please visit CDT's Privacy Issues Page:     http://www.cdt.org/privacy/------------------------------------------------------------------------(2) P-TRAK UPDATEThis past summer, information service Lexis-Nexis offered a new database to its subscribers called P-Trak.  For a per-use fee, subscribers can use P-Trak obtain personal information about an individual that can include name, current and prior addresses, maiden names, birth month and year, and current telephone number.  Social Security numbers were initally available on P-Trak, however in June, Lexis-Nexis stopped displaying Social Securitynumbers in response to complaints from consumers, privacy advocates, andbusinesses.As news about P-Trak spread over the Internet, more and more people expressed concern over the availability of their personal information online.  In response to a September 20 letter from Senator Richard Bryan (D-NV), the Federal Trade Commission (FTC) immediately recommended that Congress take action to protect the privacy of personal information by amending the Fair Credit Reporting Act (FCRA).  The recommendations called for strengthening the Fair Credit Reporting Act to limit disclosure of information such as social security number, mother's maiden name, prioraddresses, and date of birth.  (See CDT Policy Post 2.33)Despite the recommendations, Congress adjourned without taking action on them.  However, Congress added an amendment to the Omnibus Appropriations Bill which directs the Federal Reserve Board to examine whether the sale of "sensitive consumer identification information" creates "an undue potential for fraud".  Although this is a half-hearted response to the FTC's recommendations and the public's cry for action, it is a small tributeto the power and importance of the Internet in turning public opinion intoaction.  Following passage of the bill, Chairman of the Senate Committee on Commerce, Science and Transportation, Sen. Larry Pressler (R-SD), ranking minority member Senator Ernest Hollings (D-SC), and Senator Richard Bryan (D-NV), sent a letter requesting the FTC to conduct a study of online and databaseprivacy issues.While no legislation was enacted, the outcry over P-Trak proved useful in two other areas.  First, the P-Trak furor may have played a roll in eliminating an industry pushed exemption to the FCRA which would have allowed credit reports to be used to generate target marketing lists --currently against FTC rules interpreting the FCRA.  Second, the recentannouncement by "Privacy Assured", a group of Internet companies that include Four11 and I/PRO, to voluntarily comply with a series of privacyprotective information practices is clearly tied to a desire to respond topublic concerns over individual privacy. For more information, including the text of the Senators' letter to the FTCand the text of the bill requesting the Federal Reserve study, please visit the CDT Privacy Issues page:     http://www.cdt.org/privacy/------------------------------------------------------------------------(3) SUBSCRIPTION INFORMATIONBe sure you are up to date on the latest public policy issues affectingcivil liberties online and how they will affect you! Subscribe to the CDTPolicy Post news distribution list.  CDT Policy Posts, the regular newspublication of the Center For Democracy and Technology, are received bynearly 10,000 Internet users, industry leaders, policy makers andactivists, and have become the leading source for information aboutcritical free speech and privacy issues affecting the Internet and otherinteractive communications media.To subscribe to CDT's Policy Post list, send mail to     policy-posts-request@cdt.orgwith a subject:     subscribe policy-postsIf you ever wish to remove yourself from the list, send mail to theabove address with a subject of:     unsubscribe policy-posts-----------------------------------------------------------------------(4) ABOUT THE CENTER FOR DEMOCRACY AND TECHNOLOGY/CONTACTING USThe Center for Democracy and Technology is a non-profit public interestorganization based in Washington, DC. The Center's mission is to developand advocate public policies that advance democratic values andconstitutional civil liberties in new computer and communicationstechnologies.Contacting us:General information:  info@cdt.orgWorld Wide Web:       URL:http://www.cdt.org/FTP                   URL:ftp://ftp.cdt.org/pub/cdt/Snail Mail:  The Center for Democracy and Technology             1634 Eye Street NW * Suite 1100 * Washington, DC 20006             (v) +1.202.637.9800 * (f) +1.202.637.0968-----------------------------------------------------------------------End Policy Post 2.37                                            11/5/96----------------------------------------------------------------------- Return to the CDT Publications Page Return to the CDT Privacy Issues Page CDT Home Page WT02-B05-20IA095-001027-B029-279http://www.cdt.org:80/privacy/960920_Lexis.html 205.177.10.31 19970215005105 text/html 8050HTTP/1.0 200 OKDate: Sat, 15 Feb 1997 00:49:50 GMTServer: Apache/1.1.1Content-type: text/html CDT | FTC Recommends Changes/P-TRAK P-Trak Database First Posted on September 20, 1996 || Updated November5, 1996 UPDATE Congress Requests Federal Reserve Study in Responseto P-Trak Controversy [November 5, 1996] Before it adjourned for the year, Congress added an amendmentto the Omnibus Appropriations Bill which directs the Federal Reserve Boardto examine whether the sale of "sensitive consumer identificationinformation" creates "an undue potential for fraud". Althoughthis is a half-hearted response to the FTC's recommendations and the public'scry for action, it is a small tribute to the power and importance of theInternet in turning public opinion into action. Following passage of the bill, Chairman of the SenateCommittee on Commerce, Science and Transportation, Sen. Larry Pressler(R-SD), ranking minority member Senator Ernest Hollings (D-SC), and SenatorRichard Bryan (D-NV), sent a letter requesting the FTC to conduct a studyof online and database privacy issues. While no legislation was enacted, the outcry over P-Trakproved useful in two other areas. First, the P-Trak furor may have playeda roll in eliminating an industry pushed exemption to the FCRA which wouldhave allowed credit reports to be used to generate target marketing lists-- currently against FTC rules interpreting the FCRA. Second, the recentannouncement by "Privacy Assured", a group of Internet companiesthat include Four11 and I/PRO, to voluntarily comply with a series of privacyprotective information practices is clearly tied to a desire to respondto public concerns over individual privacy. FTC Recommends Changes to Protect Personal Information[September 20, 1996] On Friday, September 20, the Federal Trade Commissionrecommended that Congress take action to protect the privacy of personalinformation by amending the Fair Credit Reporting Act (FCRA). The FTC'srecommendations -- included in a letter to SenatorRichard Bryan (D-NV) -- come on the heels of consumer outrage beingexpressed over the recently-released online database, P-Trak, offered bythe information service Lexis-Nexis. P-Trak provides personal information on millions of peopleacross the country. For a fee, Lexis-Nexis subscribers can obtain personalinformation about an individual that can include name, current and prioraddresses, maiden names, birth month and year, and current telephone number.In June, Lexis-Nexis stopped displaying Social Security numbers in responseto complaints from consumers and privacy advocates about the availabilityof that information. However, P-Trak users can still search the databaseby Social Security number. In response to Sen. Bryan's inquiry, FederalTrade Commission (FTC) Chairman Robert Pitofsky notes in the Sept.20 letter that "... [t]he ready availability of this information throughthe tracking service may facilitate identity fraud, credit fraud, and otherillegal activities." Chairman Pitofsky recommends strengthening theFair Credit Reporting Act to provide protection to information such associal security number, mother's maiden name, prior addresses, and dateof birth. Those who are interested in removing their personal informationfrom the database can contact Lexis-Nexis: Web: http://www.lexis-nexis.com/lncc/p-trak/ Fax: 513-865-1930 E-mail: p-trak@prod.lexis-nexis.com Snail Mail: Lexis-Nexis, ATTN: P-TRAK, P.O. Box 933,Dayton, OH 45401. Please provide your full name and complete address. CDT Policy Post2.33 - FTC Recommends Changes to Protect Personal Information Lexis-NexisStatement regarding P-TRAK Text of the 9/20/96 Letterfrom FTC Chairman Robert Pitofsky FTCPress Release regarding recommendations and letter, 9/23/96 FTC Web Site Press Clips [Note: on many browsers,links will open a new window] "Awashin Information" - Washington Post editorial, 9/28/96. "FTCSeeks Credit Agency Access Limits" - Washington Post article,9/24/96. "FTCcomes along on e-privacy" - c|net news.com article, 9/23/96. "OnlineDatabases Raise Orwellian Fears" - Washington Post article, 9/20/96. "Privacyissue raised over Lexis-Nexis database" - San Jose Mercury Newsarticle, 9/19/96. "Furorover personal info on Net" - San Francisco Examiner article, 9/19/96. "Servicepulls Social Security numbers" - c|net news.com article, 6/12/96. CDT Presents Testimonyat FTC Hearings [June 5, 1996] Back to the CDT Privacy Issues Page CDT home page This Page Last Updated 11/05/96 || For more information, write webmaster@cdt.orgWT02-B05-21IA095-001027-B029-299http://www.cdt.org:80/privacy/prev_head.html 205.177.10.31 19970215005114 text/html 2399HTTP/1.0 200 OKDate: Sat, 15 Feb 1997 00:49:58 GMTServer: Apache/1.1.1Content-type: text/html CDT | Previous Privacy Headlines Previous Privacy-Related Headlines Hearing Held on "Children's Privacy" Legislation [September 13, 1996] New Electronic Health Information Provisions Pose Privacy Risks [August 16, 1996] Rep. Markey introduces Online Privacy Legislation [June 20, 1996] CDT Testifies at Congressional Hearing regarding Medical Records Confidentiality [June 14, 1996] Supreme Court Recognizes Psychotherapy-Patient Privacy Rights [June 14, 1996] Congress and FTC Focus on Online Privacy Issues [June 7, 1996] CDT Presents Testimony at FTC Hearings [June 5, 1996] CDT Privacy Issues Page Back to the CDT Home Page Last Updated 02/02/97 || For more information, write webmaster@cdt.org WT02-B05-22IA095-001027-B029-324http://www.cdt.org:80/privacy/snoop.html 205.177.10.31 19970215005124 text/html 8321HTTP/1.0 200 OKDate: Sat, 15 Feb 1997 00:50:07 GMTServer: Apache/1.1.1Content-type: text/html CDT Privacy Demo Page - Online Services CDT Thanks Justin Boyan,Eddie Codel,and SameerParekh for their work with the demonstration Who's Watching You and What are You Telling Them? Many people surf the web under the illusion that their actions are private and anonymous. Unfortunately, there is more information collected about you than you might think. Every time you visit a site, you leave a calling card that reveals where you're coming from, what kind of computer you have, and many other details. Most sites keep logs of all visitors. But Others May Know A Lot More... As a small non-profit public interest organization, CDT's web pages reside on a server run by our (very accommodating) Internet service provider, and as a result, our ability to collect even more revealing personal information than what is displayed above is limited. However, a web site operator with the right equipment and the desire to do so can easily obtain your e-mail address, the exact files you viewed, and other detailed information without your knowledge. And you reveal information to web site operators both directly and indirectly. How Your Personal Information Gets Collected Web sites and Web browsers Your personal information (including your hobbies, political and product interests and ways to contact you, such as your e-mail address) can be collected by web sites in two ways: directly or indirectly. Passive recording of Transactional Information: The transactional information revealed in the normal course of surfing the net reveals a great deal of information about your online activities. When you visit a particular web site, for example, the webmaster can determine what files, pictures, or other information you are most interested in (and what you ignored), how long you examined a particular page, image or file, where you came from, where you went to. Web servers collect transactional information in order to allow the system operator to perform necessary system maintenance, auditing, and other essential system functions. However, when correlated with other sources of personal information, including marketing databases, phone books, voter registration lists, etc, a detailed profile of your online activities can be created without your knowledge or consent. Cookies: Additionally, many web browsers contain a feature called "cookies," or client-side persistent information. Cookies allows any web site to store information about your visit to that site on your hard drive. Every time you return to that site, "cookies" will read your hard drive to find out if you've been there before. For example, try visiting this web site twice. Direct disclosure of personal information: A growing number of web sites offer users the ability to register with the site. In many cases, registration brings real, important benefits, such as access to special areas, timely information, discounts, etc. While registration or other mechanisms by which users divulge personal information to a web site provide some obvious benefits to a users, it also provides the site's operator with a detailed picture of how you use the site. Regardless of how the information is obtained, a great deal of personally identifiable information is revealed in the normal course of surfing the web. Commercial Online Service Providers Commercial online service providers are configured in a variety of ways, but generally, little personally identifiable information is revealed to Internet sites visited directly from an online service. [Many commercial online service subscribers have reported problems accessing the CDT Privacy Demonstration from their service. This has to do with the configuration of the Internet connection from the online service.] If you subscribe to a commercial online service, your service provider has access to lots of information about your online activities. These records are generated in the normal course of using the service, and are important for billing and maintenance purposes. However, not all services treat the use and disclosure of this information the same way. CDT'S Clearinghouse on Privacy Policies focuses first on the fair information practices of the major commercial online service providers, including America Online, Compuserve, Microsoft Network and Prodigy. Later, CDT will focus on other Internet entities, such as browsers, content providers, and Internet service providers. Why should you care? Although it may not seem like it, someone is following you through cyberspace. Every time you retrieve a file, view an image, send an e-mail message or jump to a new web site, a record is created somewhere on the Net. While much of this information may never be used, it can be, and you have little control over it. In the hands of a marketer with a powerful computer, or the government, it is possible to build a detailed profile of your tastes and preferences by monitoring your online activities. The information can be used to send you unsolicited e-mail or snail mail, to call you, or to even put you on a list of people likely to support a particular political candidate. A single piece of information about you can support a tremendous range of activities. For example, if your repeated visits to web sites containing information on cigarettes results in free samples, coupons, or even e-mail to you about a new tobacco product, you may not be concerned. However, if your visits to these web sites result in escalating insurance premiums due to categorization as a smoker - now you're beginning to get concerned. Privacy Policies and Practices In the United States, there is no comprehensive law that protects people's privacy. Instead a patchwork of Constitutional, statutory and private sector guidelines that protect different areas of your informational privacy. CDT's Web Site Privacy Policy Like virtually all web sites, CDT collects information to analyze traffic patterns and to perform routine system maintenance. We do not use the system logs or other records for any other purpose, nor do we sell, rent or otherwise disclose our mailing lists. For the purposes of this demonstration, we will use information generated during your visit to the Privacy Web site to illustrate examples of what information you are revealing to us. None of the information generated during the course of your visit to this demonstration will be used for any other purposes, and logs will be purged on a regular basis. How to Surf without Being Watched The Anonymizer The Anonymizer was created by Community ConneXion ("C2") for those whose illusions of anonymity have been shattered. It is a web site that shields your personal information from the other web sites that you visit. By visiting the Anonymizer web site before visiting other web sites, you are assigned an anonymous identity which is revealed (instead of your real identity) as you surf the web. It allows you to surf freely, even if you follow a hypertext link to another web site, without having to worry that the web site you are reading is keeping track of who you are and your interests. Continue to the CDT Privacy Issues PageWT02-B05-23IA095-001027-B030-133http://www.cdt.org:80/privacy/how.html 205.177.10.31 19970215005442 text/html 4607HTTP/1.0 200 OKDate: Sat, 15 Feb 1997 00:52:51 GMTServer: Apache/1.1.1Content-type: text/html How Did You Know? "How Did You Know That?" Basically, the amount of information you provide about yourself when you surf the Internet depends on: the type of Internet connection you use (Is it behind a firewall? Is it from a commerical online service provider?), and the kind of browser you are using (and whether you have configured the browser options accurately.) The CGI script for the CDT Privacy Demonstration reflects information thatis obtained from commands such as "finger" and "whois". These commands canbe run on any Unix computer that is connected to the Internet. The scriptexecutes these commands and displays some of the information reported bythose commands. Obtaining the visitor's e-mail address is a bit more tricky. The scriptuses a browser "loophole" to obtain that information. (The "trick"involves anonymous FTP and reading FTP logs.) Not all browsers have this"loophole". This is why e-mail addresses will appear for some sitevisitors, but not others. The script also utilizes a JAVA bug that "makes" a user with a particularbrowser send e-mail to a predesignated address. (This JAVA bug has been corrected in the latest versionsof the browser.) We have set up an automatic reply message that informsthe visitor that they "accidently" sent e-mail to us just by visiting oursite. The information you see about yourself when you visit the site is nothingthat a knowledgeable Internet user or web site owner could obtain aboutyou. CDT had the assistance of three knowledgeable programmers, but as a public interest non-profitorganization, our technical resources aren't very sophisticated. Imaginewhat a well-financed web site operation that includes registration andtracking software could learn about you. An added note: sometimes not all information about a visitor is displayedbecause response times with the server may be slow. This explains whysomeone may get more or less information with repeat visits. Anonymous FTP and the Many computers on the Internet have public areas (FTP sites) where interested users can connect and obtain files. These users do not have to be registered users of the site. When a non-registered user connects to a "public" computer to obtain a file, the user is said to be using anonymous File Transfer Protocol, or anonymous FTP. Many FTP sites ask users who connect anonymously to use their e-mail address as the password into the system. When a user visits the Demonstration site, they obtain the graphic of the Eye by using anonymous FTP. When some web browsers perform anonymous FTP transactions, they automatically use the e-mail address that is configured in the browser preferences as a password into the system. After the visitor obtains the Eye graphic, the script grabs the password (the e-mail address) from the FTP transaction log that is kept for all FTP transactions and displays it to the site visitor. Newer web browsers have changed this convention when using anonymously FTP. They now use a standard password instead of the e-mail address that is configured in the browser settings. Back to the CDT Privacy Issues Content Page Back to the CDT Privacy Demonstration Page Back to the CDT Home Page Last Updated 06/06/96 | For more information, write webmaster@cdt.orgWT02-B05-24IA095-001027-B030-160http://www.cdt.org:80/publications/pp_2.21.html 205.177.10.31 19970215005545 text/html 12312HTTP/1.0 200 OKDate: Sat, 15 Feb 1997 00:54:26 GMTServer: Apache/1.1.1Content-type: text/html Policy Post 2.21 - CDT Unveils Privacy Demo -----------------------------------------------------------------------------    _____ _____ _______   / ____|  __ \__   __|   ____        ___               ____             __  | |    | |  | | | |     / __ \____  / (_)______  __   / __ \____  _____/ /_  | |    | |  | | | |    / /_/ / __ \/ / / ___/ / / /  / /_/ / __ \/ ___/ __/  | |____| |__| | | |   / ____/ /_/ / / / /__/ /_/ /  / ____/ /_/ (__  ) /_   \_____|_____/  |_|  /_/    \____/_/_/\___/\__, /  /_/    \____/____/\__/   The Center for Democracy and Technology  /____/     Volume 2, Number 21----------------------------------------------------------------------------      A briefing on public policy issues affecting civil liberties online---------------------------------------------------------------------------- CDT POLICY POST Volume 2, Number 21                         May 30, 1996 CONTENTS: (1) Your Privacy Online - CDT Unveils Demonstration and                Clearinghouse           (2) Join Rep. White Wed 6/5 At HotWired to Discuss the Internet               Caucus, the CDA, and other Internet Policy Issues           (3) Subscription Information           (4) About CDT, contacting us  ** This document may be redistributed freely with this banner in tact **        Excerpts may be re-posted with permission of -----------------------------------------------------------------------------(1) Your Privacy Online - CDT Unveils Demonstration & ClearinghouseMany people surf the World Wide Web with an illusion of anonymity,believing that their activities are unobserved and that they can explorethe Internet without leaving a trail.  In reality, this is not the case.During the normal course of using the Internet, a great deal of personallyrevealing information is routinely generated, collected, and stored.  Mostof this information is collected for purposes of system maintenance,billing, or other necessary functions.  But a sophisticated marketer,determined hacker, or law enforcement official can put together a detailedprofile of your online activities, personal tastes, interests, habits andvices with relative ease.Today, the Center for Democracy and Technology unveiled an interactiveprivacy demonstration and privacy policy clearinghouse on our World WideWeb site. The demonstration is located at                    http://www.cdt.org/privacy/The goals of the demonstration are two fold:1. To educate the public about the extent to which personal information   is automatically revealed online, and2. To begin to make available examples of privacy and information usage   policies that give people greater knowledge of and control over the   personal information revealed online.  The current focus of this   "Privacy Clearinghouse" is centered on commercial online service   providers (ie, America Online, CompuServe, Prodigy, Microsoft).Future updates of the clearinghouse will include information on InternetService Providers, content providers, and web browser software.  Futureupdates will also explore the extent that users can employ varioustechnological solutions to control the collection and disclosure of personalinformation.FEDERAL TRADE COMMISSION TO HOLD HEARINGS ON ONLINE PRIVACYOn June 4 and 5, the Federal Trade Commission (FTC) will hold hearings toexplore online privacy issues.  The FTC is particularly interested inexploring privacy protecting technologies which empower users to exercisemore control over the collection and use of personally identifiableinformation online.CDT has been invited to present testimony at the hearings.  Testimony andother background information on the FTC hearings will be available at CDT'sweb page at the end of next week. Details on the hearings are available athttp://www.ftc.gov/.WHY SHOULD NETIZENS CARE ABOUT THIS ISSUE?Although it may not seem like it, someone is following you throughcyberspace.  Every time you retrieve a file, view an image, send an emailmessage or jump to a new web site, a record is created somewhere on theNet.While much of this information may never be used, it can be, and you havelittle control over it.  In the hands of a marketer with a powerfulcomputer, or the government, it is possible to build a detailed profile ofyour tastes and preferences by monitoring your online activities.The information can be used to send you unsolicited email or snail mail, tocall you, or to even put you on a list of people likely to support aparticular political candidate.  A single piece of information about youcan support a tremendous range of activities.  For example, if yourrepeated visits to web sites containing information on cigarettes resultsin free samples, coupons, or even email to you about a new tobacco product,you may not be concerned.  However, if your visits to these web sitesresult in escalating insurance premiums due to categorization as a smoker -now you're beginning to get concerned.HOW PERSONAL INFORMATION IS COLLECTED ONLINEWeb sites and Web browsers--------------------------Your personal information (including your hobbies, political and productinterests and ways to contact you, such as your email address) can becollected by web sites in two ways: directly or indirectly.* PASSIVE RECORDING OF TRANSACTIONAL INFORMATION:  The transactional  information revealed in the normal course of surfing the net reveals a  great deal of information about your online activities. When you visit  a particular web site, for example, the webmaster can determine what  files, pictures, or other information you are most interested in (and  what you ignored), how long you examined a particular page, image or  file, where you came from, where you went to.  Web servers collect transactional information in order to allow the  system operator to perform necessary system maintenance, auditing, and  other essential system functions.  However, when correlated with other  sources of personal information, including marketing databases, phone  books, voter registration lists, etc, a detailed profile of your  online activities can be created without your knowledge or consent.* COOKIES: Additionally, many web browsers contain a feature called   "cookies," or client-side persistent information.  Cookies allows any  web site to store information about your visit to that site on your  hard drive.  Every time you return to that site, "cookies" will read  your hard drive to find out if you've been there before. (The Privacy  Demonstration has a link to a site that utilizes cookies.)* DIRECT DISCLOSURE OF PERSONAL INFORMATION: A growing number of web  sites offer users the ability to register with the site.  In many  cases, registration brings real, important benefits, such as access to  special areas, timely information, discounts, etc.  While registration  or other mechanisms by which users divulge personal information to a  web site provide some obvious benefits to a users, it also provides  the site's operator with a detailed picture of how you use the site.Regardless of how the information is obtained, a great deal of personallyidentifiable information is revealed in the normal course of surfing theweb.Commercial Online Service Providers-----------------------------------Commercial online service providers are configured in a variety of ways,but generally, little personally identifiable information is revealed toInternet sites visited directly from an online service.If you subscribe to a commercial online service, your service provider hasaccess to lots of information about your online activities.  These recordsare generated in the normal course of using the service, and are importantfor billing and maintenance purposes.  However, not all services treat theuse and disclosure of this information the same way.Please visit The Center for Democracy and Technology's Clearinghouse onPrivacy Policies (http://www.cdt.org/privacy/) for a detailed description ofthe information practices of the major commercial online services.Future updates of the clearinghouse will focus on other Internet entities,such as browsers, content providers, and Internet service providers.------------------------------------------------------------------------(2) JOIN CONGRESSMAN RICK WHITE (R-WA) LIVE ONLINE TO TALK ABOUT THE    INTERNET CAUCUS, THE CDA, AND TAKE YOUR QUESTIONSCongressman Rick White (R-WA) will be live online at HotWired on WednesdayJune 5 at 9:00 pm ET to discuss his efforts to encourage bettercommunication between members of Congress and the Internet community, hisplans for the Congressional Internet Caucus, and other topics.Representative White will also answer questions from Netizens.DETAILS ON THE EVENT* Wednesday June 5, 9 - 10 pm ET (6 pm Pacific) on HotWired   URL: http://www.hotwired.com/wiredside/To participate, you must be a registered HotWired member (thereis no charge for registration).  You must also have RealAudio(tm) anda telnet application properly configured to work with your browser.Please visit http://www.hotwired.com/wiredside/ for information on howyou can easily register for Hotwired and obtain RealAudio.Wednesday's forum is another in a series of planned events, and is partof a broader project coordinated by CDT and the Voters TelecommunicationsWatch (VTW) designed to bring the Internet Community into the debate andencourage members of Congress to work with the Net.community on vital Internet policy issues.Transcripts from last week's discussion with Senator Leahy are available athttp://www.cdt.org/crypto/.  Events with other members of Congress working on Internet Policy Issues are currently being planned. Please checkhttp://www.cdt.org/ for announcements of future events------------------------------------------------------------------------(3) SUBSCRIPTION INFORMATIONBe sure you are up to date on the latest public policy issues affectingcivil liberties online and how they will affect you! Subscribe to the CDTPolicy Post news distribution list.  CDT Policy Posts, the regular newspublication of the Center For Democracy and Technology, are received bymore than 9,000 Internet users, industry leaders, policy makers andactivists, and have become the leading source for information aboutcritical free speech and privacy issues affecting the Internet and otherinteractive communications media.To subscribe to CDT's Policy Post list, send mail to     policy-posts-request@cdt.orgwith a subject:     subscribe policy-postsIf you ever wish to remove yourself from the list, send mail to theabove address with a subject of:     unsubscribe policy-posts-----------------------------------------------------------------------(4) ABOUT THE CENTER FOR DEMOCRACY AND TECHNOLOGY/CONTACTING USThe Center for Democracy and Technology is a non-profit public interestorganization based in Washington, DC. The Center's mission is to developand advocate public policies that advance democratic values andconstitutional civil liberties in new computer and communicationstechnologies.Contacting us:General information:  info@cdt.orgWorld Wide Web:       URL:http://www.cdt.org/FTP                   URL:ftp://ftp.cdt.org/pub/cdt/Snail Mail:  The Center for Democracy and Technology             1634 Eye Street NW * Suite 1100 * Washington, DC 20006             (v) +1.202.637.9800 * (f) +1.202.637.0968-----------------------------------------------------------------------End Policy Post 2.21                                           5/30/96----------------------------------------------------------------------- Return to the CDT Privacy Demonstration Page Return to the CDT Privacy Issues Page Return to the CDT Publications Page Return to the CDT Home Page WT02-B05-25IA095-001027-B030-177http://www.cdt.org:80/privacy/online_services/chart.html 205.177.10.31 19970215005556 text/html 13441HTTP/1.0 200 OKDate: Sat, 15 Feb 1997 00:54:38 GMTServer: Apache/1.1.1Content-type: text/html CDT Online Services Policies Chart Privacy Policy Chart - Online Service Providers This Privacy Policy Chart details the fair information practices of major commercial online service providers. We arrived at these results by analyzing the service providers' written polices (such as Terms of Service) and policies distributed online to subscribers. Boxes marked Yes indicate that the service provider practices this fair information policy, and that the practice is disclosed to members. Boxes marked No indicate that the service provider does not practice this fair information policy. Boxes marked NP, or "No Policy", indicate that no policy statement is available that informs the subscriber of this fair information practice. Boxes marked n/a, or "not applicable", indicate that the specific fair information practice does not apply to this commercial online service provider. Fair Information Principle / Commerical Online Service America Online CompuServe Information Service Microsoft Network Prodigy 1. Does the service explain its general information practices? (Notice) Yes No Yes Yes Subscription Data 2. Does the service tell you how it intends to use subscription data? (Informed) Yes Yes Yes Yes 3. Can you limit the internal use of subscription data for purposes unrelated to billing and system administration? (Consent for Secondary Use) No Yes Yes Yes 4. Does the service disclose subscription data to third parties, such as direct marketers and content providers? Yes Yes Yes No 5. Can you limit the disclosure of subscription data for purposes unrelated to billing and system administration?(Consent for Secondary Use) Yes Yes Yes n/a Personally Identifiable Transactional Data 6. Does the service tell you what, if any, personally identifiable transactional data -- information about your online activities -- they are gathering and what they use it for? (Informed) Yes No Yes Yes Fair Information Principle / Commerical Online Service America Online CompuServe Information Service Microsoft Network Prodigy 7. Does the service allow you to limit the collection of personally identifiable transactional data? (Limitation on collection) No No No No 8. Can you limit the internal use of personally identifiable transactional data unrelated to billing and systems administration? (Consent for Secondary Use) No Yes Yes Yes 9. Can you limit the disclosure of personally identifiable transactional data? Yes Yes Yes n/a 10. Does the service limit how information that identifies you is used by others -- such as payment facilitators and content providers? NP NP NP No 11. Can you see the subscription information the service maintains about you? (Access) Yes Yes Yes Yes 12. Can you correct and update subscription information? (Correction) Yes Yes Yes Yes 13. Can you see the personally identifiable transactional information the service maintains about you? (Access) NP No Yes NP 14. Can you correct and update personally identifiable transactional information? (Correction) NP No Yes NP Fair Information Principle / Commerical Online Service America Online CompuServe Information Service Microsoft Network Prodigy 15. Is your name and email address automatically made available in a directory to other subscribers? No No NP No 16. Does the service monitor public chatrooms? Yes NP Yes Yes 17. Does the service monitor instant messages? No NP NP No 18. Does the service monitor bulletin boards? Yes NP Yes Yes 19. Does the service monitor kids areas? NP NP NP NP 20. Can you have more than one online identity? Yes Yes No NP 21. Does the service retain the contents of your email once you've downloaded it? Yes NP Yes No 22. Does the service retain the contents of your email once you've deleted it? Yes NP No No 23. Does the service retain the header of your email once you've downloaded it? Yes NP Yes No 24. Does the service retain the header of your email once you've deleted it? Yes NP No No 25. Does the service provide you with any remedy if they don't follow their rules? NP NP NP NP 26. Do they have security practices to safeguard your information? (Security) Yes NP Yes Yes Law Enforcement Access to: Law enforcement access to the contents of your communications and personally identifiable transactional data held by commercial online service companies is governed by federal law. All the commercial online service providers comply with the law. Contents of your communications The Electronic Communications Privacy Act (ECPA) governs law enforcement access to the contents of your communications. The law was updated in 1986 to cover electronic communications including email and computer-to-computer communications. Law enforcement must get a warrant in order to access the contents of your message. Whether law enforcement can get access to the contents of your email is largely dependent on the email retention policy of your service provider. For example, if the policy of your service is to only retain the email header once you've read your email, then law enforcement will not have access to read the contents of your email. Personally Identifiable Transactional Data The Communications Assistance for Law Enforcement Act of 1994 (commonly known as the Digital Telephony Act) amended ECPA, increasing the privacy protection for online transactional information. The law now includes a heightened standard for law enforcement access to transactional data generated by electronic communications services. Instead of a mere subpoena, law enforcement officials must obtain a court order based on "specific and articulable facts" that such records are "relevant and material to an ongoing criminal investigation" (sec 207 (a)(2)). Subscription Information Under the Communications Assistance for Law Enforcement Act of 1994 (commonly known as the Digital Telephony Act), access to subscription information requires an administrative subpoena. This is a less privacy-protective standard than the standards governing law enforcement access to the contents of your communication or personally indentifiable transactional information. Back to the CDT Privacy Issues Contents Page Back to the CDT Privacy Demonstration Page Back to the CDT Home Page Last Updated 05/30/96 | For more information, write webmaster@cdt.orgWT02-B05-26IA095-001027-B030-198http://www.cdt.org:80/privacy/terms.html 205.177.10.31 19970215005605 text/html 13396HTTP/1.0 200 OKDate: Sat, 15 Feb 1997 00:54:47 GMTServer: Apache/1.1.1Content-type: text/html Definition of terms Definition of Terms Notice In an online context, notice means that online service subscribers or Internetusers learn from the online service provider or web site about whether andto what extent personal information is being collected and used. Informed (an important subset of notice) For a notice of information practice to be truly effective, it must be clearlywritten and non-coercive. For you to be "informed" means understandingwho is collecting information about your online activities, and the purposesfor which the information is being collected. There are two ways in which your personal information (including productpreferences, relevant interests and direct contact information) can be collected. First, when you actively provide information to a web site, such as whenyou purchase products or register as a member, you are actively providingpersonal information that may be collected and stored for a particular purpose. Second, while you are engaged in "passive" online activity --for example when you are lurking in chat rooms, reading bulletin boards,or browsing through online resources -- your personal information is alsobeing collected, and possibly stored or used for other purposes. Thus,personal information can be collected through both your passive browsingand active communication. Notice of information practices is particularly important when you participatein online passive activity and you have the illusion of anonymity, as wellas when your personal information is to be used for a purpose unrelatedto the one for which you provided your information. Consent The principal of consent means that you give an organization permissionto handle your information in a way that you choose. When you give personallyidentifiable information to an organization or when you engage in an activitythat generates a record, the individual or entity collecting your informationshould get your "informed consent" -- which means that beforeyour consent can be considered meaningful, you will be given fulldetails about what information is to be collected, the purpose of the collection,and when the information will be disclosed to others. Secondary Use Secondary use means that the information collected about you for one purposeis used for a second, unrelated purpose. A fundamental fair informationprinciple is that you must be given the opportunity to choose whether youwant your information used for a secondary purpose. This allows you toprovide personal information for a specific purpose without worrying thatthe information may be later used for an unrelated purpose without yourpermission. Access Access is defined as the ability to see and obtain the information thatan entity has collected about you. You should also have the opportunityto amend records that are not accurate, relevant,timely or complete. Over the Internet, the access principle may be achievedin real-time (immediately upon request). Correction If information about you is incomplete or inaccurate, an entity should alwaysgive you the ability to make additions or corrections. Down Stream Data Use Down stream data use means that information collected about you may be disclosedto other parties "downstream" to facilitate a transaction. Forexample, suppose you are a member of a commercial online service provider(e.g., America Online), and you want to order a product from a content provideron that service (e.g., L.L. Bean). You may directly give the content provideryour personal information, such as your address, telephone number and creditcard number. Or your commercial online service provider may give the contentprovider your personal information so that your order may be completed. Then, the content provider may disclose your personal information to ashipping company (e.g., Federal Express) so that your order can be deliveredto your house. The content provider may also disclose your personal informationto a billing or credit card company (e.g., Visa) so that they can chargeyou for this transaction. Remedies Remedies is a legal term that describes ways that you can be compensatedfor harm caused by another individual or entity. An example would be theawarding of monetary damages, or a judicial order requiring specific actionto fix the harm. Anonymity To be anonymous means your true identity is not known at all. Pseudonymitymeans you have taken on an assumed identity. Your online service providermay allow you, as a subscriber, to participate in online activities anonymously(not known at all) or pseudonymously (taking on a different identity). Security Security means technical measures that you or your online service providermay take to protect your privacy. There are a number of ways online servicescan safeguard data, through passwords, audit trails, and encryption. Use Use means that your personal data is collected and is being used internallywithin the company or organization, for both administrative and marketingpurposes; e.g., an online service provider using its own subscriber datato market a new service to its subscribers. Disclosure Disclosure means that the company or organization makes your personal informationavailable to third parties, e.g., marketing lists, other companies providingsimilar services, etc. Commercial Online Service A commercial online service maintains a closed proprietary network thatprovides a variety of information and other services to its subscribers. Commercial online services generally provide their own content, forums,and information available only to its subscribers. Subscription Data Subscription data is the information that you provide to an online servicewhen you sign up to become a member. Subscription data usually includesyour name, physical address, email address, billing information, and telephonenumbers. Personally Identifiable Transactional Data Personally identifiable transactional data is the information describingyour online activities, including web sites you have visited, whomyou have sent email, what files you have downloaded, and other informationrevealed in the normal course of using the Internet. Transactional datadiffers from the content of a communication in thatit is not the actual substance of your communication, but the informationabout your communication. Traditionally, the content of your communications has received greater protectionsin the law that transactional data. Recent developments in the law havegiven greater protections to transactional data in that it is just as revealingas the content of your communications. Collection The collection of personal information online occurs in two ways. First,information is collected through your active provision of information, suchas when you purchase a product online or when you join as a member of aweb site. Second, while you are engaged in "passive" online activity-- for example when you are lurking in chat rooms, reading bulletin boards,or browsing through online resources -- your personal information is alsobeing collected and possibly stored, all under your illusion of anonymity.Also, when you ftp a file, your actions may generatea record that is personally identifiable. Limitation on Collection Collection should be limited only to information necessary to complete thetransaction. In instances where personally identifiableinformation is not necessary to support the activity, you should havean opportunity to limit its collection. The goal of this principle is toavoid unnecessary information collection and to prevent people from takingadvantage of you by collecting more information than necessary as a conditionof providing you a service or product. For instance, if an online serviceprovider required you to provide a copy of your tax returns as a conditionof becoming a member, it would be far beyond information that the serviceneeded to sign you up as a subscriber. Content The content of a communication is the actual text of the communication orinformation sent. This includes files, text or graphics. For example,content is the text of your email message or your Usenetposting. Content does not include routing information, the date, time,or subject of the message, or other transactionaldata. E-mail Header The email header is the transactional information that identifies the senderand recipient of a message, routing information, the date and time at whichthe message was sent, and the subject of the message. Downloaded In this context, downloaded e-mail may also include mail that is read online. Check your online service provider agreement for specific details. Glossary of Internet Terms Internet Service Provider (ISP) An internet service provider is a company that provides directaccess to the Internet for educational institutions, individuals, companiesand organizations. Unlike a commercial online service provider, ISPs typicallydo not provide their own content. Usenet Newsgroups Usenet is a worldwide network of discussion threads, or series of postings,on a variety of topics. Usenet is available to most Internet users andis controlled by no single entity. Currently there are over 14,000 Usenetnewsgroups. Some newsgroups are moderated (screened to ensure that thecontent of your message is appropriate for the group) and some are unmoderated(not screened prior to posting). Mailing list Mailing lists are email-based discussion forums on various topicsof interest. An interested Internet user can subscribe to a mailing listby sending an e-mail message containing appropriate instructions to a specifice-mail address. The computer that houses the mailing list program maintainsa list of subscribers and routes all posted messages to subscribers' electronicmailboxes. Mailing lists are either publicly and privately maintained,and can be moderated or unmoderated. Web site A web site is a specific area of the Internet that integrates a varietyof files, such as text, graphics, sound, and video files. Companies, governments,non-profit organizations and individuals can all provide information andinteractive services through their web sites. Anyone with a web site canbe considered a content provider, or a publisher. Web browser A web browser is a program that allows you to search or surf theWorld Wide Web. Some examples of web browsers include Netscape Navigatorand Microsoft Internet Explorer. File Transfer Protocol (FTP) A software protocol that is used to transfer files from a remote host overa network to another computer. FTP is also used as a command to executethe file transfer. Many systems support so-called "anonymous FTP",in which you can access a remote host without revealing your user id orpassword on that system. Additional glossaries of Internet-related terms Back to the CDT Privacy Issues Contents Page Back to the CDT PrivacyDemonstration Page Back to the CDT Home Page WT02-B05-27IA095-001027-B030-211http://www.cdt.org:80/privacy/children/index.html 205.177.10.31 19970215005612 text/html 4544HTTP/1.0 200 OKDate: Sat, 15 Feb 1997 00:54:57 GMTServer: Apache/1.1.1Content-type: text/html CDT's Children's Privacy Issues Page CDT Children's Privacy Issues Page HEADLINES Last updated September 13, 1996 Hearing Held on "Children's Privacy" Legislation [September 13, 1996] The increasing use of the Internet by children, combined with the ease ofcollecting personal information online, raise serious privacy issues. Over the past several months, concerns about the availability and use of personal information in the online world, particularly with respect to the collection and use of information about children, have prompted Congress to seriously consider this important issue. Legislation designed to restrict the collection and use of personalinformation about children without parental consent was introducedby Rep. Bob Franks (R-NJ) on May 22, 1996. While the bill (H.R. 3508) is supported by various groups, including Enough is Enough and Electronic Privacy Information Center (EPIC), it has sparked concerns from cyber-rights advocates that it may end up increasing the collection of personal information online and result in restrictions on the free flow of information. The Electronic Frontier Foundation (EFF), People for the American Way (PFAW) Action Fund, Voters Telecommunications Watch (VTW), and CDT sent Rep. Franks a letter regarding his legislation on June 4, 1996. In the letter, the groups expressed concern that the bill, in its current form, raises some of the same privacy and free flow of information concerns raised by the Exon/Coats "Communications Decency Act" to the extent that it is extremely difficult to know whether or not a person visiting a web site is or is not a child without requiring all visitors to identify themselves. On September 12, 1996, the Crime Subcommittee of the House Judiciary Committee held a hearing on the bill. CDT sent a letter to subcommittee members reiterating its concerns about the bill. Text of H.R. 3508 as introduced by Rep. Franks Text of the June 4 letter signed by CDT, EFF, PFAW Action Fund, and VTW Text of CDT's September 11 letter to members of the Crime Subcommittee CDT Policy Post 2.23 - Congress and FTC Focus on Online Privacy Issues FTC Focuses on Children's Privacy on the Internet [June 5, 1996] Among the several topics discussed at FTC hearings held on June 4-5, 1996 was the issue of children's privacy on the Internet. These hearings highlighted the current and future availability of technologies which empower users and parents to exercise more control over the collection and use of personal information. CDT Policy Post 2.23 - Congress and FTC Focus on Online Privacy Issues Statement by Rep. Edward Markey (D-MA) at the FTC hearings regarding children's privacy and the Internet More information about the recent FTC Hearings, including CDT's testimony at the hearings. Back to the CDT Privacy Issues Page Back to the CDT Home Page Last Update September 13, 1996 || For more information, write webmaster@cdt.orgWT02-B05-28IA095-001027-B030-230http://www.cdt.org:80/privacy/priv_links.html 205.177.10.31 19970215005623 text/html 5958HTTP/1.0 200 OKDate: Sat, 15 Feb 1997 00:55:06 GMTServer: Apache/1.1.1Content-type: text/html CDT Privacy Links Privacy-Related Links and Resources Updated June 7, 1996 National Organizations International Organizations State and Local Organizations Government Agencies and Information Executive Legislative Other Government-related Sites Privacy-Related Sites Internet White Pages: Are You Listed? Technical Information Press Clips Privacy-Related Sites Community HealthInformation Systems (CHMIS) Computersand Privacy Privacy Forum You Own YourOwn Web Internet White Pages: Are you listed? There are a number of Internet sites that contain databases of names ande-mail address of many Internet users. Check these directories to see ifyou are listed. Bigfoot ESP Four11 Directory Services Internet Address Finder LookUP! Okra net.citizen DirectoryService WhoWhere? White Pages Yahoo People Search Yahoo'sdirectory of White Pages Technical Information The AnonymizerFAQ Andy's NetscapeHTTP Cookie Notes BrowserWatchhas detailed technical information about browsers and plug-ins A Note AboutWeb Browsers and Privacy - an older document that discussessome of the technical aspects used in our Privacy Demonstration Privacy-Related Press Clips "On the Internet, virtually no privacy" - Article about privacy on the Internet (and about the CDT Privacy site) published in USA Today on May 30, 1996 "It's a Jungle Out There" - Article published in U.S. News & World Report on April 29, 1996 "Web 'cookies' may be spying on you" - Article published in the SanJose Mercury News on Feb. 13, 1996 "Netscapetricks raise security concerns" - Article published in MacWeekon March 13, 1996 C|NET Special Report - "Privacy in the Digital Age" Part 1: Who's Watching You Online? Part 2: How Private is Your Personal Information? C|NET's Christopher Barr on Net Privacy Who'swatching you? Paranoidsunite! The truthabout cookies Back to the CDT Privacy Issues Content Page Back to the CDT Privacy Demonstration Page Back to the CDT Home Page Last Updated 06/07/96 | For more information, write webmaster@cdt.orgWT02-B05-29IA095-001027-B030-248http://www.cdt.org:80/privacy/thank_you.html 205.177.10.31 19970215005727 text/html 3975HTTP/1.0 200 OKDate: Sat, 15 Feb 1997 00:56:09 GMTServer: Apache/1.1.1Content-type: text/html CDT Thank Yous Many Thanks To: The Center for Democracy and Technology would like to thank the followingpeople for their assistance with our Privacy Demonstration Page: Justin Boyan Justin Boyan is the author of the "snoop" CGI script that collects information about the web site visitor and displays it back to them. Justin is a Ph.D. student in Computer Science at Carnegie Mellon University,researching applications of artificial intelligence to robotic, industrial,medical and information-retrieval optimization problems. He has a B.S. inmath from the University of Chicago and a Master's in Computer Speech andLanguage Processing from Cambridge University. His hobbies include web hackingand politics, the combination of which led to his design and implementationof the Anonymizer system for protecting privacy on the World Wide Web. Email: jab+cdt@cs.cmu.edu Web: http://www.cs.cmu.edu/~jab/ Eddie Codel When death isn't chasing him on his motorcycle or when he isn't lounging is some dark dingy DC nightclub, Eddie can be found doing a variety of things from tweaking CGI scripts to modeling virtual eyeballs. His affinity for the Internet has led to an unofficial consulting role to a varied list of organizations. Officially, Eddie makes his living consulting for organizations who require PC hardware and networking assistance. The West coast is calling him and Eddie is ready to answer that call as soon as the right incentive comes knocking. Email: zarnoff@cais.com Web: http://www.cais.net/zarnoff/ Sameer Parekh Community ConneXion, Inc. Sameer Parekh founded Community ConneXion in June of 1994; it has since grown to become a successful Internet privacy provider. Parekh's company currently offers services to more than one thousand customers, and provides valuable Internet privacy services to the Net at large. Parekh has been actively involved with the Internet since 1990 and has been active with privacy issues since 1991. He published a privacy and civil-liberties-oriented newsletter known as The Free Journal, which ran for a year and a half. Since 1993 Parekh has been an active contributing member of the cryptography and privacy community known as the "Cypherpunks". Since late 1995, Parekh has been a member of the Apache Group, which developed the world's most popular web server. Parekh was listed in Newsweek's listing of the "50 People Who Matter Most on the Internet," and has been quoted in Time, the San Francisco Chronicle, and other publications. Email: sameer@c2.org Web: http://www.c2.org/ CDT Privacy Demonstration Page Hosted by: Jim Williams Williams Consulting, Inc. Back to the CDT Privacy Issues Content Page Back to the CDT Privacy Demonstration Page Back to the CDT Home Page Last Updated 06/28/96 | For more information, write webmaster@cdt.orgWT02-B05-30IA095-001027-B030-283http://www.cdt.org:80/policy/terrorism/960805_update.html 205.177.10.31 19970215005833 text/html 2635HTTP/1.0 200 OKDate: Sat, 15 Feb 1997 00:57:16 GMTServer: Apache/1.1.1Content-type: text/html CDT | Update on the Counter-Terrorism Bill More on the Counter-Terrorism Bill that passed the House on August 2, 1996 On Friday August 2, the House of Representatives passed a revised counter-terrorism bill by a margin of 389 to 22. The House-passed bill DOES NOT contain ANY of the privacy threatening provisions. Provisions dealing with funding for the Communications Assistance for Law Enforcement Act (Digital Telephony) were REMOVED from the bill just before the vote after civil liberties groups AND the FBI objected to the language. Provisions dealing with emergency wiretap authority and "roving wiretaps" were also not included in the House-passed bill. In addition, the bill does not contain any encryption provisions. On July 29, the Administration had circulated an outline of theiranti-terrorism proposal which included new, unspecified restrictions onencryption. Senators Conrad Burns (R-MT), Patrick Leahy (D-VT), Larry Pressler (R-SD), Senate Majority Leader Trent Lott(R-MS), and others worked hard to prevent any encryption provisions frombeing included in early versions of the bill, and deserve a lot of creditfor fighting for the Net. The bill passed today contains provisions increasing airport security,studies on ways to improve US anti-terrorism policy and other terrorismissues, and a provision expanding federal racketeering lawsto cover terrorist activity. The bill also contains a small, but not insignificant, privacy victory. Thebill doubles the punishment from 5 to 10 years for unlawful disclosure ofinformation obtained from a warrant and increases certain penalties forviolation of the Privacy Act. The Senate did not vote on the bill before they recessed for the month. The Senate will most likely take up consideration of the bill when Congress returns in September. This means that this issue isn't over yet. The Senate could add provisions to the bill, such as Digital Telephony funding and proposed restrictions on encryption, so stay tuned.... Thanks to everyone who called Congress to object to the new sweepingsurveillance provisions that were dropped from the bill! It looks like wemay have really made a difference in this debate. Back to the Counter-Terrorism Page Posted on August 5, 1996 || For more information, contact webmaster@cdt.orgWT02-B05-31IA095-001027-B030-301http://www.cdt.org:80/publications/pp_2.29.html 205.177.10.31 19970215005844 text/html 13823HTTP/1.0 200 OKDate: Sat, 15 Feb 1997 00:57:27 GMTServer: Apache/1.1.1Content-type: text/html Policy Post 2.29 - Administration, Congress Propose Anti-Terrorism Initiatives -----------------------------------------------------------------------------    _____ _____ _______   / ____|  __ \__   __|   ____        ___               ____             __  | |    | |  | | | |     / __ \____  / (_)______  __   / __ \____  _____/ /_  | |    | |  | | | |    / /_/ / __ \/ / / ___/ / / /  / /_/ / __ \/ ___/ __/  | |____| |__| | | |   / ____/ /_/ / / / /__/ /_/ /  / ____/ /_/ (__  ) /_   \_____|_____/  |_|  /_/    \____/_/_/\___/\__, /  /_/    \____/____/\__/   The Center for Democracy and Technology  /____/     Volume 2, Number 29----------------------------------------------------------------------------      A briefing on public policy issues affecting civil liberties online---------------------------------------------------------------------------- CDT POLICY POST Volume 2, Number 29                        August 1, 1996 CONTENTS: (1) Clinton Administration, Congress Propose Sweeping               Anti-Terrorism Initiatives           (2) How to Subscribe/Unsubscribe           (3) About CDT, contacting us  ** This document may be redistributed freely with this banner intact **        Excerpts may be re-posted with permission of          ** This document looks best when viewed in COURIER font **-----------------------------------------------------------------------------(1) CLINTON ADMINISTRATION, CONGRESS PROPOSE SWEEPING ANTI-TERRORISM     INITIATIVESIn the wake of the recent bombing at the Olympics and the suspectedterrorist involvement in the TWA crash, the Clinton Administration andmembers of Congress are proposing a set of sweeping counter-terrorisminitiatives. If enacted into law, these proposals will dramaticallyincrease law enforcement surveillance authority over the Internet and otheradvanced communications technologies. An outline of the Administration'sproposal was circulated on Capitol Hill on Monday July 29.President Clinton has urged Congress to pass new counter-terrorismlegislation before the Congressional recess at the end of this week.  Whileseveral prominent Republican members of Congress, including House SpeakerNewt Gingrich (R-GA), have said publicly that Congress should not rush intoany new counter-terrorism legislation, most observers believe there is astrong possibility that some or all of the Administration's proposal willbe enacted before the August recess.The draft proposal contains several measures which were rejected byCongress as part of the previous counter-terrorism initiative proposed last year after the Oklahoma City bombing, as well as several new measuresincluding as-yet unspecified changes to U.S. encryption policy and fundingfor the Communications Assistance for Law Enforcement Act (CALEA, a.k.a.Digital Telephony).CDT is concerned that the latest counter-terrorism efforts on Capitol Hillare occurring without appropriate deliberation.  Major policy decisionsexpanding the surveillance powers of law enforcement should not be madewithout careful consideration of the necessity of such proposals and therelative benefit to society. In the coming days and weeks, CDT will workwith Congressional leaders, privacy advocates, and the net.community toensure that constitutional civil liberties and the openness of the Internetare protected as Congress considers counter-terrorism measures.________________________________________________________________________MAJOR POINTS OF THE COUNTER-TERRORISM PROPOSALS CIRCULATING ON THE HILLThe administration's new counter-terrorism initiative and other amendmentscirculating this week in Congress contain numerous provisions, but four are of particular concern to the net.community:* New Threats to Encryption, Opposition to the Pro-CODE Bill* Funding for Digital Telephony Without Public Accountability* Amendment to Criminalize 'Bomb-Making' Information on the Internet* Expanded Authority for Multi-Point, "Roving" WiretapsThe full text of the Administration's proposal and background informationare available at CDT's counter-terrorism Web Page:    http://www.cdt.org/policy/terrorism/       --------------------------------------------------------I. NEW THREATS TO ENCRYPTION, OPPOSITION TO THE PRO-CODE BILLThe Administration's outline contains the following statement on encryption: "* Encryption -- We will seek legislation to strengthen our ability to    prevent terrorists from coming into the possession of the technology    to encrypt their communications and data so that they are beyond the    reach of law enforcement.  We oppose legislation that would eliminate    current export barriers and encouraging the proliferation of encryption    which blocks appropriate access to protect public safety and the     national security."While no specific legislative language has yet been proposed, this represents the first statement by the Administration that they will seeklegislation to further restrict encryption.  Even more troubling, theAdministration is clearly attempting to use the recent suspected terroristincidents to push for a new and more restrictive encryption policy.This new proposal comes as Congress is finally beginning to seriouslyconsider major changes in U.S. encryption policy. Bipartisan legislationin both the House and Senate to relax encryption export controls is gainingmomentum.  The Senate Commerce Committee has held 3 hearings in the last 6weeks, and is preparing to vote to send the Burns/Leahy "Pro-CODE" bill (S.1726) to the floor of the Senate.  The Administration's attempt to leveragethe public's concern about terrorism to block passage of the Pro-CODE bill is disturbing, and poses a significant threat to privacy and security on theInternet.CDT is working with members of Congress, privacy advocates, and thecommunications and computer industries to oppose any attempt by theAdministration to impose new restrictions on encryption, and we continue towork to move the bipartisan export relief legislation through Congress.       --------------------------------------------------------II. FUNDING FOR DIGITAL TELEPHONY WITHOUT PUBLIC ACCOUNTABILITYThe Administration is also seeking to override the public accountabilityprovisions of the Communications Assistance for Law Enforcement Act (CALEA- a.k.a. 'Digital Telephony') by providing a funding for the law in a waythat prevents public oversight of the FBI's surveillance ability.Enacted in October of 1994, granted law enforcement new authority toinfluence the design of telecommunications networks (the Internet,Commercial online services, and BBS's were exempted) in order to preservetheir ability to conduct court authorized electronic surveillance.Congress balanced this new authority with a number of mechanisms to ensurepublic accountability over law enforcement surveillance ability.While complicated, the public accountability mechanisms are designed towork as follows:* Law enforcement provides telecommunications carriers, the Congress,  and the public with notice of its surveillance capacity needs (i.e.,  the number of simultaneous wiretaps in a given geographic location)  with an opportunity for public comment.* Based on an assessment of the reasonableness of the law enforcement  surveillance capacity request, Congress appropriates money to cover  the cost of modifications.  If Congress does not believe law  enforcement has adequately justified its request, money will not be  appropriated.* Telecommunications carriers are not obligated to comply with the  statute or make any capacity modifications without government  reimbursement.In October 1995, the FBI published its first notice of surveillancecapacity (see CDT Policy Post Vol. 1, No. 26).  The telecommunicationsindustry and privacy advocates used the public accountability provisions ofCALEA to respond to the FBI's request and argued that the FBI had notadequately justified the extensive surveillance capability contained in therequest.  As a result, Congress has not yet appropriated funds and nomodifications have been made.The FBI clearly believes that the public accountability provisions of CALEAare working **too well**, and appears to be using the recent focus onterrorism to push for a new funding mechanism which does not contain publicoversight.CDT is fighting hard to ensure that the public accountability provisions ofCALEA, which have until now prevented the FBI from acquiring unnecessarysurveillance capacity, remain a part of the law, and will vigorously opposeany effort by the FBI and the Clinton Administration to remove the lastopportunity for public oversight over law enforcement power.       --------------------------------------------------------III. THE AVAILABILITY OF 'BOMB-MAKING' INFORMATION ON THE INTERNETSenator Dianne Feinstein (D-CA) has reintroduced an amendment to make itillegal to disseminate information on how to construct explosives knowingthat the information will be used in furtherance of a federal crime.  The amendment was adopted by the Senate earlier this month as part of a Department of Defense Appropriations bill.  CDT believes that the vague provisions of the Feinstein amendment could have a chilling effect on onlinespeech, needlessly duplicate existing criminal statutes, and should be removed.Feinstein first proposed the amendment as part of the 1995counter-terrorism bill. The initial Feinstein amendment was extremely broadand would have resulted in a flat ban on certain constitutionally protectedspeech online.  After civil liberties advocates objected, Feinsteinnarrowed her amendment substantially, although it was ultimately droppedfrom the final terrorism bill signed in April 1996.       --------------------------------------------------------IV.  EXPANDED WIRETAP AUTHORITYThe Administration's proposal would also significantly expand currentwiretapping authority to allow multi-point (or "roving") wiretaps. Thiswould dramatically change surveillance authority to include wiretaps ofINDIVIDUALS instead of LOCATIONS.This proposal would do away with the delicate balance between privacy andlaw enforcement that Congress has struck over 30 years of wiretappinglegislation. Federal law has always required that wiretaps issue for aspecific location, to meet Fourth Amendment requirements. In 1986 Congressintroduced a narrow exception to this rule, only for cases where it couldbe shown that the target was intentionally evading wiretaps by changingfacilities. The Administration proposal would completely remove thisstandard, allowing so-called "roving taps" for any persons whose behaviormakes wiretapping difficult for law enforcement.The administration proposed similar provisions in the spring of 1995 in thewake of the Oklahoma City bombing. These provisions proved controversial inCongress and were dropped from the final bill.________________________________________________________________________FOR MORE INFORMATIONFor more information on the counter-terrorism proposals and their impact onthe Internet check out:CDT's Counter-Terrorism Page:     http://www.cdt.org/policy/terrorism/CDT's Encryption Policy Page:     http://www.cdt.org/crypto/CDT's Digital Telephony Page:     http://www.cdt.org/digtel.htmlEncryption Policy Resource Page:  http://www.crypto.com/------------------------------------------------------------------------(4) SUBSCRIPTION INFORMATIONBe sure you are up to date on the latest public policy issues affectingcivil liberties online and how they will affect you! Subscribe to the CDTPolicy Post news distribution list.  CDT Policy Posts, the regular newspublication of the Center For Democracy and Technology, are received bynearly 10,000 Internet users, industry leaders, policy makers andactivists, and have become the leading source for information aboutcritical free speech and privacy issues affecting the Internet and otherinteractive communications media.To subscribe to CDT's Policy Post list, send mail to     policy-posts-request@cdt.orgwith a subject:     subscribe policy-postsIf you ever wish to remove yourself from the list, send mail to theabove address with a subject of:     unsubscribe policy-posts-----------------------------------------------------------------------(5) ABOUT THE CENTER FOR DEMOCRACY AND TECHNOLOGY/CONTACTING USThe Center for Democracy and Technology is a non-profit public interestorganization based in Washington, DC. The Center's mission is to developand advocate public policies that advance democratic values andconstitutional civil liberties in new computer and communicationstechnologies.Contacting us:General information:  info@cdt.orgWorld Wide Web:       URL:http://www.cdt.org/FTP                   URL:ftp://ftp.cdt.org/pub/cdt/Snail Mail:  The Center for Democracy and Technology             1634 Eye Street NW * Suite 1100 * Washington, DC 20006             (v) +1.202.637.9800 * (f) +1.202.637.0968-----------------------------------------------------------------------End Policy Post 2.29                                             8/1/96----------------------------------------------------------------------- Return to the CDT Publications Page Return to CDT Counter-Terrorism Page Return to the CDT Home Page WT02-B05-32IA095-001027-B030-313http://www.cdt.org:80/policy/terrorism/vtw_960801.html 205.177.10.31 19970215005851 text/html 11819HTTP/1.0 200 OKDate: Sat, 15 Feb 1997 00:57:35 GMTServer: Apache/1.1.1Content-type: text/html Red Alert! Congress rushing to pass... 8/1/96 ====================================================================== ____  _____ ____     ___  _     _____ ____ _____ |  _ \| ____|  _ \   / _ \| |   | ____|  _ \_   _|  CONGRESS RUSHING TO| |_) |  _| | | | | | |_| | |   |  _| | |_) || |    ENACT SURVEILLANCE|  _ <| |___| |_| | |  _  | |___| |___|  _ < | |    LEGISLATION.  CALL|_| \_\_____|____/  |_| |_|_____|_____|_| \_\|_|    CONGRESS NOW! 8/1/96                REPOST THIS ALERT WHERE APPROPRIATE             DO NOT REDISTRIBUTE AFTER AUGUST 7, 1996----------------------------------------------------------------------Table of contents        Introduction        What you can do now             Background        Participating organizations----------------------------------------------------------------------INTRODUCTIONLate Wednesday, Congress and the Clinton Administration reached apreliminary agreement on a sweeping new surveillance initiative. ThePresident and several Congressional leaders are pushing for a vote on themeasure BEFORE CONGRESS RECESSES ON AUGUST 2.If enacted, parts of the proposal would dramatically impact privacy andsecurity on the Internet and other advanced communications technologies.Of particular concern are provisions which:1. Allows law enforcement to wiretap "suspected terrorists" for up to   48 hours BEFORE obtaining a court order2. Provide funding for the Digital Telephony Proposal without any public   accountability over how the FBI spends the fundsOther provisions are also circulating that would:3. Threaten to impose new restrictions on encryption technologies4. Seek to criminalize the distribution of 'bomb-making' information on   the Internet that is legal in print.Congress needs to hear from you.  Congress will rush through the passageof massive new surveillance plans with privacy risks unless youshow them there is support for slow, deliberate, reasoned thought onthe issue.----------------------------------------------------------------------WHAT YOU CAN DO NOW                 CALL KEY MEMBERS OF CONGRESS IMMEDIATELY!                      NO LATER THAN FRIDAY (8/2/96)Please contact as many elected officials on the list below as you can.Urge them to "go slow" and carefully consider the impact thesesurveillance proposals will have on the privacy and security ofall Internet users.Tell them while you appreciate their concern about combating terrorism,the measures being proposed have many potential side effects which must becarefully considered.1. Call the key members of Congress below and ask them to "go slow" and   examine the issues before rushing into changing the delicate balance   of law enforcement surveillance and the public.2. If you are at a loss for words, use the following sample communique:        SAMPLE COMMUNIQUE        Dear _________,        Please do not rush the passage of counter terrorism legislation;        I'm concerned that Congress is rushing without carefully        considering the implications of privacy.  I'm from <city, state>.        Thanks, <click>   You should call the following members of Congress because they   are steering this legislation and need to hear there is support   for slow, deliberate, thoughtful consideration of this issue.   Some of thee members *have publicly expressed reservations* about this   legislation, and we should support them in their efforts.Senate members:      P ST Name and Address           Phone           Fax      = == ========================   ==============  ==============      R MS Lott, Trent                1-202-224-6253  1-202-224-2262      D DE Biden Jr., Joseph R.       1-202-224-5042  1-202-224-0139      D SD Daschle, Thomas A.         1-202-224-2321  1-202-224-2047      R UT Hatch, Orrin G.            1-202-224-5251  1-202-224-6331      R PA Specter, Arlen             1-202-224-4254  1-717-782-4920      D VT Leahy, Patrick J.          1-202-224-4242  1-202-224-3595House members:   Dist ST Name, Address, and Party       Phone            Fax   ==== == ========================       ==============   ==============      6 GA Gingrich, Newt (R)             1-202-225-4501   1-202-225-4656      3 MO Gephardt, Richard A. (D)       1-202-225-2671   1-202-225-7452      6 IL Hyde, Henry J. (R)             1-202-225-4561   1-202-226-1240     14 MI Conyers Jr., John (D)          1-202-225-5126   1-202-225-0072President William Clinton:        White House Comment Line: 1-202-456-14143. If you get a response, take a moment and send mail to vtw@vtw.org   with "feedback" in the subject line.        $ Mail vtw@vtw.org        Subject: my feedback from calling Congress        They said they're not going to pass most of Clinton's package,        because it upsets the delicate balance between law enforcement and        the public.         ^D        Mail sent!        ----------------------------------------------------------------------BACKGROUNDAmong other things, the law enforcement proposals circulating on CapitolHill include provisions which:o WIRETAPPING WITHOUT COURT ORDER ALLOWED FOR 48 HOURS  Congress and the President have already agreed to provisions which  would dramatically expand law enforcement surveillance authority. Both  of these provisions were proposed by the President as part of the 1995  counter-terrorism legislation, but were dropped from the final bill  after Republicans and civil liberties advocates objected.  The current proposal would expand law enforcement surveillance  authority in two ways:  - Emergency 48 Hour Wiretap Authority: Current law requires law    enforcement officials to get the affirmative consent of a judge    before installing a wiretap.    The current proposal would expand law enforcement authority to    wiretap "suspected terrorists" for up to 48 hours before obtaining a    court order, limiting a critical 4th amendment safeguard.  - Multi-Point "Roving" Wiretaps: Current law allows law enforcement to    tap only specific LOCATIONS (i.e., a telephone number). In certain    very limited circumstances, law enforcement can tap a specific    INDIVIDUAL if it can be shown to a judge that the suspect is moving    from place to place with the specific intent of thwarting law    enforcement.  The current proposal would expand this so-called "roving" wiretap  authority by making it much easier for law enforcement to tap specific  INDIVIDUALS as opposed to specific physical locations.  This change  would dramatically effect the balance between 4th Amendment privacy  rights and public safety which has existed for nearly 30 years, and  should not be enacted without careful consideration of the  implications.o FUNDING FOR DIGITAL TELEPHONY WITHOUT PUBLIC ACCOUNTABILITY  The Administration and Congress are seeking funding to implement the  Digital Telephony Law in a way which eliminates any opportunity for  public oversight of law enforcement surveillance ability.  The controversial law, known officially as the Communications  Assistance for Law Enforcement Act (CALEA), granted the FBI new  authority to influence the design of telecommunications networks.  At  the same time, the law provided substantial public oversight over the  FBI's surveillance ability by requiring the FBI to state, on the  public record, what its surveillance needs are.  The FBI has faced stiff resistance from civil liberties groups and some  members of Congress and has not yet been able to obtain funding to  implement the requirements of the law.  As part of the current proposal, the FBI is seeking a mechanism which  will provide funding for CALEA in a way which skirts the public  oversight provisions of the law.  This is an extremely troubling move  by law enforcement which, if enacted, would allow law enforcement  essentially unlimited authority to influence the design of  telecommunications networks without any accountability.Other provisions which could show up in legislation in the next 72 hours are:o BOMB MAKING MATERIAL ON THE INTERNET  In the wake of the recent public concern about terrorism, Senators  Dianne Feinstein (D-CA) and Joseph Biden (D-DE) have renewed their  efforts to pass legislation to restrict the availability of 'bomb-  making' information on the Internet.  The Feinstein/Biden amendment was added to the Senate Defense  Appropriations bill (S. 1762) in early July, and is not currently part  of the new law enforcement initiative.  However, the amendment poses a  serious threat to chill the the free flow of information on the  Internet.o THREATEN TO IMPOSE NEW RESTRICTIONS ON ENCRYPTION TECHNOLOGIES:  While no specific legislation has been proposed, the Clinton  Administration has circulated an outline to Congress which states:    "We will seek legislation to strengthen our ability to    prevent terrorists from coming into the possession of the technology    to encrypt their communications and data so that they are beyond the    reach of law enforcement."  This statement marks the first time that the Administration has  suggested legislation to restrict encryption.  This is especially  troubling because it comes at a time of growing Congressional support  for legislation to promote privacy and security tools for the Net.  Of even more concern, the Administration is clearly attempting to use  the recent suspected terrorist incidents to push for a new and more  restrictive encryption policy.  If the Administration succeeds in passing new restrictions on  encryption as part of the new surveillance legislation, the future  of the Internet as a secure and trusted platform for commerce and  private communication will be threatened.Some or all of these provisions may be included in a package votedon by both houses by August 3rd.  It is not clear what a final billwill look like, and some of these provisions may not be considered byCongress until later this summer.----------------------------------------------------------------------PARTICIPATING ORGANIZATIONSThe following organizations all urge you to take this action to combat thesurveillance initiatives.   Check their pages for more backgroundinformation on these issues.        American Civil Liberties Union (http://www.aclu.org)        American Communication Association        Center for Democracy and Technology (http://www.cdt.org)        Electronic Frontier Foundation (http://www.eff.org)        EF-Austin (http://www.efa.org)        Electronic Privacy Information Center (http://www.epic.org)        Feminists for Free Expression        National Libertarian Party (http://www.lp.org)        National Writers Union (http://www.nwu.org/nwu/)        People For the American Way (http://www.pfaw.org)        Voters Telecommunications Watch (http://www.vtw.org)        Wired Ventures Ltd. (http://www.hotwired.com)====================================================================== Return to the CDT Counter-Terrorism Page Return to CDT Home Page Posted on August 1, 1996 || For more information, contact webmaster@cdt.org. WT02-B05-33IA095-001027-B030-329http://www.cdt.org:80/policy/terrorism/960729_admin_fact.html 205.177.10.31 19970215005902 text/html 7829HTTP/1.0 200 OKDate: Sat, 15 Feb 1997 00:57:42 GMTServer: Apache/1.1.1Content-type: text/html CDT | Fact Sheet on Anti-Terrorism Proposals FACT SHEET ON ADMINISTRATION ANTI-TERRORISM PROPOSALS July 29, 1996 Multi-Point Wiretaps - These were authorized by the Electronic CommunicationsPrivacy Act of 1986 (as amended), codified at 18 U.S.C. Sec. 2518 (11). We propose harmonizing the standards for obtaining a roving microphoneand a roving electronic intercept. Under existing law, roving microphoneinterceptions require only a demonstration of probable cause that it is"impracticable" to use a standard uni-point order, while rovingelectronic interceptions require a demonstration of probable cause thatthe subject is attempting to evade surveillance by changing telephone devices. This latter standard is extremely difficult to meet in the investigativephase of a case. By way of example, an individual switching between multiplecellular telephones, all of which he can carry in a brief case, may be doingso to defraud a cellular carrier rather than to evade surveillance. Sincethe burden is on the government to demonstrate probable cause, an absenceof proof means that the burden is not met. Absent a court order, multi-pointsurveillance like nonconsensual uni-point intercepts is punishable as acrime or a civil offense and evidence gained through the illegal surveillanceis subject to suppression. Pen Registers and Trap-and-trace devices for foreign intelligence investigations - Pen registers are devices which record numbers dialed on a telephone. Trap and trace devices record the incoming number, similar to Caller ID. Neither records the content of the conversation. Both may be issued ona representation by an attorney for the government - generally an AssistantUnited States Attorney - that the information is "relevant to an ongoingcriminal investigation," 18 U.S.C. Sec. 3123(a). In FISA investigations,a full electronic intercept order, approved by the Attorney General mustbe sought. We seek to harmonize the FISA and criminal standards so thata FISA application may be made on the same showing and representation. Underexisting law, a FISA pen register could not be authorized under the criminalstandard and the use of a pen register without a court order may resultin criminal and/or civil penalties. Taggants - Congress should fund at $25 million a six-month study ofidentification taggants-- microscopic particles which are identifiable andwhich are designed to survive an explosion -- and thereafter permit theTreasury Department to promulgate regulations -- subject to a 45 day reviewperiod --which would criminalize the possession of untagged explosives,including black powder and smokeless powder. The 1996 Terrorism Act expresslyexcludes the study and regulation of black powder. Common Carrier and Public Accommodation Records - We seek authorityfor the FBI to issue administrative requests - National Security Letters- to common carriers, hotels, communications providers and storage facilitiesfor records in foreign counterintelligence (FCI) cases. Under existing law,grand jury subpoenae may be issued in criminal cases, see Fed. R.Crim. P.6(e), the Attorney General has authority which she has delegated to certainFederal agents in narcotics cases to issue administrative subpoenae. Weseek the same authority as exists in routine criminal cases for the FBIin FCI cases. Under existing law, carriers need not comply with an FBIrequest and there is no sanction for them not doing so. Those who failto comply with a valid grand jury and/or administrative subpoena are subjectto penalties which may include criminal contempt. Emergency Wiretap Authority - These are authorized in ECPA in 18 U.S.C.Sec 2518(7) and permit the Attorney General (and Deputy) to authorize anemergency wiretap without a court order for 48 hours in certain limitedsituations involving organized crime, national security or immediate riskof injury. At the conclusion of the 48 hours, a standard application mustbe presented to a Judge and if the intercept order is not approved by thejudge, evidence gained during the 48-hour period cannot be used. We seekto expand the emergency situation to those which are clearly-terrorist relatedbut which do not trigger one of the exceptions. An emergency order grantedoutside of the specified statutory criteria would constitute an illegalintercept and would subject the interceptor to criminal and civil penaltiesand the evidence to suppression. Terrorist Offenses as RICO Predicate - The Racketeer Influenced CorruptOrganizations Act (RICO) provides severe criminal, civil and forfeiturepenalties for organizations engaged in certain conduct. Although most seriousviolations are RICO predicates, terrorist acts are not. We propose to maketerrorism offenses RICO predicates to [sic] that investigators and prosecutorscan utilize the proven tools of the statute which include freezing assets,lengthy sentences of imprisonment and favorable case law. Expanded Predicates - ECPA limits the Federal felonies which can constitutea sufficient predicate for an intercept order, see 18 U.S.C. Sec. 2516(1). We propose that any Federal felony ought to constitute a Section 2516(1)predicate when there is a nexus to terrorist activity. While most crimeswhich are likely predicates in terrorism cases are already listed, in theearly stages of a terrorism investigation, it is entirely possible thatthe only predicate may be a relatively technical crime. By way of example,explosives shipped to a terrorist in the United States but labeled on aCustoms declaration as "medical supplies" give rise to a putativeviolation of Customs statues. While more serious violation may become apparentthrough further investigation, investigators may only have the relativelytechnical false statement violation in the first instance. Under existinglaw, a court order could not issue. If an intercept were conducted, it wouldbe illegal and could lead to criminal and civil penalties as well as thesuppression of evidence. Statute of Limitations On Unregistered Firearms/Explosives Devices -We propose extending the statute of limitations for firearms registrationsoffenses -- crimes designed to prohibit the possession of machine guns andshort-barreled firearms -- from 3 to 5 years. The five-year statute of limitationsapplies to virtually all other Federal crimes, including the misuse of theSmokey the Bear emblem. Encryption - We will seek legislation to strengthen our ability to preventterrorists from coming into possession of the technology to encrypt theircommunications and data so that they are beyond the reach of law enforcement. We oppose legislation that would eliminate current export barriers andencouraging the proliferation of encryption which blocks appropriate accessto protect public safety and the national security. Return to the CDT Counter-Terrorism Page Return to CDT Home Page Posted on July 31, 1996 || For more information, contact webmaster@cdt.org. WT02-B05-34IA095-001027-B030-344http://www.cdt.org:80/policy/terrorism/s1762_sec.html 205.177.10.31 19970215005911 text/html 1844HTTP/1.0 200 OKDate: Sat, 15 Feb 1997 00:57:55 GMTServer: Apache/1.1.1Content-type: text/html S. 1762, Sec. 1088 - Bomb Info Distribution S.1762 Department of Defense Authorization Act for Fiscal Year 1997 (Passed by the Senate on July 10, 1996) SEC. 1088. PROHIBITION ON THE DISTRIBUTION OF INFORMATION RELATING TO EXPLOSIVE MATERIALS FOR A CRIMINAL PURPOSE. (a) UNLAWFUL CONDUCT- Section 842 of title 18, United States Code, is amended by adding at the end the following new subsection: `(l) It shall be unlawful for any person to teach or demonstrate the making of explosive materials, or to distribute by any means information pertaining to, in whole or in part, the manufacture of explosive materials, if the person intends or knows, that such explosive materials or information will be used for, or in furtherance of, an activity that constitutes a Federal criminal offense or a criminal purpose affecting interstate commerce.'. (b) PENALTY- Section 844(a) of title 18, United States Code, is amended-- (1) by striking `(a) Any person' and inserting `(a)(1) Any person'; and (2) by adding at the end the following: `(2) Any person who violates subsection (l) of section 842 of this chapter shall be fined under this title, imprisoned not more than 20 years, or both.'. Return to the CDT Counter-Terrorism Page Return to CDT Home Page WT02-B05-35IA095-001027-B030-373http://www.cdt.org:80/policy/terrorism/adm-anti-terror-otl.html 205.177.10.31 19970215005932 text/html 11653HTTP/1.0 200 OKDate: Sat, 15 Feb 1997 00:58:13 GMTServer: Apache/1.1.1Content-type: text/html Clinton Administration Counter Terrorism Initiative Clinton Administration Counter Terrorism Initiative I. Actions Already Announced by the President (1) Pass the Omnibus Counter-Terrorism Act of 1995 This bill would provide clear Federal criminal jurisdiction for any international terrorist attack that might occur in the United States; provide Federal criminal jurisdiction over terrorists who use the United States as the place from which to plan terrorist attacks overseas; provide a workable mechanism, utilizing United States District Judges appointed by the Chief Justice, to deport expeditiously alien terrorists without risking the disclosure of national security information or techniques; provide a new mechanism for preventing fundraising in the United States that supports international terrorist activities overseas; and would implement an international treaty requiring the insertion of a chemical agent into plastic explosives when manufactured to make them detectable. (2) Provide more tools to federal law enforcement agencies fighting terrorism Amend the Fair Credit Reporting Act to Ease access to financial and credit reports in anti-terrorism cases. This legislation provides for disclosures by consumer reporting agencies to the FBI for counterintelligence and counterterrorism purposes. The FBI has no mechanism for obtaining credit reports for lead purposes in counterterrorism cases. These reports are available to used car dealers and other merchants. The FBI currently has authority under the Right to Financial Privacy Act of 1978 to obtain similar records pursuant to a "National Security Letter" signed by a high-ranking FBI official. the same procedures and safeguards would apply to credit records under this proposal. Amend Federal law to adopt, in national security cases the standard currently used in obtaining a "pen register" in a routine criminal case. This proposal would extend the relaxed standard for obtaining "pen registers" and "trap and trace" device orders which already exists in routine criminal cases, to national security cases. A "pen register" is a device which records the number dialed on a telephone. A "trap and trace" devices is similar to "Caller ID," providing law enforcement with the telephone number from which a call originates. Neither "pen registers" nor "trap and trace" devices permit law enforcement to monitor actual conversations being conducted. the current, higher-than-regular standard impedes the ability of the FBI to obtain surveillance coverage of terrorists and spies. Pass legislation to require hotel/Motel and common carriers to provide records necessary for fighting terrorism. This proposal would require hotel/motel and common carriers such as airlines and bus companies to provide records to the FBI pursuant to authorized national security requests just as they must do now for virtually all state and local law enforcement. The FBI must now rely on the voluntary assistance of motel, hotel, and other innkeepers or common carriers regarding records of terrorists who may have stayed at the establishment or used the common carrier. The FBI has found that, while some of these entities voluntarily provide such information, an increasing number refuse, absent a court order, a subpoena, or other legal protection. In a counterterrorism case being conducted pursuant to the Attorney General's guidelines for FBI Foreign Intelligence Collection and Foreign Counterintelligence Investigations, there is no legal mechanism, e.g. subpoena, available to obtain these records. Fully Fund the FBI's "digital telephony" initiative to assure court-authorized law enforcement access for electronic surveillance to digitized communications. This proposal would appropriate funds to implement recent amendments to statutes governing secure telephone transmission (digital telephony). These amendments require telephone carriers to install and maintain sophisticated equipment which would permit law enforcement to continue to conduct legal electronic surveillance. Create and allocate funds for a special FBI counterterrorist and counterintelligence fund. This proposal will fund costs associated cases which arise in connection with terrorism crises, including logistics and other support. Create an interagency Domestic Counterterrorism Center headed by the FBI. This proposal will establish a partnership effort between the Justice Department, including the FBI, and other federal and state law enforcement authorities to coordinate efforts within the United States. (3) Conduct terrorism threat assessment of every federal facility in the country within the next 60 days. The President has directed the Attorney General to conduct this assessment and report her recommendations in 60 days. The assessment has already begun. (4) Direct GSA to replace the federal building in Oklahoma City. (5) Direct the FBI Director, the Attorney General, and the National Security Adviser to prepare a Presidential Decision Directive authorizing any and all further steps necessary to combat foreign and domestic terrorism. II. New Legislative Proposals (1) INVESTIGATIONS Hire approximately 1000 new agents, prosecutors, and other federal law enforcement and support personnel to investigate, deter, and prosecute terrorist activity. Pass legislation to require, within 1 year, the inclusion of taggants in standard explosive device raw materials which will permit tracing of the materials post-explosion. This proposal would require the inclusion of microscopic particles in certain raw materials, thereby permitting law enforcement to trace the source of the explosive even after a device has been detonated. Require the BATF to study and report on 1) the tagging of explosive materials for purposes of identification and detection; 2) whether common chemicals used to manufacture explosives can be rendered inert for use in explosives; and 3) whether controls can be imposed on certain precursor chemicals used to manufacture explosives. In light of recent bombing incidents, there is a need to develop technologies that will make it possible to detect concealed explosives. Additionally, if bombings do take place, a means of providing some clues is needed to lead investigators to those responsible for the explosion. Moreover, since explosives can be manufactured using common agricultural and household materials, it is important to determine whether such materials can be manufactured in a manner so that their use in explosives is unlikely. Finally, the study would determine whether any reasonable controls can be placed on precursor chemicals, e.g., ammonium nitrate, which have many legitimate uses. Amend the Posse Comitatus Act to permit military participation in crime-fighting involving weapons of mass destruction. This proposal would amend Federal Laws, which severely limit the role of the military in domestic law enforcement, to permit military participation in criminal cases involving chemical, biological, and other weapons of mass destruction; areas in which the military has specialized expertise. Amend the Electronic Communications Privacy Act of 1968 to constitutionally enhance use of electronic surveillance to fight terrorism. This proposal would: permit any federal felony to be used as a basis for an electronic surveillance order; ease restrictions on the use, in American court proceedings, of information from electronic surveillance conducted by foreign governments; forbid suppression of electronic evidence unless law enforcement acted in bad faith in obtaining the evidence; authorize emergency electronic surveillance in situations involving threats by domestic terrorist organizations, authorize roving wiretaps where it is not practical to specify the number of the phone to be tapped, such as where a target uses multiple pay phones; allow the FBI to obtain records of local telephone calls, without the need for a court order, as they can own obtain records of long-diastase calls; and require telephone companies and/or service providers to preserve evidence until a court order could be obtained. None of these changes would alter the requirement for probable cause prior to engaging in electronic surveillance. (2) PROSECUTION Amend Federal law to criminalize the use of all chemical weapons to include all forms of chemical weapons. This bill would amend federal law to include chemical weapons in non-gaseous form. Under existing law, chemical weapons in gaseous form are covered, but those which are in liquid or solid form are not. Thus, for example, an individual who introduces dioxin in solid form into the water supply of a city would not be chargeable under current law. Make it illegal to possess explosives knowing that they are stolen. This proposal would conform explosive laws to existing firearms statutes, making it a crime for an individual to possess explosives which the individual knows are stolen. Extend the Statute of limitations on the National Firearms Act to five (5) years. This proposal would extend from three (3) to five (5) years the statute of limitations for prosecution for violations of the National Firearms Act, which deals with explosive and incendiary bombs. This change brings the statue of limitations for these offenses in line with similar criminal provisions. Provide the Secretary of Treasury authority to direct the use of Treasury Department aircraft to support emergency law enforcement situations. This proposal would authorize the Secretary of Treasury to authorize the use of Treasury Department aircraft in support of emergency law enforcement crises. Amend reward statutes to reduce restrictions on making rewards. This proposal would provide the Attorney General authority to pay a reward which is not subject to the spending limitations contained in 18 USC Sec. 3059 and 3072, provided that any reward of $100,000 or more may not be made without the approval of the President of the Attorney General, and such approval may not be delegated. (3) PENALTIES Increase the penalty for anyone convicted of transferring a firearm or explosive knowing that it will be sue dot commit a crime of violence or drug trafficking crime. This proposal will provide a mandatory penalty of not less than 10 years for any person who transfers a firearm knowing or having reasonable cause to believe that a firearm will be used to commit a crime of violence or drug-trafficking crime. Amend 18 USC Sec. 111 to provide enhanced penalties for all current and former Federal employees against terrorist attacks. The existing statute only protects enumerated categories of current Federal employees. The proposed statute would provide enhanced penalties for crimes against all current and former Federal employees, and their immediate families, when the crime is committed because of the official duties of the federal employee. Return to the counter-terrorism index page Return to the CDT Home Page WT02-B05-36IA095-001027-B031-8http://www.cdt.org:80/policy/terrorism/internet_bomb.test.html 205.177.10.31 19970215005946 text/html 36709HTTP/1.0 200 OKDate: Sat, 15 Feb 1997 00:58:25 GMTServer: Apache/1.1.1Content-type: text/html Berman Senate Judiciary Testimony May 11, 1995 Testimony of Jerry Berman, Executive Director Center for Democracy and Technology Before the Senate Judiciary Committee Subcommittee on Terrorism, Technology and Government Information May 11, 1995 Index of this document Introduction Overview: Shouting Fire in Cyberspace -- First Amendment Implications Political Discourse on the Net: Democracy Flourishing Anew in Interactive Media Limits on Law Enforcement Activity in Pure Speech Environments Such as the Internet Recommendations Appendix A -- Politically Oriented World Wide Web Sites Appendix B -- Politically Oriented Usenet Newsgroups Download a text version of this document (37 K). Be sure to set your browser to "save to disk" Mr. Chairman and Members of the Subcommittee: My name is Jerry Berman, Executive Director of the Center for Democracy and Technology. The Center is pleased to have opportunity to address the subcommittee on one of the critical civil liberties issues of our day: the right to free speech, free association, and privacy on the Internet in the aftermath of Oklahoma City. The Center for Democracy and Technology is an independent, non-profit public interest policy organization in Washington, DC. The Center's mission is to develop and implement public policies to protect and advance individual liberty and democratic values in new digital media. The Center achieves its goals through policy development, public education, and coalition building. I. Overview: Shouting Fire in Cyberspace -- First Amendment Implications The recent tragedy of Oklahoma City brings us here with questions and concerns about terrorist activity and constitutional rights on the Internet. The Internet is a global network of networks that connects over twenty million users around the world. Each day hundreds of thousands of documents and millions of electronic mail messages are exchanged through these interconnected computers. Yes, there is information on the Internet about how to build bombs, reasons to overthrow the United States Government, and how to organize violent militia groups. The question facing us, as an open society, is how to respond to the most controversial and extreme uses of this new technology, this electronic, global Gutenberg printing press that turns all citizens into publishers who can reach thousands and even millions of people around the country and the world. As an open society, governed by the democratic principles of the First and Fourth Amendments, we tolerate and even encourage robust debate, advocacy and exchange of information on all subjects and in all media of expression, without exception. Prior restraint or any government action which might chill speech have long been labeled intolerable, expect in the few circumstances in which that speech advocates imminent violence and is likely to produce such violence. Even in these cases, Constitutional law and long-standing law enforcement policy have dictated great restraint in order to avoid chilling legitimate speech activity. Justice Holmes taught that the First Amendment does not protect a person from punishment for "falsely shouting fire in a theater and causing a panic," Schenk v. United States, 249 U.S. 47, 52 (1919), but what does it mean to "shout fire" in cyberspace? We believe that shouting fire in cyberspace is actually far less threatening, and thus less deserving of censure, than the equivalent act in the physical world. Though one can shout fire in an email message or on an Internet newsgroup, the likelihood that it will incite readers to imminent, criminal action is much reduced because the readers are dispersed around the country, and even around the world. As interactive media such as the Internet become more and more common in public life, we will be challenged to revisit these basic issues about the difference between protected advocacy and truly dangerous action. Articulating this line, over which government investigation and prosecution must not cross, requires faithfulness to the traditions of our open society and careful attention to the unique characteristics of this new medium. Answering these questions is particularly important because the Internet is the site of new, vibrant political discourse and information. Given the political character of communication in online environments, it is especially important that First Amendment activity and privacy rights be protected. Indeed, in the face of terrorist threats, it is particularly important to maintain an open society in order to minimize public paranoia about the government and to discredit the arguments of those who advocate the destruction of our government. The openness of the Internet and other interactive media should be seen as a great boon to our democracy, not as a threat to order. A noted scholar of terrorist behavior notes that: The U.S. has been remarkably free of political terrorism because the U.S. institutions for conflict resolution and justice redress, available to everyone, were believed to be working by and large in a satisfactory manner.1 Following Oklahoma City, the debate over counterterrorism policy has presupposed that the openness of our society is at odds with the fight against domestic terrorists. At least in the case of political advocacy on the Internet, we believe that a policy that promotes openness can help heal the paranoia and distrust of government and the political process by engaging the citizenry in a new political forum. The Center for Democracy and Technology believes that any prosecutorial or investigative activity must be predicated on speech plus a reasonable indication that the speech will lead to imminent violence. Speech alone is not enough to prosecute or investigate in other media, and it should not be sufficient in interactive media. Moreover, we assert that current law and the FBI's strict interpretation of the existing Attorney General investigative guidelines are adequate to serve both law enforcement purposes and First Amendment interests. II. Political Discourse on the Net: Democracy Flourishing Anew in Interactive Media To judge the Internet solely by the aspects of this new medium that have caught Congressional attention this year would lead to the belief that it is a haven for bomb-makers, militia members, racists, and purveyors of child pornography. Yet this view of the Internet fails to account for the great democratic potential of interactive media, and the fact that a considerable degree of political discussion, grass roots organizing, and political education takes place on the Internet today. Indeed, if present usage patterns continue, we believe that the Internet has the potential to revitalize political discourse by providing citizens with access to more detailed information about the political process and by creating a forum for political organizing that includes far more citizens in the political process than does the passive politics of television-based campaigning.2. This potential will be chilled if the medium is not properly protected from intrusion. As the popularity and accessibility of the Internet and commercial online services grows, and as the medium becomes easier to use, the political uses of the net are flourishing. Political discourse is facilitated by a variety of different communications techniques available online, including newsgroups, mailing list discussion groups, chat sessions, and a host of electronic publishing capabilities. Newsgroups: News groups are open, public areas in which users "post" articles and comments on a variety of subjects. Usenet newsgroups accessible around the world on the Internet may be thought of as a hybrid of a newspaper, because of their broad reach, and community bulletin boards, because of their interactivity and ease of access. Each newsgroup is devoted to a particular subject, from discussion of abortion, privacy rights, to the views of President Clinton and Rush Limbaugh. Newsgroups are read by thousands or even millions of people, and any one who reads the group can also contribute to the discussion by posting his or her own comments. [See Appendix B for a list of politically-oriented newsgroups] Public mailing lists: Those who have an interest in exchanging information about a particular subject may also join a public mailing list on that subject. Mailing lists enable all members to exchange electronic mail messages easily and allow others to join their discussions. Unlike newsgroups, many mailing lists that are open to the public enable participants to obtain a list of those who are participating in the discussion. Private mailing lists: In some circumstances, an existing group of people will create a private mailing list to enable the group to discuss issues in private through the exchange of electronic mail. These lists are considered closed to the public and the identity of each participant is generally known. Interactive chat services: A variety of services are available to enable a group of people to engage in live, instantaneous communications. These services might be characterized as conference calls, social gatherings, or town meetings in cyberspace. As with mailing lists, the chat sessions may be either public or private. The name or identity of each participant is generally known. These services have been used to hold public conferences and discussion sessions on a variety of subjects from music to politics. A geographically dispersed political group might well use interactive chat services to hold a meeting online. Electronic publishing: The Internet is a revolutionary medium for delivering and receiving information inasmuch as distribution is rapid at a low cost compared to print publication. Services such as the World Wide Web enable any individual or organization to quickly disseminate documents, images and even video to individuals all over the world. The Center for Democracy and Technology has found World Wide Web services critical to our own public education activities, and an increasing number of grass roots and community groups are coming to rely on the Internet to keep in touch with members and constituents. In fact, even some Senators offices are using the World Wide Web to communicate with and solicit feedback from constituents. 3 [See appendix Afor a list of politically-oriented World Wide Web sites.] Political groups left, right, and center are using the Internet to communicate, to organize, and to advocate their own views. As a nation we should be encouraging political discourse in this new medium, because of its potential to raise the level of political discussion beyond the soundbite and to involve more citizens in the political process. One aspect of encouraging political discourse in interactive media is to assure all users that their First Amendment and privacy rights will be respected fully. III. Limits on Law Enforcement Activity in Pure Speech Environments Such as the Internet All discussions and exchanges of information on the Internet are speech, and thus any proposal to criminalize or investigate such activity triggers a heightened degree of scrutiny. The tradition of prosecutorial and investigative sensitivity in areas involving First Amendment activity is both long standing and well-founded in our democratic traditions. We outline here the restrictions that have traditionally safeguarded political activity from harmful, chilling government interference, and suggest ways in which their application to cyberspce poses unique, new questions. In our preparation for this hearing, we have found information on how to construct bombs on the Internet. Curiously, the most detailed information that we found comes from Internet sites located outside the United States. The Terrorist Handbook, that contains information on how to make bombs similar to the one used in Oklahoma City, is available from a British World Wide Web site.4 And, information on how to make an atomic bomb can be found on a Swedish site.5 A. Heightened standard for prosecution of crimes involving First Amendment rights Even putting the problems of international criminal jurisdiction aside, we believe that the mere publication of these bomb manuals is protected by the First Amendment from criminal sanction. Criminal prosecution of speech-related activity must withstand the two-pronged test established by the Supreme Court in Brandenberg v. Ohio, 395 U. S. 444 (1969). Advocacy may not be proscribed unless it 1) "is directed to inciting or producing imminent lawless action", and 2) that such advocacy is "likely to ... produce such action." Id. at 447. Both the call to immediate criminal action and the likelihood that such a call will be heeded are necessary to justify prosecution. Advocacy of violence alone is insufficient. Yates v. United States, 354 U.S. 298, 318 (1957) (advocacy and teaching forcible overthrow of the government is immune from prosecution under the First Amendment). Taken together, these cases form what is commonly referred to as the "speech plus" doctrine. Some action or evidence of action beyond mere words must exist to justify a criminal prosecution of political advocacy activity. Cox v. Louisiana, 379 U.S. 559, 563 (1965). In Cox, the "plus" that justified prosecution of the advocacy in the course of a street demonstration was the imminent threat that the demonstrators would violently attack the county courthouse around which they were circling. Speech and advocacy on the Internet, unlike a street demonstration, are pure speech, with no immediate threat of physical violence, in all of the circumstances that we can imagine. As passionate and vehement as speech on the Internet may be, it remains only speech, with no immediate nexus to violence in most situations. Unlike the crowded street in which demonstrators circle a building, no matter how incendiary the words sent over the Internet may be, they are still a long way from causing criminal harm. Words sent over the Internet may inspire or incite, but the nexus between the words and subsequent action is far more attenuated than any case in which the Court has approved criminal sanction. Thus, we believe that even if one publishes bomb-making instructions online, the second prong of Brandenberg is not satisfied. There is no "plus" incident to the publication of a document that constitutes action likely to produce violence.6 B. Tradition of special status for law enforcement investigations involving political groups and exercise of First Amendment rights Further recognition of the sensitivity of law enforcement intrusion on First Amendment activities is found in the Attorney General's Guidelines governing investigation, infiltrations, and information collection involving First Amendment activities. In response to several decades of law enforcement harassment of political organizations, these guidelines established the general principle that law enforcement may not interfere with political activity based solely on predicates drawn from the speech and advocacy activities of political groups. As in the prosecutorial standard described above, something more than speech is required before investigations, infiltrations, or intrusive infiltration gathering activities are commenced. 1. Speech plus required to open an investigation The Attorney General's Guidelines on General Crimes, Racketeering Enterprise and Domestic Security/Terrorism Investigations7 are in place in order to "encourage Agents of the FBI to perform their duties with greater certainty, confidence and effectiveness," and to "give the public firm assurance that the FBI is acting properly under the law." This dual purpose guides the FBI toward the most effective investigative path, and assures the public that their free speech and privacy rights are fully respected. Of particular relevance to this hearing are the guidelines as they relate to domestic security/terrorism investigations. The guidelines state: "A domestic security/terrorism investigation may be initiated when the facts or circumstances reasonably indicate that two or more persons are engaged in an enterprise for the purpose of furthering political or social goals wholly or in part through activities that involve force or violence and a violation of the criminal laws of the United States." p. 13. These guidelines describe requirements for opening full investigations, and also, procedures and requirements for opening preliminary inquiries, which inclyde investigative activity where a full investigation in not necessary or not yet justified. The Investigation Guidelines recognize all political activity as "sensitive" to undue law enforcement intrusion. Two provisions exist to safeguard sensitive First Amendment activity from the chilling effect of improper intrusion. Speech plus predicate for a full investigation: The Investigative Guidelines clearly state that a full investigation may not be commenced based "solely on activities protected by the First Amendment or on the lawful exercise of any other rights secured by the Constitution" if there is no "prospect of harm." p. 3. Supervisory approval required for intrusion on political matters: In the event that a full investigation or even merely a preliminary inquiry is to be opened involving "sensitive" matters, including the investigation of political groups, supervisory approval is required before proceeding. p. 4-5. Given this tradition of forbearance in the case of investigations of First Amendment-protected activity, we would expect that all investigations and preliminary inquires involving political activity on the Internet or other interactive media would be subject to the above requirements. 2. Limitations on infiltrations Historically, law enforcement infiltration of domestic political groups has been shown to be excessive and violative of individual's right to free association. The Attorney General's Guidelines on FBI Use of Information and Confidential Sources8 were issued in order to set reasonable limits on law enforcement's use of these techniques. Like the Investigative Guidelines, the Infiltration Guidelines also recognize that extra care is needed when the use of these techniques implications First Amendment activities. In assessing the appropriateness of a particular operation, the FBI must consider that risk of intrusion upon "lawful association of individuals or expression of ideas." p. 3, 11. As with the Investigative Guidelines, supervisory approval is required for the use of an informant or confidential source who will "make use of formal or informal affiliation with an organization that is predominantly engaged in political activities." p. 11. Furthermore, the FBI intrusion must be assessed in light of its potential to "hinder the ability of the organization to function." p. 11. Inasmuch as many of the political activities undertaken in interactive media involve group discussion and planning, concerns raised by the Guidelines are especially relevant to any law enforcement activity online. We believe that this new medium raised many questions as to the proper role of law enforcement in light of these Guidelines. For example: Can law enforcement agents participate in online discussion groups? We believe that it may be allowed under the guidelines for law enforcement agents to read Usenet newsgroups under certain circumstances, however we are gravely concerned that the Bureau should not train a large vacuum cleaner on the Internet for the purpose collecting masses of information as to the political views of individual citizens, especially where those citizens are in no nexus to any criminal activity. If so, must they announce their identity as law enforcement officers to the group? If not, must they disclose their identity if asked? Absent authorization for infiltration under the Justice Department's criminal investigation standard, we believe that law enforcement agents should certainly be required to identify themselves. C. First and Fourth Amendment nexus: Protecting privacy rights to ensure First Amendment rights To encourage full political participation by all citizens requires that law enforcement respect individual privacy, as well as free speech rights. For, if individuals feel that they may be investigated, tracked, or otherwise subject to government scrutiny merely for association with a particular political idea or group, then they may be less likely to vigorously participate in the political process. The Court has long recognized the nexus between the First Amendment and Fourth Amendment privacy rights. United States v. United States District Court, 407 U.S. 297 (1972)(warrantless wiretap not only violates Fourth Amendment, but also implicates the First Amendment). Recognizing these concerns, the various Attorney General guidelines discussed above, as well as the Privacy Act, puts limits on the degree to which law enforcement may invade the privacy of individual and group political activity. In the absence of an authorized FBI inquiry or investigation, the Bureau is barred from maintaining any record on the First Amendment-protected activities of individuals. Section (e)(7) of the Privacy Act of 1974 (5 U.S.C. 552a) provides that: "Each agency that maintains a system of records shall maintain no record describing how any individual exercises rights guaranteed by the First Amendment unless expressly authorized by statute or by the individual about who the record is maintained or unless pertinent to and within the scope of an authorized law enforcement activity." Congress included Subsection (e)(7) in the Act to reassure the American public that the FBI, CIA and the military would no longer have free reign to monitor and maintain files on the first amendment-protected activities of citizens. The Senate Report on the bill explains that "[t]his section's restraint is aimed particularly at preventing collection of protected information, not immediately needed, about law-abiding Americans, on the off-chance that Government or the particular agency might possibly have to deal with them in the future." (S.Rept. 93-1183) As Representative Abner Mikva pointed out in hearings leading up to the passage of the Privacy Act: " The harm comes when the ordinary citizen feels he cannot engage in political activity without becoming a 'person of interest,' without having his name and photo place in a file colloquially, if not officially, labeled 'subversive.' " In floor debate on the final wording of the section, the importance of protecting lawful speech was underscored: "[N]o records or files shall be kept on persons which are not within constitutional limitations... The rights of Americans to dissent in a lawful manner and for lawful purposes must be preserved." In guidance issued by the Office of Management and Budget in December, 1975, the (e)(7) prohibition was interpreted to bar the collection of information on individuals even if the information was published and considered publicly available, with the exception of standard bibliographic or library reference materials: "Collections of newspaper clippings or other published matter about an individual maintained other than in a conventional reference library would normally be a system of records [and thus subject to the Privacy Act]." Further, a 1983 Justice Department memorandum intended to clarify the Privacy Act application to FBI collection of publicly available information concluded : "that unless the individual or group meets the standard for either a preliminary inquiry or a domestic security/terrorism investigation, collection of published materials, outside the library context, is barred." It is important to note, however, that the FBI guidelines state in the General Principles section that "Nothing in these guidelines is intended to prohibit the FBI from collecting and maintaining publicly available information consistent with the Privacy Act." An issue here is how the (e)(7) prohibition applies along the continuum of speech activities on the Internet. Both the Privacy Act and the FBI guidelines were written before the development of the Internet. A question exists as to whether, for instance, newsgroup communications are to be publicly available information for purposes of collection by the FBI. IV. Recommendations In conclusion, we want to commend Chairman Specter and this subcommittee for your diligence in addressing this very important issue. We close with the following recommendations: Don't criminalize pure speech: Our First Amendment traditions and long-standing law enforcement policy teach that criminal sanctions are only appropriate for "speech plus" some criminal or likely violent action. Maintain cautious interpretation of Attorney General's guidelines in online investigations: Cautious interpretations of the current guidelines leave the FBI plenty of room to investigate genuine threats and provide the citizenry reassurance that their political activities, even where controversial, are not subject to government scrutiny and intrusion. Start of dialogue on the proper role of law enforcement in policing the online world: We hope that this hearing is the first step in a process that establishes, based on a broad public dialogue, how law enforcement can be expected to function in the new online environment. One venue for such a dialogue is the legislation (S.714) that Senator Leahy has introduced, calling for a study of proper legal responses to violence, hate speech, and sexually-explicit material in interactive media. We commend Senator Leahy for his leadership on this issue, and are grateful to Senator Kohl for his co-sponsorship of the Leahy study. We have also been in discussions with this subcommittee about the study, and look forward to working with you. Treat proposals to expand surveillance authority with great caution: In the wake of the Oklahoma City tragedy, law enforcement and the Administration is proposing dramatic changes to federal wiretap authority including new roving tap powers and the use of any federal criminal statute as the predicate for wiretaps in terrorism investigations. Just last year, the Congress enacted changes to wiretap law in the Digital Telephony bill. The changes now sought were not raised in the context of last years bill and there is no indication that any of the changes sought this year are justified by new circumstances. Though these issues are beyond the scope of today's hearing, we do want to note for the record that we are very concerned about expansion in roving tap authority, additions to the list of predicate crimes for electronic surveillance, as well as other records access provisions proposed in various counterterrorism bills now before both houses of Congress. Again, we thank the Chair for the opportunity to appear before you on this very important issue and are ready and willing to work with you on these critical civil liberties issues affecting interactive media. Appendix A -- Politically Oriented World Wide Web Sites General Resource: Political Participation Project http://www.ai.mit.edu/projects/ppp/home.html The Political Participation Project is a research program investigating how computer networks can be used to facilitate political participation. The Project's mission is to design networked, interactive media that improve citizens' participation in the democratic process. The Project, affiliated with the Intelligent Information Infrastructure Project at MIT, is non-profit and non-partisan. Project Vote Smart http://www.peak.org/~votesmrt/ Project Vote Smart is a voter's self-defense system that provides the voter with factual information on candidates and elected officials. Interactive Democracy http://www.teleport.com/~pcllgn/id.html A free service that provides a gateway to allow individuals to send email messages to a list of representatives of government and the media. NewtWatch http://www.cais.com/newtwatch/ NewtWatch is a new web service designed to be your resource on Speaker of the House Newt Gingrich. Contains information on Gingrhich's voting records, political contributions, legislative efforst, and more. Clinton Watch gopher://dolphin.gulf.net:3000/ Clinton Watch is a political column on the Internet devoted to acritical analysis of the policies and actions of the Clinton administration. Conservative Sites: The Conservative Link http://www.moscow.com/~bmdesign/tcl/conintro.html The Conservative Link is a page for people who share the conservative point of view. The Right Side of the Web http://www.clark.net/pub/jeffd/index.html The Right Side of the Web is a unique listing of resources for political conservatives. The page contains links to other conservitie oriented sites, email lists, publications/editorials, and links to other policical groups (including liberal groups). Liberal Sites: The Left Side of the Web http://paul.spu.edu/~sinnfein/progressive.html The Left Side of the Web -- Links to liberal related resouces , newsgroups, publications, and file archives Progressive Page http://www.io.org/~spamily/SocPolEnv.html A collection of links for progressives, feminists, liberals, and anyone else who"s interested. Political Organizations: The Center For Democracy And Technology http://www.cdt.org/ CDT is a non profit public interest organization working to develop and advocate public policies that preserve and enhance democratic values in new communications media. The Progress and Freedom Foundation http://www.pff.org/ The Progress and Freedom Foundation a non-profit organization dedicated to creating a positive vision of the future. Internet Headquarters for the Republican Primary http://www.umr.edu/~sears/primary/main.html Internet Headquarters for the Republican Primary - info on who are running, who may run, and who's not running for President in the Republican party. Democratic Senatorial Campaign Committee http://www.dscc.org/d/dscc.html Over the next several months, look for new information about potential candidates, impact issues in 1996, and other DSCC activities. United We Stand America http://www.telusys.com/uwsa.html An educational, nonpartisan, nonprofit organization designed to inform the public about the important issues facing our country and to give our members a voice in the way we are governed. Rock The Vote http://www.iuma.com/RTV/ Rock The Vote - national organization for young people based on one simple idea: young Americans deserve to be heard. Appendix B -- Politically Oriented Usenet Newsgroups Usenet newsgroups are analogous to a community bulletin board, only they are available worldwide to anyone who has access to the Internet. There are more than 4,000 usenet news groups available on the Internet, and each covers a different topic. Although some specific groups are moderated, usenet as a whole is not organized or administered by any one individual or organization. Adding and removing discussion forums is governed by consensus among system administrators. Below is a list of just a few of the usenet newsgroups dedicated to talk.abortion -- discussion and debate on the issue of abortion talk.politics.guns -- debate pro and con on gun-control issues alt.activism -- a discussion forum for political activists alt.censorship -- discussion on the topic of censorship alt.feminism -- discussion on feminist issues alt.politics.clinton -- general discussion and debate about the President and his policies alt.politics.perot -- general discussion about the former presidential candidate and his policies alt.politics.democrat -- discussion and debate about Democratic party figures and policies altl.politics.usa.republican -- discussion and debate about Republican party figures and policies alt.rush-limgaugh -- a forum for fans and foes of the talk show host Footnotes F. Hacker, Crusaders, Criminals, Crazies: Terro and Terrorism in Our Time, 67 (1976). back See Berman & Weitzner, Abundance and User Control: Renewing the Democractic Heart of the First Amendment in the Age of Interactive Media, 104 Yale.L.J. 1619 (1995). back The document can be found the following URL: http://www.mcs.dundee.ac.uk:8080/~apaterso/terror.txt. back See URLhttp://www.nada.kth.se/~nv91-asa/atomic.html. back The publication of a bomb-making manual on theInternet is factually distinct from the publication of instructions on making a hydrogen bomb that was injoined in United States v. Progressive, Inc., 467 F.Supp 990 (W.D. Wisc. 1979). In that case, the material which was enjoined was classified and was held so dangerous that it could lead to world-wide conflagration. Id. at 995. The article was ultimately published and the case became moot because the information previously held as classified was found in a number of public libraries. We would also distinguish Near v. Minnesota, 283 U.S. 697 (1931), a case approving the bar on publication of troop movements in local newspapers. Near stakes out an extremely narrow area involving prior restraint for the sake of national security threats, such as the location of troops. The threat of bomb-making information -- all of which is generally available in libraries, chemical text books, and farming manuals -- is clearly not as great as the disclosure of military strategy. back Guidelines originally issued by Attorney General Edward Levi in 1976 and modified by William French Smith in 1983 and Richard Thornburg in 1989. Hereinafter Investigation Guidelines. back Issued in 1980 by Attorney General Benjamin Civiletti. back Return to the CDT Home PageWT02-B05-37IA095-001027-B031-33http://www.cdt.org:80/policy/terrorism/cnss_habeas.html 205.177.10.31 19970215010002 text/html 8681HTTP/1.0 200 OKDate: Sat, 15 Feb 1997 00:58:46 GMTServer: Apache/1.1.1Content-type: text/html CNSS Analysis of Enacted "Anti-Terrorism" Legislation Center for National Security Studies 2130 H Street, NW, Suite 701 Washington, DC 20037 tel: (202) 994-7060 fax: (202) 994-7005 e-mail: cnss@gwis2.circ.gwu.edu Terrorism Law Is Major Setback for Civil Liberties In a major blow to the Bill of Rights, Congress has passed and PresidentClinton on April 24 signed the anti-terrorism bill, Pub. L.104-132. Thenew law, which took effect upon signing - Guts habeas corpus, the "Great Writ" by which federal courtshave granted relief from violations of the Bill of Rights in state courtcriminal proceedings. Perhaps the single worst part of the bill, this hasnothing to do with terrorism, since it involves the standards for federalreview of state court rulings, and terrorism cases are almost always triedin federal, not state courts. Rather, it is the culmination of a decades-longeffort to end meaningful federal constitutional review of the proceduresby which death sentences are imposed in the states. The essence of thechanges is a provision requiring federal courts to overlook many instanceswhere state courts failed to adhere strictly to the U.S. Constitution, evenin cases going to the basic fairness of the trial or the guilt of the accused. The Supreme Court has already taken up a case that presents questions asto the effect of the habeas changes. Oral argument was June 3 and a decisionmay come before July. Makes it a crime for U.S. citizens to provide any material support tothe lawful political or humanitarian activities of any foreign group designatedby the Secretary of State as "terrorist." It was already a federalcrime to support the violent activities of terrorists. Banks in the U.S.,facing fines of $50,000, must freeze the assets of any domestic organizationor U.S. citizen believed to be an agent of a designated group. The provisiondoes not specify how the banks identify the domestic "agents"of terrorist groups, nor does it provide any mechanism for a domestic organizationto get its funds unfrozen. Denies visas to foreigners visiting the U.S. based on mere membershipin groups designated as terrorist by the Secretary of State. Denying visasbased on membership and not on terrorist activity represents a return tothe discredited ideological exclusions standard of the McCarran-Walter Act. Creates a special court that will use secret evidence to deport U.S.residents or visitors suspected of being members of terrorist groups. Theclassified evidence will be presented to the judge but the alien will beprovided only a summary of the evidence. Severely curtails the ability to claim political asylum, by requiringan undocumented alien entering the U.S. to be immediately sent back to thecountry he is fleeing unless he can prove, at the border inspection point,a credible fear of political persecution. Refugees would not have timeto obtain legal representation, and the on-the-spot determination of theINS officer would not be reviewable in court. Recently, while consideringan otherwise terrible immigration bill, the Senate voted to repeal thisprovision; the fate of the repeal is now in the hands of the immigrationconferees, as the House-passed bill has no comparable repeal provision. Deprives aliens of due process rights if they entered the U.S. withoutinspection. Again, this provision has nothing to do with terrorism. Itis an effort to strip aliens facing deportation of the due process theyhave long been granted. Opens the door once again to politically focused investigations likethe flawed CISPES probe, by repealing the Edwards amendment, a provisionenacted less than two years ago, which barred the FBI, when investigatingthe crime of material support for terrorism, from opening investigationsbased solely on activities protected under the First Amendment. For more information on the provisions summarized above, seethe memo posted below, which CNSS prepared in 1995 when the bill wasfirst introduced. A few objectionable provisions sought by the President having to do withwiretaps were dropped but these would have been incremental in their effectcompared to the radical changes that were adopted. Designation of Terrorist Groups -- An Inherently Political Decision with Wide-Reaching Consequences Under the new law, the Secretary of State is authorized to designatecertain foreign entities as "terrorist organizations". Threesets of consequences flow from the Secretary of States decsion todesignate a foreign entity as a terrorist organization: (1) it is a crimefor anybody in this country to contribute money or other material supportto the activities, including the legal social, political and humanitarianactivities of the group; (2) all members of the group are ineligible forvisas, even if they have never been involved in illegal activities: and(3) the government can use secret evidence to deport alleged members ofsuch groups. The new law allows the decision of the Secretary of State to designate agroup as terrorist to be based on classified evidence, and if challengedin court, the Secretary of State's decision can be defended on the basisof secret evidence. The government admits that some of the groups it will designate are broad-basedorganizations engaged in both lawful social, political and humanitarianactivities as well as violent activities. The law already provided thatindividuals who have engaged, or are likely to engage, in terrorist activitiesare to be excluded and deported from the U.S. McCarran-Walter Ideological Exclusions Reemerge; First Amendment Rights of Americans at Stake The First Amendment grants Americans the right to receive informationand ideas, especially ideas the government finds objectionable. This FirstAmendment right includes the receipt of information from abroad. One highlyeffective way of transmitting information remains the personal encounter,through speeches, conferences and meetings. The immigration law sets thestandards both for excluding aliens from permanent admission and makingthem ineligible for visas for temporary visits. Rendering a category ofaliens "excludable" on ideological grounds means that they cannotcome here even temporarily to speak or engage in other activities implicatingthe First Amendment rights of U.S. citizens. Less than six years ago, Congress repealed the ideological exclusion provisionsof the McCarran-Walter Act, which had barred foreigners from obtaining visasto visit the U.S. based on their political activities and associations. Since adoption of the Immigration Act of 1990, foreigners can be deniedvisas based on their own acts, not based on beliefs, advocacy or associationsthat would be protected under the First Amendment if engaged in by a personwithin the U.S. Foreigners seeking to visit the U.S. to speak or lecturecan be barred if there is reason to believe that they had engaged or wouldengage in the U.S. in criminal conduct. This reform, a major victory forCNSS and the Free Trade in Ideas coalition, is now being reversed. Theterrorism bill amends the Immigration Act to exclude any alien who is amember of a group designated by the Secretary of State as terrorist, evenif the individual had only participated in the group's political or humanitarianactivities. Conclusion Provisions of the omnibus terrorism law will almost certainly be subjectto judicial challenge on constitutional grounds. For now, the law representsthe worst setback for civil liberties in many years. Return to the CDT Counter-Terrorism Page Return to CDT Home Page Posted on June 20, 1996 || For more information, contact webmaster@cdt.org. WT02-B05-38IA095-001027-B031-50http://www.cdt.org:80/policy/terrorism/cnss.cti.anal.html 205.177.10.31 19970215010106 text/html 19291HTTP/1.0 200 OKDate: Sat, 15 Feb 1997 00:59:19 GMTServer: Apache/1.1.1Content-type: text/html CNSS Analysis of Clinton Administration Coutner-Terrorism Proposal CENTER FOR NATIONAL SECURITY STUDIES Gelman Library, Suite 701 2130 H Street, NW Washington, DC 20037 tel: (202) 994-7060 fax: (202) 994-7005 April 26, 1995 Clinton Terrorism Legislation Threatens Constitutional Rights On February 10, 1995, a counterterrorism bill drafted by theClinton Administration was introduced in the Senate as S. 390 andin the House of Representatives as H.R. 896. The Clinton bill is a mixture of: provisions erodingconstitutional and statutory due process protections, selectivefederalization -- on political grounds -- of state crimes (minusstate due process rules), discredited ideas from the Reagan andBush Administrations, and the extension of some of the worstelements of crime bills of the recent past. The legislation would: authorize the Justice Department to pick and choosecrimes to investigate and prosecute based on political beliefsand associations; repeal the ancient provision barring the U.S. militaryfrom civilian law enforcement; expand a pre-trial detention scheme that puts the burdenof proof on the accused; loosen the carefully-crafted rules governing federalwiretaps, in violation of the Fourth Amendment; establish special courts that would use secret evidenceto order the deportation of persons convicted of no crimes, inviolation of basic principles of due process; permit permanent detention by the Attorney General ofaliens convicted of no crimes, with no judicial review; give the President unreviewable power to criminalizefund-raising for lawful activities associated with unpopularcauses; renege on the Administration's approval in the lastCongress of a provision to insure that the FBI would notinvestigate based on First Amendment activities; and resurrect the discredited ideological visa denialprovisions of the McCarran Walter Act to bar foreign speakers. Once again, the impatience of those charged with upholdingthe Constitution has led them to seek authority to circumvent it. The U.S. has not been a fertile breeding ground forterrorism. Part of the reason lies in the values at the core ofour unique system of governance -- diversity, religious andethnic tolerance, acceptance of change, openness to new ideas,constitutional limits on government discretion, reliance on legalproceedings open to public scrutiny. These values make it hardto nurture in the U.S. the ethnic or religious hatred that fuelsmuch terrorism. Unfortunately, these values would be underminedby this legislation. 1. Use of Secret Evidence to Deport Aliens Not Charged with Criminal Activity Title II is a slightly modified version of a proposal firstmade during the Bush Administration, which Congress twice refusedto enact. The changes made by the Clinton Administration do notcure the essence of the proposal: it would create a special courtto hear secret evidence against aliens whom the government wishesto deport. It is important to recognize at the outset that theprovision applies only to aliens who are not charged with anycrime. If any person found in this country was suspected ofcommitting a crime, especially a terrorist crime, that personwould be arrested and put on trial here or extradited to acountry where he could stand trial. This provision is designedto allow the government to deport persons who are deemedundesirable because of their political associations and beliefs. For the government to take adverse action against anindividual based on secret evidence is the antithesis of Americanjurisprudence and a fundamental due process violation. Aside from the Star Chamber concept that is at the core ofthis provision, it has many other extraordinary features, amongthem the following: Use of Illegally Obtained Evidence. The provision states:"Nor shall such alien have the right to seek suppression ofevidence." Repealing the exclusionary rule eviscerates theFourth Amendment protection against unreasonable search andseizure. Exemption from FISA Standards. The Foreign IntelligenceSurveillance Act has a meticulously crafted set of proceduresintended to balance the rights of individuals against thenational security. Those procedures include a requirement thatthe government give the defendant notice when it intends to useinformation from a FISA wiretap and allow the defendant to moveto suppress the evidence if it was obtained illegally. The billwould make such provisions, which have worked fine in the mostserious espionage cases, inapplicable in alien deportation cases. Permanent detention. If no country is willing to receive analien ordered deported under the new provisions, the bill statesthat "the Attorney General may, notwithstanding any otherprovision of law, retain the alien in custody. ... Any alien incustody pursuant to this subsection shall be released fromcustody solely at the discretion of the Attorney General." Appeals only in D.C.. In what appears to be either forum-shopping or an effort to impose additional costs on aliensfighting deportation, the bill would allow appeals fromdeportation proceedings only to the United States Court ofAppeals for the District of Columbia Circuit, forcing attorneysfrom all over the country to come to Washington. Guilt by Association. The legislation subtly but criticallyrewrites the definition of engaging in terrorist activity in theImmigration and Nationality Act, which serves as the basis forthe exclusion of aliens seeking entry and the deportation ofaliens already in this country. The current law defines "to engage in terrorist activity" tocover someone who "affords material support to any individual,organization, or government in conducting a terrorist activity."The revised definition would read: "affords material support toan individual, organization, or government which the actor knowsor reasonably should know has committed or plans to committerrorist activity." The change would remove the current law'srequirement that there be a nexus between the material supportand the terrorist activity, thereby allowing exclusion anddeportation of any alien who had supported the peaceful, legalactivities of a group that engaged, or had subgroups thatengaged, in illegal acts. The "has committed" language wouldeven seem to sweep in those who support groups that oncecommitted but have now foresworn terrorism. Guilt by Association, Part II. The bill would resurrect thediscredited ideological tests of the McCarran Walter Act fordenying foreign visitors visas to come to speak in the U.S. While the Immigration Act of 1990 authorized the denial of visasto persons who had engaged in terrorist activities, this billwould deny visas to all representatives or spokespersons forgroups labeled terrorist, even if the representative orspokesperson had never engaged in any illegal activity. Thistest would have allowed the exclusion of representatives of theAfrican National Congress or the IRA or many other politicalgroups, even if they were seeking to enter the U.S. to talk aboutprospects for peace. Continued Exclusion of PLO Representatives. Even afterYassar Arafat has been received at the White House, where hesigned a peace accord with Israel, he and every other alien whois a representative of the PLO is "considered, for purposes ofthis Act, to be engaged in a terrorism activity." Son of Star Chamber. Section 202(d) of the bill seems toauthorize a mini-Star Chamber proceeding, allowing the use ofclassified information in any deportation case, even those wherethe complex provisions of the alien terrorist removal section arenot invoked. 2. Terrorist Fund-Raising Is Whatever the President Decides It Is and Nobody Can Question His Decision Title III of the bill creates a new federal crime of"terrorist fund-raising." The provision would allow thePresident to define the crime by designating certain groups asterrorist organizations. The President can also designateindividual persons who are raising funds for, or acting for or onbehalf of, any organization he designates. From then on, it is acrime for "any person subject to the jurisdiction of the UnitedStates anywhere, to directly or indirectly, raise, receive orcollect on behalf of, or furnish, give, transmit, transfer orprovide funds to or for an organization or person" so designated,unless a license has been granted by the Secretary of theTreasury. In an attempt to avoid judicial review of designations thatare either arbitrary or politically motivated, the legislationstates that the President's designation of a group or individualwould be final. "Any finding made in any designation pursuant to[this section] shall be conclusive. No question concerning thevalidity of the issuance of such designation may be raised by thedefendant in a criminal prosecution as a defense or as anobjection to any trial or hearing." Introducing a furtheropportunity for biased or inconsistent decisions, the legislationallows the President to take an organization or person off thelist whenever he decides that "the national security, foreignrelations, or economic interests of the United States sowarrant," even though the organization is still involved interrorist activity. The new crime adopts by reference the definition ofterrorist activity in the Immigration and Nationality Act. Thatdefinition states that a terrorist organization means anyorganization engaged, or which has a significant subgroup whichengages, in terrorism activity, regardless of any legitimateactivities conducted by the organization or its subgroups. The fundraising provisions are unconstitutional because theyviolate the fundamental principle of our constitutional law that"a blanket prohibition of association with a group having bothlegal and illegal aims," without a showing of specific intent tofurther the unlawful aims of the group, is an unconstitutionalinfringement on "the cherished freedom of association protectedby the First Amendment." Elfbrandt v. Russell, 384 U.S. 11(1966). As the Supreme Court emphasized in Noto v. UnitedStates, 364 U.S. 290, 299-300 (1961), "There is a danger that onein sympathy with the legitimate aims of . . . an organization,but not specifically intending to accomplish them by resort toviolence, might be punished for his adherence to lawful andconstitutionally protected purposes, because of other andunprotected purposes which he does not necessarily share." 3. A New Federal Crime of Terrorism to Be Applied Selectively Based on the Political Motivation of the Offender Section 101 of the bill creates a new federal crime ofinternational terrorism in the United States. Terrorist activityshould be a crime. It already is a crime. Section 101 does notcriminalize anything that is not already a crime. The newoffense is defined as any killing, kidnapping, maiming, assaultresulting in serious bodily injury, or assault with a deadlyweapon, and any damage to any real or personal property "inviolation of the laws of any State or the United States," so longas one of 9 jurisdictional bases is met. Since the new offense does not cover anything that is notalready a crime, the main purpose of the proposal seems to be toavoid certain constitutional and statutory protections that wouldotherwise apply. Investigations of, and prosecutions for, thenew crime would be subject to the following special rules: Suspension of posse comitatus. The new subsection (f)provides a wholesale exemption from one of the oldest protectionsin American law, the separation between military and policefunctions. At a time when there is growing public concern aboutthe militarization of law enforcement, subsection (f) providesthat "Assistance may be requested from any Federal ... agency,including the Army, Navy and Air Force, any statute, rule orregulation to the contrary notwithstanding." Avoiding state due process protections. The federal rulesof criminal procedure are in certain respects outdated comparedto state court rules. For example, many states have rejected theconcept of trial by surprise, adopting instead rules that requirethe prosecution to disclose its evidence to the defense inadvance of trial, and vice versa. This facilitates pleabargaining and ensures that both sides are better prepared so thetrial, if there is one, runs more smoothly. By contrast, underfederal law, a defense lawyer is entitled to see prior statementsmade to police by a witness against his client only after thewitness testifies at trial. There is increasing discussion ofmodernizing this federal rule. In contrast to this trend, the draft adopts a tactic thatstate and federal prosecutors have jointly pursued to circumventstate procedural rules. Subsection (g) provides that in anyprosecution under the section, "only the elements of state law,and not any provisions pertaining to criminal procedure, areadopted." This allows state prosecutors, dissatisfied with therules of their own state, to take certain cases to federalprosecutors in order to obtain the benefit of rules that make itharder to mount an effective defense. Chipping away at the Fifth and Sixth Amendments. Inderogation of the Fifth Amendment's presumption of innocence andthe Sixth Amendment right to bail, Subsection 101(d) of this billprovides that anyone accused of committing a crime thereunder ispresumed to be ineligible for bail and may be detained pretrial. The accused bears the burden of rebutting the presumption. (Thisis a significant expansion of a provision that first appeared in1984, when Congress adopted 18 USC 3142(e), shifting to thedefendant in certain drug cases the burden of proving pretrialthat he is eligible for the constitutional right to bail.) Loosening the rules on wiretaps. Subsection (e) wouldexempt terrorism cases from the carefully crafted and balancedstandards developed in 1986 for so-called "roving taps." WhenCongress adopted the Electronic Communications Privacy Act of1986, it struck a careful balance between privacy and lawenforcement. Because of the Fourth Amendment's specificityrequirement, federal law has always required applicants forwiretap orders to specify the location to be tapped. Somecriminals were attempting to evade surveillance by using payphones, the location of which could not always be anticipated forinclusion in the wiretap application. Therefore, Congress in1986 created a limited exception to the specificity requirementwhere the target of an investigation has been taking steps tothwart interception by changing facilities. This bill woulddispense with that standard, allowing roving taps to be usedanytime a person is suspected of being involved in a terroristcrime, regardless of the law's requirement that there be a basisfor the roving tap authority. Mandatory jail sentence. The new subsection 2332b(d) wouldprovide that no person convicted of a violation under the newcrime could be placed on probation. While it is reasonable thatpersons who commit violent crimes would be incarcerated, the newsection is not limited to violent offenses. Someone whointentionally scratches the car of a foreign diplomat would go tojail if charged and convicted under this provision. This givesprosecutors, who decide whether to charge under this section oranother section, a tremendous club to hold over the heads ofminor offenders. Threats Under the proposed statute, threatening to doanything violent is a crime itself. There are numerous federalthreat statutes already on the books (bomb threats, threatsagainst the President), but there is no general threat statute. Under this bill, threatening to hit a tourist would be a federalcrime, which could be investigated and prosecuted withoutadherence to constitutional and statutory protections. First Amendment dangers. It is unlikely, of course, thatordinary crimes against tourists would be prosecuted under thissection. The question of how cases will be selected forinvestigation and prosecution under such a broad statute bringsus to the nub of the threat it poses. Proposed new section2332b(e) provides that no indictment could be brought unless theJustice Department certifies that the offense appeared to havebeen intended to intimidate or retaliate against a government orpopulation. So the cases will be chosen based on the offender'spolitical motives, known or suspected. Selecting offenders for prosecution based on their politicsis fraught with danger to the First Amendment, especially whereordinary constitutional and statutory guarantees arecircumvented. The problem is further exacerbated here, wheremotive is not an element of the crime to be proved at trial butan unreviewable prosecutorial determination. Worse than the prosecutorial concerns are the investigativeimplications of the legislation. Encompassing as it doesattempts, threats and conspiracies, and read in conjunction withthe extraterritorial provisions in sections 102 and 103 and thefund-raising provisions in Title III, this legislation is ageneral charter for the FBI to investigate political groups andcauses at will. Indeed, the Administration is quite explicit about itsintention to investigate based on First Amendment activities. Insection 601 of the bill, it seeks to repeal a seemingly modestprovision (the "Edwards amendment") agreed to by theAdministration only 6 months ago and enacted in last year's crimebill that prohibited investigations of "material support" basedon activities protected by the First Amendment. TheAdministration now claims that this provision imposes "anunprecedented and impractical burden on law enforcementconcerning the initiation and continuation of criminalinvestigations" and asks for its repeal. The amendment in factwas intended to merely codify the criminal standard in the Smithguidelines. Equal protection violation. One of the jurisdictional basesset forth in the new provision is that any alleged offender is analien. While the federal government has broader discretion thanthe states in making distinctions between citizens and aliens,providing different crimes for aliens and citizens would surelyseem to violate the Constitution. Return to the CDT Counter-Terrorism Page. Return to the CDT Home Page.WT02-B05-39IA095-001027-B031-80http://www.cdt.org:80/policy/terrorism/cnss.FBI.auth.html 205.177.10.31 19970215010129 text/html 6819HTTP/1.0 200 OKDate: Sat, 15 Feb 1997 01:00:12 GMTServer: Apache/1.1.1Content-type: text/html Current FBI Counter-Terrorism Authority CENTER FOR NATIONAL SECURITY STUDIES Gelman Library, Suite 701 2130 H Street, NW Washington, DC 20037 tel: (202) 994-7060 fax: (202) 994-7005 April 26, 1995 The FBI's Domestic Counterterrorism Program Recent news commentary has suggested that the FBI ishamstrung in its efforts to combat domestic terrorism. Oneformer FBI official was quoted as saying that "you have to waituntil you have blood on the street before the Bureau can act." Steven Emerson has asserted that the FBI is severely restrictedin infiltrating known extremist groups, that it has no terrorismdata base like the CIA's, and that it is powerless to stopextremist groups from masquerading as "religious" groups. All of these claims are incorrect. Persons concerned aboutaddressing the threat of terrorism need to begin with a clearunderstanding of current FBI capabilities, which are in factbroad. Attorney General Guidelines The FBI currently operates under a set of guidelines issuedin 1983 by Ronald Reagan's Attorney General, William FrenchSmith. The Smith guidelines were a modification of guidelinesissued by Gerald Ford's Attorney General Edward Levi in 1976. The Levi guidelines were criticized as being too restrictive andcumbersome. Indeed, many of the criticisms of the currentguidelines are really the same criticisms lodged against the Leviguidelines, which the Smith guidelines were intended to rectify. The Smith guidelines make it absolutely clear that the FBIdoes not have to wait for blood in the streets before it caninvestigate a terrorist group. The guidelines expressly state: "In its efforts to anticipate or prevent crimes, the FBI must attimes initiate investigations in advance of criminal conduct." The threshold for opening a full investigation is low: adomestic security/terrorism investigation may be opened whenever "facts or circumstances reasonably indicate that two or morepersons are engaged in an enterprise for the purpose offurthering political or social goals wholly or in part throughactivities that involve force or violence and a violation of thecriminal laws of the United States." Indeed, the FBI is also authorized to open a preliminaryinquiry on an even lower threshold: The Bureau can begininvestigating when it receives any information or allegation"whose responsible handling requires some further scrutiny." Preliminary inquiries can be conducted without headquartersapproval for 90 days, during which the FBI can conductinterviews, contact confidential sources and previouslyestablished informants, and carry out physical surveillance. Preliminary inquiries can be extended with Headquarters approval. Advocacy One of the main purposes of the Smith guidelines was to makeit clear that the FBI could open an investigation based onadvocacy of violence. While urging respect for the FirstAmendment, the guidelines state: "When, however, statementsadvocate criminal activity or indicate an apparent intent toengage in crime, particularly crimes of violence, aninvestigation under these guidelines may be warranted ... ." How do the Guidelines work in practice? In any given year, the FBI engages in approximately twodozen full domestic terrorism investigations. Over the yearssince the Smith guidelines were adopted, nearly two thirds ofthese full investigations were opened before a crime had beencommitted. The FBI has investigated right-wing, anti-government,anti-tax, paramilitary and militia groups under this authority. The FBI's characterization of White American Resistance (WAR) is typical: After opening a domestic terrorism investigation of WAR,the FBI stated "No known acts of violence have as yet beenattributed to WAR; however, leaders of the group have beenencouraging members to arm themselves." The FBI has been successful in preventing terrorist crimesbefore they occurred. In 1993, for example, the FBI arrestedseveral skinheads in Los Angeles after a lengthy investigationdetermined that they has been discussing and planning attacks ona black church, Jewish targets and other religious targets. Calling something a church or a religious organization doesnot immunize it from investigation. In fact, a number of thewhite supremacist groups investigated by the FBI had assumed areligious mantle, under the "Christian Identity" philosophy. TheFBI investigated under the terrorism guidelines the YahwehChurch, a militant black group in Miami, and other religiousgroups. Nothing in law or logic prohibits the FBI from openinginvestigations based on public source material or reports fromprivate civil rights groups like the Southern Poverty Law Center. The FBI opens investigations based on any credible source,including news reports. For example, the FBI opened a civilrights investigation into the Rodney King case as soon asofficials saw the broadcast of the videotape. And the JusticeDepartment has met with abortion rights activists to solicitinformation about groups that may be planning attacks on abortionclinics. Terrorist Information System The FBI has a state of the art, on-line computer databaseknown as the Terrorist Information System containing informationon suspected terrorist groups and individuals. The system hasover 200,000 individuals and over 3000 organizations orenterprises. The individuals indexed include not only subjectsof investigations but also known or suspected members ofterrorist groups, associates, contacts, victims and witnesses. The organizations or enterprises include not only terroristgroups but also affiliated organizations or enterprises. TISallows the FBI to rapidly retrieve information and to make linksbetween persons, groups or events. Issues to Be Considered There appears to be a growing problem of disaffected lonerswho cut themselves off from all groups. An increased effort tomonitor anti-government groups is unlikely to identify theseloners, who may pose the greatest threat. In this context, theenterprise concept that serves as the basis of the Smithguidelines -- and that serves as the basis for calls for greaterinfiltration of groups -- may be irrelevant. Return to the CDT Counter-Terrorism Page. Return to the CDT Home Page.WT02-B05-40IA095-001027-B008-421http://www.cdt.org:80/policy/terrorism/cnss.trends.html 205.177.10.31 19970215010158 text/html 6865HTTP/1.0 200 OKDate: Sat, 15 Feb 1997 01:00:42 GMTServer: Apache/1.1.1Content-type: text/html Recent Trends in Domestic and International Terrorism CENTER FOR NATIONAL SECURITY STUDIES Gelman Library, Suite 701 2130 H Street, NW Washington, DC 20037 tel: (202) 994-7060 fax: (202) 994-7005 April 26, 1995 Recent Trends in Domestic and International Terrorism On February 10, 1995, a counterterrorism bill drafted by theClinton Administration was introduced in the Senate as S. 390 andin the House of Representatives as H.R. 896. The legislationposes serious threats to constitutional rights. Terrorism is a serious problem, and calls for a seriousresponse founded on a clear and accurate assessment of the facts. In the past, the Administration and Congress have found it highlyrelevant to look at the numbers and trends of terrorist incidentsas a predicate for policy decisions. The Administration's proposal begins with nearly eight pagesof "findings" that omit some key facts: that terrorism in theUnited States, especially terrorism of international origin, israre, and that terrorism abroad, including terrorism againstAmericans abroad, continues to decline. 1. International Terrorism in the U.S. According to reports published by the FBI, in the pasteleven years, there have been two international terroristincidents in the United States. (An international terroristincident is defined by the FBI as one committed by a group orindividual that is foreign-based and/or directed by countries orgroups outside the United States or whose activities transcendnational boundaries.) One of the two incidents was the notoriousand highly destructive World Trade Center bombing in February1993. The other was not even directed against the U.S. and ishard to characterize as a serious incident: in April 1992, fiveopponents of the Iranian regime occupied the offices of theIranian Mission to the United Nations in New York City. The fivepled guilty and were sentenced to three months in jail. 2. Domestic Terrorism in the U.S. Last year (1994), there were no terrorist incidents in theUnited States, according to statistics maintained by the FBI. There were no preventions of terrorist incidents in the UnitedStates. There was one set of suspected terrorist incidents,involving improvised explosive devices discovered at twolocations in New York. The devices, which did not detonate, wereaccompanied by notes criticizing the government of Israel asbeing too liberal, signed by the Maccabee Squad and the Shield ofDavid. The case remains unsolved to date. In 1993, there were 11 domestic terrorist incidents in theU.S. Nine of the eleven all occurred on a single night whenanimal rights activists placed small incendiary devices in fourChicago department stores that sell furs. (According to the FBI,the most active domestic "terrorist" groups in recent years havebeen animal rights activists and "skinheads".) In recent years, the number of terrorist incidents in theU.S., according to the FBI, is as follows:                        Actual   Prevented  Suspected                1994      0          0         1               1993     12          7         2                                 1992      4          0         0               1991      5          4         1                      1990      7          5         1               1989      4          7        16 As noted above, all but one of the incidents under "Actual" weredomestic in nature. 3. International Terrorism is On the Decline; Lethality of Incidents Rises There have been two trends in international terrorism:incidents have been declining, while the lethality of incidentshas been increasing. After reaching a peak in 1987, international terroristincidents have been declining, according to statistics collectedand published by the U.S. Department of State. In 1992, the State Department recorded a total of 364 terrorist incidentsworldwide, down from the 666 recorded in 1987. In 1993, totalincidents increased to 427, but were it not for a series ofcoordinated incidents, the level of terrorism would have fallenin 1993 as well: the increase in 1993 over 1992 was caused by acampaign of 150 attacks carried out by the Kurdistan WorkersParty against Turkish interests in Western Europe on two separatedays, in June and November, with about 75 attacks each day. In 1994, the number of terrorist incidents worldwide fellagain, to 321, according to preliminary statistics available fromthe State Department. According to the State Department, anti-U.S. attacks fell to88 in 1993, down from 142 in 1992. Anti-U.S. attacks fell againin 1994, to 66. By comparison, in 1986, there were 204 attacksagainst Americans. According to the U.S. State Department, about 21% of worldterror is targeted at the U.S. In 1993, 109 people were killed and 1,393 were wounded interrorist incidents worldwide, the highest casualty total in fiveyears. Six of those killed and nearly a thousand of thosewounded were Americans, all as a result of The World Trade Centerbombing. Prior to that, the most deadly attack against Americanswas the downing of Pan Am 103 in 1988, in which 189 Americanswere killed. In 1992, 2 Americans were killed and 1 was woundedin terrorist incidents. In 1991, there were 7 Americanfatalities and 14 other casualties. In 1990, 12 Americans werekilled and 11 injured in incidents worldwide. Administration officials and terrorism experts have citedseveral reasons for the trend. In December 1994, the StateDepartment's coordinator for counter-terrorism said thatinternational terrorism was declining because of the Middle Eastpeace process, the firm policies of the U.S and other governments, and the fall of the Soviet Union, which had providedsupport for terrorist organizations. In June 1994, the State Department's director for regionalcounter-terrorism affairs stated, "Terrorist activity is at amore manageable level now." "Clearly, there has been a very, very sharp reduction inwhat we used to call state-sponsored terrorism," said Robert B.Oakley, the retired career foreign service officer who had servedas director of the Office of Combatting Terrorism in the Reaganadministration, in a news story that appeared in September 1994. Return to the CDT Counter-Terrorism Page. Return to the CDT Home Page.WT02-B05-41IA095-001027-B008-437http://www.cdt.org:80/internat/960513_IFN_mtg.html 205.177.10.31 19970215010208 text/html 22818HTTP/1.0 200 OKDate: Sat, 15 Feb 1997 01:00:50 GMTServer: Apache/1.1.1Content-type: text/html Internet Freedom Network Meeting - May 13, 1996 Internet Freedom Network First Organizational Meeting May 13, 1996 Toronto,Canada Meeting Summary I. Overview II. Public Policy Issues Identified III. Conclusion and Next Steps IV. Action Items V. For More Information VI. List of Attendees and Other Participating Organizations I. Overview The first organizational meeting of the Internet Freedom Network was heldin Toronto, Canada on May 13, 1996 sponsored by the Open Society Instituteand organized by the Center for Democracy and Technology. The meeting washeld in order to: discuss online freedom of expression issues; identify work being done in this area around the world; establish a network of NGOs committed to free expression and the freeflow of information and the Internet; and, plan means of sharing information regarding developments in online freeexpression; and, explore ways to participate in regional and international policy decisionmakingforums which will affect the Internet. Attendees included NGO representatives from Africa, Asia, Western and CentralEurope, the United States, and Canada, as well as public policy specialistsfrom online service and Internet software companies. Special thanks goto the International Freedom of Expression Exchange (IFEX) whose directorsand staff provided guidance and logistical support for the meeting. The outcome of the meeting was a strong agreement that more coordinatedwork is necessary among existing groups in order to advance and protectfree expression on the Internet. The assembled organizations also agreedthat efforts should be made to help new advocacy organizations develop outsidethe United States whose sole mission is to address Internet free expressionissues. The remainder of the summary outlines the issues discussed andlists action items agreed to by the participants. II. Public Policy Issues Identified Meeting participants raised a great diversity of Internet freedom issuesfrom every continent around the world. Yet, in discussing Internet freeexpression issues, a number of common policy issues emerged. This is aroad map of the common policy themes that were discussed: A. Internet Service Provider Liability: ISP as bottleneck and governmentleverage point restricting the free flow of information Internet Service Providers (ISPs) -- those entities which provide usersaccess to the Internet in each locality -- whether non-profit organizations,government agencies, state telecom monopolies, or competitive businesses,are the sole access point to the Internet for users large and small. ISPsmay also maintain World Wide Web sites and Internet news servers for theirusers, thereby increasing their importance in the functioning of the Internet. As such, ISPs have become key targets of government censorship effortsdirected at the Internet. Example: The government of Zambia recently banned an edition of the WeeklyPost, an opposition newspaper published in the country. The Weekly Posthas, for some time, published its work both on paper and on their WorldWide Web Site, on a server maintained by their Internet Service Provider. The ban made it a crime to be in possession of the any copies of the bannedmaterial. The government used this as a means to force the ISP to removethe offending material from its Web server. Issue: The critical place of ISPs in the Internet framework make them particularlyvulnerable to government intimidation and legally-sanctioned censorship. ISPs, however, are generally mere conduits of information or hosts forweb sites, simply offering the technical means for users to receive anddisseminate information. In most cases, ISPs have no knowledge of the contentof the messages that they transmit, or even the World Wide Web sites whichthey host. ISPs are critical gateways for access to the Internet, as wellas for the flow of information from individuals in any one area to the restof the world. If ISPs become fearful of government penalties arising frominformation which is transmitted or hosted by the ISP, however, the ISPmay well be induced to restrict the free flow of information through itsfacilities. Though it is impossible to screen all of the numerous messagesand massive amounts of information on a typical web site, even the attemptto do so would severely restrict the free flow of information on the Internet. Post script: As it happens, before the banned articles were removed fromthe Zambian Web site, an Internet user in the United States downloaded thematerial. The banned articles are still available on web servers in otherAfrican countries and the United States. B. Internet Service Market Structure: State-run, private monopoly,or competitive markets As Internet services begin to develop around the world, a variety of marketstructures are emerging. In many cases, restrictive telecommunicationsregulations, combined with the pattern that Internet services often originatein university settings, lead to the result that Internet access is effectivelylimited to certain classes of users in only small regions of the country. Examples: A number of countries place strict controls on the Internet market,limiting access to the Net in general. Here are a few examples discussed: Singapore: ISPs must be licensed as broadcasters, with numerous regulatoryrequirements. Equador: The State bank has the exclusive right to provide Internetservices in the country and the only international connection to the Internet. The conditions make it difficult for alternative access providers to developand provide services. Botswana: ISP are banned altogether. Zimbabwe: ISPs exist but appear to be illegal under the national telecommunicationslaw. Issue: The regulatory structure of the Internet service market has a substantialimpact on the number of users in a country who have access to the Internet,as well as the general free flow of information in that country. If thereis only a single ISP, or merely a small number of them, the likelihood thatsuch services will be intimated by governments increases. Moreover, ifInternet service are provided by state-run or state-controlled institutionssuch as universities or telecommunications para-statals, the opportunityfor government control of content is also increased. C. Regulatory models for the Internet: Is it broadcasting, print,or something new? As the Internet increases in popularity around the world, national governmentsand regional entities such as the European Union are wrestling with thequestion of how to fit the Internet into the current regulatory structurewhich governs traditional communications media, or whether to create newregulatory models. The outcome of these decisions are critical for thefree expression rights of all users online. Yet, most policy makers aredeciding these issues in forum without any input whatsoever from the usercommunity. Examples: Recent developments include: Singapore: The government has already decided to regulate Internet ServiceProviders as traditional broadcasting entities, thus imposing numerous regulatoryburdens and content controls on ISPs. United States: With the passage of the Communications Decency Act,the US Congress has imposed a variety of radio and television broadcastindecency restrictions on Internet users, content providers, and serviceproviders. Australia: The Australia Broadcasting Authority is currently consideringwhat regulatory model to apply to ISPs. European Union: Actions now pending before various EU bodies (witha first reading already having occurred in the Parliament) would imposea variety of broadcast-like regulatory requirements on ISPs throughout Europe. Issue: Imposition of broadcast-like regulations on the Internet would bea fundamental impediment to the free flow of information online. Regulationswhich may have been appropriate and easily applied in the broadcast context,simply make no sense when applied to the Internet. Moreover, extensionof broadcast regulations give governments a great degree of censorship authorityover Internet content. Note: Actions take by governments around the world will have an impacton the free flow of information globally. Of particular concern, however,are actions that may be taken by the European Union over the next year. A number of Central European states are seeking EU membership. So, decisionstaken by the EU regarding the Internet now will be binding on the new membersin the future. D. Citizen Access to Government Information The Internet can be a powerful enhancement of citizen's access to governmentinformation such as the text of law, legislative proposal under consideration,as well as judicial and regulatory decisions. Especially in newly emergingdemocracies, it is important to identify successful models for use of theInternet to increase citizens participation in governing processes. E. Communications Privacy: Electronic Surveillance Online and thestatus of Internet Wiretaps in International Law Free expression only exists where citizens feel that the privacy of theircommunications and associations are sufficiently protected from governmentintrusion. Many uncertainties exist regarding the legal limitations onelectronic surveillance on the Internet. Meanwhile, numerous national restrictionson the use of encryption leave the Internet environment without basic securityprotections. Lack of International Human Rights Standards: At present, there isno international law or international human rights standards that clearlyaddress the issue of electronic surveillance on the Internet. European Union encryption policy: The EC DG XIII is about to issuea policy proposal regarding the use of encryption technology for privacyprotection and government access to electronic communications. United States encryption policy: After the highly controversial ClipperChip proposal, the US is moving forward with policy alternatives aimed atcontrolling the use of cryptography in order to assure law enforcement accessto private communications. III. Conclusion and Next Steps Following the direction of the action items listed below, CDT will pursuewith interested NGOs present at the Toronto meeting, as well as other organizationsactive in the field, the means to mobilize free expression proponents aroundthe world in support of the free flow of information on the Internet. IV. Action Items Policy Development Understand and articulate international consequences of national-levelregulatory actions on the Internet as a whole. Communicate the message that the Internet is unlike anything that hascome before it frame anti-censorship argument so that it has broad left-right appeal articulate a really convincing policy argument (must be better thanjust free expression) new regulatory framework explore wireless services as bypass to wireline networks (especiallyin unstable countries) look at access to government information develop and advocate for international human rights standards on electronicsurveillance Coalition-Building Foster networking among NGOs concerned about online free expressionissues Create a moderated discussion group on global online free expressionissues Develop European partners for existing US-based online free expressionorganizations Hold a meeting in Brussels to discuss issues and expand face-to-facenetworking Develop Corporate-NGO-foundation partnerships to pursue joint goalsand support projects build broad coalitions business user groups free expression & press groups activist NGOs North/South participation Information Dissemination Hire staff person to collect information and facilitate exchange ofknowledge Collect news re:online censorship incidents Develop online legal/legislative archive Education/public relations with positive example and positive policymodels Distribute Human Rights Watch report Link to IFEX updates Messages Be compassionate and sensitive when approaching hate speech issues,but not lenient V. For More Information For more information on this project and global internet freedom issuescontact: Daniel J. Weitzner, Deputy Director <djw@cdt.org> Center for Democracy and Technology 1634 Eye St., NW Suite 1100 Washington, DC 20006 +1 202.637.9800 (voice) +1 202.637.0968 (fax) VI. List of Attendees and Other Participating Organizations *Owais Aslam Ali Pakistan Press Foundation Press Center Shahrah-E-Kamal Ataturk Karachi 74200 Pakistan Phone: 9221 263 1123/263 0562 Fax: 9221 263 7754 Email: owais@biruni.erum.com.pk *Jerry J. Berman Executive Director Center For Democracy And Technology 1634 Eye St., NW Suite 1100 Washington, DC USA Phone: (202) 637-9800 Fax: 637-0968 Email: jberman@cdt.org Sandra Bernstein Electronic Frontiers Canada 214 Riverdale Avenue Toronto, Ontario Canada Phone: 416-465-0798 Fax: 416-465-3290 Email: sandrab@inforamp.net *William Burrington Director Goverment Affairs America Online 8619 Westwood Center Drive Vienna, VA USA Phone: (703) 917-1290 Fax: (703) 448-9164 Email: billburr@aol.com Robert Carty Canadian Cmte To Protect Journalists Canada Phone: (613) 562-1738 Email: bcarty@web.apc.org James Dempsey Deputy Director Center For National Security Studies Gelman Library Suite 701 2130 H Street NW Washington, DC USA Phone: (202) 994-7061 Fax: (202) 994-7005 Email: jxdem@gwis2.circ.gwu.edu Edie Farwell Assoc. For Progressive Communication USA Phone: (415) 561-6100 x120 Email: efarwell@igc.apc.org *Andreas Harsono General Secretary Institut Studi Arus Informasi Jl. Utan Kayu 68-H Jakarta Indonesia Phone: 62-21-856-9280 Fax: 62-21-856-7529 Email: isai@rad.net.id *Adam Koziel Helsinki Foundation For Human Rights Ul. Bracka 18 M. 62 Warszawa Poland Phone: (482) 628-1008 Fax: 48-22 26.98.75 / 29.69.96 Email: hfhrpol@ikp.atm.com.pl Jack Krumholtz Federal Gvt. Affairs Manager Microsoft Corporation 5335 Wisconsin Ave Suite 600 Washington, DC USA Phone: (202) 895-2169 Fax: (202) 364-9643 Email: jackk@microsoft.com *Riff La Roche EuroCom E.V. Germany Email: Factory@eurocomberlin.De Gara LaMarche Human Rights Watch USA Phone: (212) 972-8400 Fax: (212) 972-0905 Email: LAMARCG@HRW.ORG *Kela Leon Directora Ejecutiva Instituto Prensa y Sociedad Miguel Dasso 153 Ofc 7M San Isidro Lima Peru Phone: 511 4216146 Fax: 511 2211523 Email: kela@ipyspe.org.pe David Lush Media Institute Of Southern Africa Private Bag 13386 Windhoek Namibia Phone: 264 61 232975 Fax: 264 61 248016 Email: dlush@ingrid.misa.org.na Kate Martin Director Center For National Security Studies Gelman Library Suite 701 2130 H Street NW Washington, DC USA Phone: (202) 994-7060 Fax: (202) 994-7005 Email: Kmartin@gwis2.circ.gwu.edu Merte Newth Administrator Norweigan Forum For Free Of Expression Urtegata 50 N-017 Oslo Norway Phone: 4722 67 79 64 Fax: 47 22 57 00 88 Email: nffe@sn.no Jonathan Peizer Director Int'l Info Systems Soros Foundation 888 7th Avenue 31st Floor New York, NY USA Phone: (212) 757-2323 Fax: (212) 397-3944 Email: jpeizer@sorosny.org *Bettina Peters Deputy General Secretary International Federation Of Journalists Rue Royale 266 Brussels Belgium Phone: 32 2 223-2265/219.77.80 Fax: 32 2 219-2976 Email: IFJBET@ign.apc.org *Dimitrina Petrova European Roma Rights Center Budapest, Hungary Email: dpetrova@osi.hu Margaret Purcell PEN Canada Canada Email: pencan@web.apc.org *Madanmohan Rao Communications Director Inter Press Service Room 485 United Nations Building New York, NY USA Phone: (212) 963-6156 Fax: (212) 754-2791 Email: rao@igc.org *Olga Razbash Ecojuris Moscow Russia Phone: (7 095) 246-2903 Email: Edwin Rekosh USA Phone: (212) 662-8606 Fax: (212) 662-8606 Email: rekosh@igc.apc.org Kirk Roberts Executive Director Web Networks/NirvCentre 401 Richmond St. W., Suite #104 Toronto, ONTARIO Canada Phone: (416) 596-0212 ext19 Fax: (416) 596-1374 Email: kroberts@web.net *Jan Rochinsky Memorial Human Rights Center Moscow Russia Phone: 7095) 973-2094 Email: memhrc@glas.apc.org *Rafael Roncagliolo President-Int'l Secretariat World Assoc Of Community Radio B'casters Brazil Phone: (593) 222-6648 Fax: (593) 222-6648 Email: bgirard@pi.pro.ec *Geoff Sears Executive Director Institute For Global Communication 18 De Boom Street San Francisco, CA USA Phone: (415) 442-0220 Fax: (415) 546-1794 Email: gsears@igc.apc.org *Tanya Smith UN Centre For Human Rights Geneva Switzerland Phone: (4122) 917-1719 Fax: (4122) 917-0213 Email: tanya@ge.maxess.ch Karen Sorensen Human Rights Watch 485 Fifth Avenue New York, NY 10017-6104 Phone: (212) 972-8400 Fax: (212) 972-0905 Email: sorensk@hrw.org Philip Spender Index On Censorship London UK Phone: 44.1.71.278.2313 Fax: 44.1.71.278.187 Email: indexoncenso@gn.apc.org Mark Surman NirvCentre 401 Richmond St. W., Ste. 104 Toronto, ONTARIO M5V 3A8 Canada Phone: 416-596-0212 Fax: 416-596-1374 Email: msurman@web.apc.org *Vedran Vucic Soros Yugoslavia Foundation Email: VEDRAN@george.sfj.opennet.org Daniel J. Weitzner Deputy Director Center For Democracy & Technology 1634 Eye Street NW Suite 1100 Washington, DC USA Phone: (202) 637-9800 Fax: (202) 637-0968 Email: djw@cdt.org Lucy Winkler America Online 8619 Westwood Center Drive Vienna, VA USA Phone: (703) 918-2208 Fax: (703) 918-1175 Email: lucywink@aol.com Dov Wisebrod Legal Grp For The Internet In Canada Osler, Hoskin & Harcourt PO Box 50 1 Canadian Place Toronto, ONTARIO Canada Phone: (416) 362-2111 Fax: (416) 862-6666 Email: sherlock@io.org Jiri Zlatuska Dean, Faculty Of Infomatics Masaryk University Czech Republic Email: zlatuska@muni.cz [* signifies an individual or organization which has expressedstrong interest in participating in the effort but was not able to attendthe meeting. In addition to these groups, US-based Internet organizations,including EFF and Voters Telecommunications Watch, are also very interestedin particating in future activities.] Back to the CDT International Issues Page Back to the CDT Home Page This Page Last Updated 09/18/96 || For more Information, write webmaster@cdt.orgWT02-B05-42IA095-001027-B011-64http://www.cdt.org:80/publications/pp120508.html 205.177.10.31 19970215011556 text/html 5875HTTP/1.0 200 OKDate: Sat, 15 Feb 1997 01:14:36 GMTServer: Apache/1.1.1Content-type: text/html CDT POLICY POST No.12 -- FCC MODIFIES CALLER ID POLICY ------------------------------------------------------------------------   ******    ********    *************  ********   *********   *************     **         **      **       ***               POLICY POST    **         **      **       ***                 **         **      **       ***               May 8, 1995  **         **      **       ***               Number 12  ********   *********        ***                 ******    ********         ***                  CENTER FOR DEMOCRACY AND TECHNOLOGY------------------------------------------------------------------------  A briefing on public policy issues affecting civil liberties online------------------------------------------------------------------------CDT POLICY POST Number 12                       May 8, 1995CONTENTS: (1) FCC Modifies Caller ID Policy          (2) About the Center for Democracy and TechnologyThis document may be re-distributed freely provided it remains in its entirety.-------------------------------------------------------------------------SUBJECT: FCC MODIFIES CALLER ID POLICYOn Thursday, May 4, 1995, the Federal Communications Commission voted to approve national Caller ID rules requiring carriers to provide "a free, simple and consistent, per call blocking and unblocking mechanism."  In addition, under the new rules carriers are permitted to extend per-line blocking options selected by consumers for intrastate calls, to the consumers interstate calls.  This action reverses an earlier rule adopted in March 1994, that required separate systems for intrastate and interstate calls.  The Commissions earlier rules allowed for per-call blocking only.  The new rules take effect December 1, 1995.The Center for Democracy and Technology supports the new FCC policy on Caller ID.  Caller ID or Automatic Number Identification (ANI) is a device that displays to a recipient of a call the telephone number of an incoming call while the phone is ringing.  The introduction of Caller ID technology sparked an emotional and divisive debate.  The unlimited use of Caller ID threatened to place the privacy rights of the individual in his or her capacity as maker and receiver of telephone calls in tension.  Civil liberties organizations were quick to point out that technology was available to honor the privacy right of the consumer in theircapacity as both the sender and recipient of phone calls.  Civil liberties organizations stated that through blocking users of telephones could be given control over information.  For the caller, blocking allows them to choose when and to whom to release their phone number.  For the recipient, blocking provides receivers with information that an incoming caller does not want their phone number revealed.  Additional features can allow recipients of phone calls to choose whether or not to refuse all incoming calls that employ blocking, send blocked calls to voice mail or answering machine, or exercise their option to answer or not answer the unidentified call on a per call basis.  The latest FCC policy responds to the dual civil liberty concerns of respecting and protecting the individual caller's privacy expectations, and respecting theimportant privacy interest of the receiver to limit intrusions by unknown, or unwanted callers.  THE NEW FCC POLICY:1. Where a customer selects per-line blocking for in-state calls the new policy    permits that choice to extend to interstate calls as well;2. Permits customers to prohibit the transmission of Caller ID information -    number, name, location - at all times, but on a per-call basis choose to    release the information by using the code *82.3. Binds states without Caller ID and blocking regulations to federal privacy    protection models, which require per-calling blocking through the use of    code *67.CDT commends the FCC for issuing a policy that encourages technological development that maximizes individual choice and affirms individuals' expectations of privacy. For More Information Contact:Janlori Goldman, Deputy Director Deirdre Mulligan, Staff Counsel  ---------------------------------------------------------------------(2) ABOUT THE CENTER FOR DEMOCRACY AND TECHNOLOGYThe Center for Democracy and Technology is a non-profit public interestorganization. The Center's mission is to develop and advocate publicpolicies that advance constitutional civil liberties and democratic values in new computer and communications technologies. Contacting us:General information on CDT can be obtained by sending mail to  CDT has set up the following auto-reply aliases to keep you informed on the Communications Decency Act issue.For information on the bill, includingCDT's analysis and the text of SenatorLeahy's alternative proposal and information on what you can do to help                                         -- cda-info@cdt.orgFor the current status of the bill,including scheduled House and Senate action (updated as events warrant)                                     -- cda-stat@cdt.orgWorld-Wide-Web:   http://www.cdt.org/ftp:   ftp://ftp.cdt.org/pub/cdt/gopher:   CDT's gopher site is still under construction and should be operational    soon.snail mail:Center For Democracy and Technology1001 G Street, NW Suite 700 EastWashington, DC 20001voice: +1.202.637.9800 fax:   +1.202.637.9800                                  ### Return to the CDT Home Page Return to the Publications Index PageWT02-B05-43IA095-001027-B011-77http://www.cdt.org:80/publications/pp110504.html 205.177.10.31 19970215011610 text/html 10153HTTP/1.0 200 OKDate: Sat, 15 Feb 1997 01:14:51 GMTServer: Apache/1.1.1Content-type: text/html CDT POLICY POST NO.11 -- Justice Dept. Says CDT Threat to 1st Amdt ------------------------------------------------------------------------   ******    ********    *************  ********   *********   *************     **         **      **       ***               POLICY POST    **         **      **       ***                 **         **      **       ***               May 4, 1995  **         **      **       ***               Number 11  ********   *********        ***                 ******    ********         ***                  CENTER FOR DEMOCRACY AND TECHNOLOGY------------------------------------------------------------------------  A briefing on public policy issues affecting civil liberties online------------------------------------------------------------------------CDT POLICY POST 5/4/95                                      Number 11CONTENTS: (1) Justice Department Says CDA Threatens First Amendment and              Privacy Rights, Recommends Comprehensive Review          (2) Pro-Family Group says CDA is Flawed          (3) About the Center for Democracy and TechnologyThis document may be re-distributed freely provided it remains in its entirety.-------------------------------------------------------------------------SUBJECT: Justice Department Says CDA Threatens First Amendment and          Privacy Rights, Recommends Comprehensive Review.The US Department of Justice, in a May 3, 1995 letter sent to Senator Patrick Leahy (D-VT), has weighed in on the debate over the Communications Decency Act, stating that it threatens first amendment and privacy rights and would severely complicate ongoing efforts to prosecute child pornogrophy cases. The Department instead recommendeda comprehensive review of current law and law enforcement resources, as well as an investigation into the availablity of technical means to empower parents and users to control the commercial and noncommercial content they receive through interactive media. The full text of the DOJ letter is available thru CDT's online archives (URL's below).The Justice Department wrote:"With respect to the communications Decency Act, while we understandthat section 402 is intended to provide users of online services thesame protection against obscene and harassing communications afforded to telephone subscribers, this provision would not accomplish that goal.  Instead, it would significantly thwart enforcement of existing laws regarding obscenity and child pornography, create several ways fordistributors and packages of obscenity and child pornography to avoid criminal liability, and threaten important First Amendment and privacy rights."<...>"Despite the flaws in these provisions, the Administration applauds the primary goal of this legislation:  prevent obscenity from being widely transmitted over telecommunications networks to which minors have access.  However, the legislation raises complex policy issues that merit close examination prior to Congressional action.  We recommend that a comprehensive review be undertaken of current laws and law enforcement resources for prosecuting online obscenity and child pornography, andthe technical means available to enable parents and users to controlthe commercial and non commercial communications they receive over interactive telecommunications systems."In addition, the Department raised specific concerns regarding theconstitutionality of the legislation:"First, Section 402 of the bill would impose criminal sanctions on thetransmission of constitutionally protected speech.  Specifically, subsections 402(a)(1) and (b)(2) of the bill would criminalize the transmission of indecent communications, which are protected by theFirst Amendment.  In _Sable Communications of Cal. v. FCC_, 492 U.S. 115 (1989), the Supreme Court ruled that any restrictions on the contentof protected  speech in media other than broadcast media must advance a compelling state interest and be accomplished by the "least restrictivemeans."  By relying on technology relevant only to 900 number services, section 402 fails to take into account less  restrictive alternatives utilizing existing and emerging technologies which enable parents and other adult users to control access to content.""Nearly ten years of litigation, along with modifications of the regulations, were necessary before the current statute as applied to audiotext services, or "dial-a-porn" calling numbers, was upheld asconstitutional.  See _Dial Information Services v. Thornburg_, 938 F. 2d 1535 (2d Cir. 1991).  The proposed amendment in section 40-2 of the bill would jeopardize the enforcement of the existing dial-a-porn statute by inviting additional constitutional challenges, with the concomitant diversion of law enforcement resources."The Justice Department Letter represents an important development in the fight to block the Communications Decency Act and the effort to develop less restrictive technical alternatives. The Center For Democracy and Technology commends the Justice Department for recognizing the threat the Communications Decency Act poses to FirstAmendment rights and for its leadership in this area. CDT is looking forward to working with the Department to develop alternative prolicy solutions which protect the First Amendment, privacy rights, and the free flow of information in cyberspace.The full text of the letter can be found at the following URL's:http://www.cdt.org/policy/freespeech/doj_050395.ltr.htmlftp://ftp.cdt.org/pub/cdt/policy/freespeech/doj_050395.ltr-------------------------------------------------------------------------(2) SUBJECT: American Family Association Expresses Concern about CDA,             Says Defenses Must Be Axed, Current Law Sufficient.The American Family Association, a conservative pro-family organization, has sent a letter to Senators Exon (D-NE) and Pressler (R-SD) stating that the Communications Decency Act as currently drafted would grant those who distribute pornography on the Internet greater protection than exists for current law. The American Family Assocaition reccomended that the defenses to prosecution be removed from the legislation.The letter states that, in its current form, "...the pro-family movement will uniformly oppose your (Sen. Exon) bill and, if necessarry, thetelecommunications bill to which it is attached, unless significant changes are made prior to a vote on the Senate floor."The American Family Association stated that current law is sufficient to address the concerns Senator Exon is attempting to address: "... it is unnecessary to change that law as your bill would do, unless you are seeking to clarify this point and add improvements to the law.  Also, it is my opinion, although this point may not be as clear or settled as the first, that federal criminal law, specifically Title 18 Sections 1462 and 1465 prohibits distribution of obscenity via computer whether or not for commercial purpose. Further, it is my opinion that a primary problem regarding computerpornography is the lack of leadership and enforcement on this issue by the Clinton Administration.  While current laws could be improved, the Administration could make substantial progress in protecting children in particular from both obscenity and child pornography by using existing law to prosecute illegal pornographers who use the Internet if it had the will to do so."The American Family Association is the second pro-family group to publicly express concerns over the Communications Decency Act (in March Morality In Media raised similar concerns). The full text of the American Family Association Letter, as well as the Morality In Media statement, can be found at the following URL's:http://www.cdt.org/policy/freespeech/amfam_exon.ltr.html http://www.cdt.org/policy/freespeech/amfam_pressler.ltr.htmlhttp://www.cdt.org/policy/freespeech/mim_pr.htmlftp://ftp.cdt.org/policy/freespeech/amfam_exon.ltrftp://ftp.cdt.org/policy/freespeech/amfam_pressler.lt                                   ftp://ftp.cdt.org/policy/freespeech/mim_pr                                  ---------------------------------------------------------------------(3) ABOUT THE CENTER FOR DEMOCRACY AND TECHNOLOGYThe Center for Democracy and Technology is a non-profit public interestorganization. The Center's mission is to develop and advocate publicpolicies that advance constitutional civil liberties and democratic values in new computer and communications technologies. Contacting us:General information on CDT can be obtained by sending mail to   info@cdt.orgCDT has set up the following auto-reply aliases to keep you informed on the Communications Decency Act issue.For information on the bill, includingCDT's analysis and the text of SenatorLeahy's alternative proposal and information on what you can do to help                                         -- cda-info@cdt.orgFor the current status of the bill,including scheduled House and Senate action (updated as events warrant)                                     -- cda-stat@cdt.orgWorld-Wide-Web:   http://www.cdt.org/ftp:   ftp://ftp.cdt.org/pub/cdt/gopher:   CDT's gopher site is still under construction and should be operational    soon.voice: +1.202.637.9800                                    ###WT02-B05-44IA095-001027-B011-93http://www.cdt.org:80/publications/pp100427.html 205.177.10.31 19970215011623 text/html 16941HTTP/1.0 200 OKDate: Sat, 15 Feb 1997 01:15:03 GMTServer: Apache/1.1.1Content-type: text/html CDT Policy Post No. 10 -- Clinton Counter-Terrorism Initiative ------------------------------------------------------------------------   ******    ********    *************  ********   *********   *************     **         **      **       ***               POLICY POST    **         **      **       ***                 **         **      **       ***               April 27, 1995  **         **      **       ***               Number 10  ********   *********        ***                 ******    ********         ***                  CENTER FOR DEMOCRACY AND TECHNOLOGY------------------------------------------------------------------------  A briefing on public policy issues affecting civil liberties online------------------------------------------------------------------------CDT POLICY POST 4/27/95                                      Number 10CONTENTS: (1) Clinton Administration Announces Counter Terrorism Plan          (2) Outline of Clinton Administration Proposal          (3) Communications Decency Act Update          (4) About the Center for Democracy and TechnologyThis document may be re-distributed freely provided it remains in its entirety.-------------------------------------------------------------------------SUBJECT: Clinton Administration Announces Outline of Counter         Terrorism Initiative.The Clinton Administration today unveiled an outline of administrationproposals to combat foreign and domestic terrorism in the wake of the Oklahoma City bombing. The outline is attached below.These proposals on their face raise obvious civil liberties concerns, including government interference with privacy, free speech, free association and Forth Amendment rights. CDT is waiting for theAdministration to elaborate and provide concrete legislative proposalsso that we can assess the full civil liberties ramifications.This document is merely an outline, not specific legislationor executive order. The administration is expected to produce a more formal proposal in the coming weeks. These proposals are likely to supplementthe Omnibus Counter-Terrorism Act of 1995 (S. 390, HR 896), which iscurrently pending before Congress.CDT believes that there must be substantial open, public discussion of these proposals and thier potential implications before any action is taken.We have set up the following URL's to provide information on the counter-terrorism issue. Updates will be made as soon as more informationbecomes available.World-Wide-Web:http://www.cdt.org/policy/terrorism/terrorism.htmlftp:ftp://ftp.cdt.org/pub/cdt/policy/terrorism/--------------------------------------------------------------------------- Clinton Administration Counter Terrorism InitiativeI.      Actions Already Announced by the President        (1) Pass the Omnibus Counter-Terrorism Act of 1995        This bill would provide clear Federal criminal jurisdiction for any international terrorist attack that might occur in the United States; provide Federal criminal jurisdiction over terrorists who use the United States as the place from which to plan terrorist attacks overseas; providea workable mechanism, utilizing United States District Judges appointed by the Chief Justice, to deport expeditiously alien terrorists without risking the disclosure of national security information or techniques; provide a new mechanism for preventing fundraising in the United States that supports international terrorist activities overseas; and would implement an international treaty requiring the insertion of a chemical agent into plastic explosives when manufactured to make them detectable.        (2) Provide more tools to federal law enforcement agencies           fighting terrorism* AMEND THE FAIR CREDIT REPORTING ACT TO EASE ACCESS TO FINANCIAL AND  CREDIT REPORTS IN ANTI-TERRORISM CASES. This legislation provides for  disclosures by consumer reporting agencies to the FBI for  counterintelligence and counterterrorism purposes. The FBI has no  mechanism for obtaining credit reports for lead purposes in  counterterrorism cases. These reports are available to used car  dealers and other merchants. The FBI currently has authority under the  Right to Financial Privacy Act of 1978 to obtain similar records  pursuant to a "National Security Letter" signed by a high-ranking FBI  official. the same procedures and safeguards would apply to credit  records under this proposal.* AMEND FEDERAL LAW TO ADOPT, IN NATIONAL SECURITY CASES THE STANDARD  CURRENTLY USED IN OBTAINING A "PEN REGISTER" IN A ROUTINE CRIMINAL  CASE. This proposal would extend the relaxed standard for obtaining  "pen registers" and "trap and trace" device orders which already  exists in routine criminal cases, to national security cases. A "pen  register" is a device which records the number dialed on a telephone.  A "trap and trace" devices is similar to "Caller ID," providing law  enforcement with the telephone number from which a call originates.  Neither "pen registers" nor "trap and trace" devices permit law  enforcement to monitor actual conversations being conducted. the  current, higher-than-regular standard impedes the ability of the FBI  to obtain surveillance coverage of terrorists and spies.* PASS LEGISLATION TO REQUIRE HOTEL/MOTEL AND COMMON CARRIERS TO PROVIDE  RECORDS NECESSARY FOR FIGHTING TERRORISM. This proposal would require  hotel/motel and common carriers such as airlines and bus companies to  provide records to the FBI pursuant to authorized national security  requests just as they must do now for virtually all state and local   law enforcement. The FBI must now rely on the voluntary assistance of  motel, hotel, and other innkeepers or common carriers regarding  records of terrorists who may have stayed at the establishment or used  the common carrier. The FBI has found that, while some of these  entities voluntarily provide such information, an increasing number  refuse, absent a court order, a subpoena, or other legal protection.  In a counterterrorism case being conducted pursuant to the Attorney  General's guidelines for FBI Foreign Intelligence Collection and  Foreign Counterintelligence Investigations, there is no legal  mechanism, e.g. subpoena, available to obtain these records.* FULLY FUND THE FBI'S "DIGITAL TELEPHONY" INITIATIVE TO ASSURE COURT  AUTHORIZED LAW ENFORCEMENT ACCESS FOR ELECTRONIC SURVEILLANCE TO  DIGITIZED COMMUNICATIONS. This proposal would appropriate funds to  implement recent amendments to statutes governing secure telephone  transmission (digital telephony). These amendments require telephone   carriers to install and maintain sophisticated equipment which would  permit law enforcement to continue to conduct legal electronic  surveillance.* CREATE AND ALLOCATE FUNDS FOR A SPECIAL FBI COUNTERTERRORIST AND  COUNTERINTELLIGENCE FUND. This proposal will fund costs associated  cases which arise in connection with terrorism crises, including  logistics and other support.* Create an interagency Domestic Counterterrorism Center headed by the  FBI. This proposal will establish a partnership effort between the  Justice Department, including the FBI, and other federal and state law  enforcement authorities to coordinate efforts within the United  States.      (3) CONDUCT TERRORISM THREAT ASSESSMENT OF EVERY FEDERAL FACILITYIN THE COUNTRY WITHIN THE NEXT 60 DAYS. The President hasdirected the Attorney General to conduct this assessment and report her recommendations in 60 days. The assessment has already begun.        (4) DIRECT GSA TO REPLACE THE FEDERAL BUILDING IN OKLAHOMA CITY.        (5) DIRECT THE FBI DIRECTOR, THE ATTORNEY GENERAL, AND THE NATIONAL SECURITY ADVISER TO PREPARE A PRESIDENTIAL DECISION DIRECTIVE AUTHORIZING ANY AND ALL FURTHER STEPS NECESSARY TO COMBAT FOREIGN AND DOMESTIC TERRORISM.II.     New Legislative Proposals        (1) INVESTIGATIONS* HIRE APPROXIMATELY 1000 NEW AGENTS, PROSECUTORS, AND OTHER FEDERAL LAW  ENFORCEMENT AND SUPPORT PERSONNEL TO INVESTIGATE, DETER, AND PROSECUTE  TERRORIST ACTIVITY.* PASS LEGISLATION TO REQUIRE, WITHIN 1 YEAR, THE INCLUSION OF TAGGANTS   IN STANDARD EXPLOSIVE DEVICE RAW MATERIALS WHICH WILL PERMIT TRACING  OF THE MATERIALS POST-EXPLOSION. This proposal would require the  inclusion of microscopic particles in certain raw materials, thereby  permitting law enforcement to trace the source of the explosive even  after a device has been detonated.* REQUIRE THE BATF TO STUDY AND REPORT ON 1) THE TAGGING OF EXPLOSIVE  MATERIALS FOR PURPOSES OF IDENTIFICATION AND DETECTION; 2) WHETHER  COMMON CHEMICALS USED TO MANUFACTURE EXPLOSIVES CAN BE RENDERED INERT  FOR USE IN EXPLOSIVES; AND 3) WHETHER CONTROLS CAN BE IMPOSED ON  CERTAIN PRECURSOR CHEMICALS USED TO MANUFACTURE EXPLOSIVES. In light  of recent bombing incidents, there is a need to develop technologies  that will make it possible to detect concealed explosives.  Additionally, if bombings do take place, a means of providing some  clues is needed to lead investigators to those responsible for the  explosion. Moreover, since explosives can be manufactured using common  agricultural and household materials, it is important to determine   whether such materials can be manufactured in a manner so that their  use in explosives is unlikely. Finally, the study would determine  whether any reasonable controls can be placed on precursor chemicals,  e.g., ammonium nitrate, which have many legitimate uses.* AMEND THE POSSE COMITATUS ACT TO PERMIT MILITARY PARTICIPATION IN  CRIME-FIGHTING INVOLVING WEAPONS OF MASS DESTRUCTION. This proposal  would amend Federal Laws, which severely limit the role of the  military in domestic law enforcement, to permit military participation  in criminal cases involving chemical, biological, and other weapons of   mass destruction; areas in which the military has specialized  expertise.* AMEND THE ELECTRONIC COMMUNICATIONS PRIVACY ACT OF 1868 TO    CONSTITUTIONALLY ENHANCE USE OF ELECTRONIC SURVEILLANCE TO FIGHT  TERRORISM. This proposal would: permit any federal felony to be used  as a basis for an electronic surveillance order; ease restrictions on  the use, in American court proceedings, of information from electronic  surveillance conducted by foreign governments; forbid suppression of  electronic evidence unless law enforcement acted in bad faith in  obtaining the evidence; authorize emergency electronic surveillance in  situations involving threats by domestic terrorist organizations,  authorize roving wiretaps where it is not practical to specify the  number of the phone to be tapped, such as where a target uses multiple    pay phones; allow the FBI to obtain records of local telephone calls,  without the need for a court order, as they can own obtain records of     long-diastase calls; and require telephone companies and/or service  providers to preserve evidence until a court order could be obtained.  None of these changes would alter the requirement for probable cause  prior to engaging in electronic surveillance.        (2) PROSECUTION* AMEND FEDERAL LAW TO CRIMINALIZE THE USE OF ALL CHEMICAL WEAPONS TO   INCLUDE ALL FORMS OF CHEMICAL WEAPONS. This bill would amend federal  law to include chemical weapons in non-gaseous form. Under existing  law, chemical weapons in gaseous form are covered, but those which are  in liquid or solid form are not. Thus, for example, an individual who  introduces dioxin in solid form into the water supply of a city would  not be chargeable under current law.* MAKE IT ILLEGAL TO POSSESS EXPLOSIVES KNOWING THAT THEY ARE STOLEN.  This proposal would conform explosive laws to existing firearms  statutes, making it a crime for an individual to possess explosives  which the individual knows are stolen.* EXTEND THE STATUTE OF LIMITATIONS ON THE NATIONAL FIREARMS ACT TO FIVE  (5) YEARS. This proposal would extend from three (3) to five (5) years   the statute of limitations for prosecution for violations of the  National Firearms Act, which deals with explosive and incendiary  bombs. This change brings the statue of limitations for these offenses  in line with similar criminal provisions.* PROVIDE THE SECRETARY OF TREASURY AUTHORITY TO DIRECT THE USE OF    TREASURY DEPARTMENT AIRCRAFT TO SUPPORT EMERGENCY LAW ENFORCEMENT  SITUATIONS. This proposal would authorize the Secretary of Treasury to  authorize the use of Treasury Department aircraft in support of  emergency law enforcement crises.* AMEND REWARD STATUTES TO REDUCE RESTRICTIONS ON MAKING REWARDS. This  proposal would provide the Attorney General authority to pay a reward  which is not subject to the spending limitations contained in 18 USC   3059 and 3072, provided that any reward of $100,000 or more may not  be made without the approval of the President of the Attorney General,  and such approval may not be delegated.        (3) PENALTIES* INCREASE THE PENALTY FOR ANYONE CONVICTED OF TRANSFERRING A FIREARM OR  EXPLOSIVE KNOWING THAT IT WILL BE SUE DOT COMMIT A CRIME OF VIOLENCE  OR DRUG TRAFFICKING CRIME. This proposal will provide a mandatory  penalty of not less than 10 years for any person who transfers a  firearm knowing or having reasonable cause to believe that a firearm  will be used to commit a crime of violence or drug-trafficking crime.* AMEND 18 USC  111 TO PROVIDE ENHANCED PENALTIES FOR ALL CURRENT AND  FORMER FEDERAL EMPLOYEES AGAINST TERRORIST ATTACKS. The existing  statute only protects enumerated categories of current Federal  employees. The proposed statute would provide enhanced penalties for  crimes against all current and former Federal employees, and their  immediate families, when the crime is committed because of the  official duties of the federal employee.------------------------------------------------------------------------UPDATE: Communications Decency Act Senate Vote Expected by JuneThe Senate is expected to consider telecommunications reform legislation(S. 652), which includes the Exon/Gorton Communications Decency Act (Title IV), sometime towards the end of May or begining of June. The vote had been expected to occur in the first week of May, but other issues, including counter-terrorism legislation, are likely to delay Senate action.Senator Patrick Leahy's (D-VT) alternative proposal (S. 714) is gaining support among key members of congress and industry. CDT is working with Senator Leahy, the public interest community, and representatives of the communicaitons, computer, online services, and publishing industries to generate support for Senator Leahy's proposal.Action on the House version of the CDA (HR 1004) is not expected to occur any time soon as its sponsor, Rep. Tim Johnson (D-SD) has recently backed away from the proposal. In a letter to Rep. Jack Fields (R-TX and Chair of the Hse. Telecomm. Subcommitte), circulated by CDT, Rep. Johnson urged the Committee to hold hearings and consider alternatives to protect children from controversial content instead of rushing to enact the CDA.CDT has set up the following auto-reply aliases to keep you informed on the Communications Decency Act issue.For information on the bill, includingCDT's analysis and the text of SenatorLeahy's alternative proposal and information on what you can do to help                                         -- cda-info@cdt.orgFor the current status of the bill,including scheduled House and Senate action (updated as events warrant)                                     -- cda-stat@cdt.org---------------------------------------------------------------------ABOUT THE CENTER FOR DEMOCRACY AND TECHNOLOGYThe Center for Democracy and Technology is a non-profit public interestorganization. The Center's mission is to develop and advocate publicpolicies that advance constitutional civil liberties and democratic values in new computer and communications technologies. Contacting us:General information on CDT can be obtained by sending mail to  info@cdt.orgWorld-Wide-Web:   http://www.cdt.org/ftp:   ftp://ftp.cdt.org/pub/cdt/gopher:   CDT's gopher site is still under construction and should be operational    soon.voice: +1.202.637.9800                                    ### Return to the CDT Home Page. Go to the CDT Counter-Terrorism Issues Page.WT02-B05-45IA095-001027-B011-116http://www.cdt.org:80/publications/pp090411.html 205.177.10.31 19970215011638 text/html 5763HTTP/1.0 200 OKDate: Sat, 15 Feb 1997 01:15:21 GMTServer: Apache/1.1.1Content-type: text/html CDT POLICY POST No. 9 -- 4/11/95 ------------------------------------------------------------------------   ******    ********    *************  ********   *********   *************     **         **      **       ***               POLICY POST    **         **      **       ***                 **         **      **       ***               April 11, 1995  **         **      **       ***               Number 9  ********   *********        ***                 ******    ********         ***                  CENTER FOR DEMOCRACY AND TECHNOLOGY------------------------------------------------------------------------  A briefing on public policy issues affecting civil liberties online------------------------------------------------------------------------CDT POLICY POST 4/11/95                                      Number 9CONTENTS: (1) House CDA Sponsor Calls for Hearings, Go-Slow Approach          (2) Text of Rep. Tim Johnson's Letter to Chairman Fields          (3) About the Center For Democracy and TechnologyThis document may be re-distributed freely provided it remains in its entirety.-------------------------------------------------------------------------SUBJECT:        House CDA Sponsor Calls for Hearings, Go-Slow ApproachRepresentative Tim Johnson (D-SD) recently sent the attached letter to Rep.Jack Fields (R-TX), chairman of the House Subcommittee onTelecommunications and Finance, urging the subcommittee to carefullyexamine the issues raised by the legislation before rushing to enact it. In the letter, Johnson clarifies that he sponsored HR 1004 only tofacilitate a discussion and hearings on the issue.  Johnson writes thatwhile "it is essential for your committee to consider obscenity,harassment, and First Amendment concerns as well as over-all enforceabilitymatters ... it is my hope that you will hold hearings which permit allpoints of view to be heard before taking any action on this issue."The House Subcommittee on Telecommunications and Finance is currentlydrafting legislation to overhaul the Nation's telecommunications laws.  Amodified version of the Exon/Gorton "Communications Decency Act" (S. 314)was incorporated into similar legislation approved last month by the SenateCommerce Committee.HR 1004 is the House counterpart to the Exon/Gorton Communications DecencyAct, which would criminalize the transmission of any content deemed"obscene, indecent, lewd, lascivious, filthy, or harassing."   Unlike theSenate version, HR 1004 has not been modified since its introduction. CDT wishes to thank People for the American Way for obtaining a copy ofthis letter and forwarding it to us for distribution.----------------------------------------------------------------------------April 3, 1995The Honorable Jack FieldsChairman Subcommittee on Telecommunications  and FinanceHouse Committee on Commerce2125 Rayburn House Office BuildingWashington, DC 20515Dear Jack:I am writing to you today relative to legislation which I have sponsored,HR 1004, a house counterpart to Senator Exon's S. 314, the CommunicationsDecency Act.  S. 314 was recently incorporated by voice vote into theSenate Commerce Committee's telecommunications reform legislation.  Theamendment attempts to update the Communications Act of 1934 by providingusers of digital communications the same protections telephone userscurrently have against obscene, indecent, or harassing telephone calls.I want to advise you that I have sponsored HR 1004 simply as a beginningpoint for hearings and discussion and not necessarily to propose that thisbill, or any bill for that matter, is necessarily the proper response toconcerns over obscenity. While it appears that the Exon provision asamended goes a long way to address the liability questions by exemptingcompanies or entities which merely provide transmission services for theInternet, I remain concerned that this issue needs a thorough examinationthrough the hearing process.It is essential for your committee to consider obscenity, harassment, andFirst Amendment concerns as well as over-all enforceability matters.  Forthat reason, it is my hope that you will hold hearings which will permitall points of view to be heard before taking any action on this issue.Hopefully, you and your committee will have an opportunity to consider thisimportant issue in a carefully deliberative fashion which will balanceconcerns for children and others from unwanted obscene material on theInternet with free and enhanced use of the Internet. It may very well bethat this balance is best achieved by voluntary means rather than by newlegislation, but I will be appreciative of your willingness to carefullyinvestigate this complex issue.Thank you for your attention to this matter.Sincerely, {sig}Tim Johnsoncc:     Ed Markey        Ranking Minority Member        Subcommittee on Telecommunications and Finance---------------------------------------------------------------------ABOUT THE CENTER FOR DEMOCRACY AND TECHNOLOGYThe Center for Democracy and Technology is a non-profit public interestorganization. The Center's mission is to develop and advocate publicpolicies that advance constitutional civil liberties and democratic values in new computer and communications technologies. Contacting us:General information on CDT can be obtained by sending mail to CDT's www site is up! Visit us at http://www.cdt.org/Our ftp and gopher sites will be up soon.voice: +1.202.637.9800                                  ###WT02-B05-46IA095-001027-B011-136http://www.cdt.org:80/publications/pp080407.html 205.177.10.31 19970215011647 text/html 11347HTTP/1.0 200 OKDate: Sat, 15 Feb 1997 01:15:30 GMTServer: Apache/1.1.1Content-type: text/html CDT POLICY POST No.8 -- 4/7/95 ------------------------------------------------------------------------   ******    ********    *************  ********   *********   *************     **         **      **       ***               POLICY POST    **         **      **       ***                 **         **      **       ***               April 7, 1995  **         **      **       ***               Number 8  ********   *********        ***                 ******    ********         ***                  CENTER FOR DEMOCRACY AND TECHNOLOGY------------------------------------------------------------------------  A briefing on public policy issues affecting civil liberties online------------------------------------------------------------------------CDT POLICY POST 4/7/95                                      Number 8CONTENTS: (1) Senator Leahy Introduces Alternative to Communications               Decency Act          (2) Leahy Statement on Introdcution of S. 714          (3) Text of S. 714          (4) About the Center For Democracy and TechnologyThis document may be re-distributed freely provided it remains in its entirety.------------------------------------------------------------------------SUBJECT: Senator Leahy Introduces Alternative to Exon/Gorton          Communications Decency Act Senator Patrick Leahy (D-VT) today introduced the "Child Protection, UserEmpowerment, and Free Expression in Interactive Media Study Bill" (S. 714).The bill represents an alternative to Senator Exon (D-NE) and SenatorGorton's (R-WA) "Communications Decency Act", which would criminalize thetransmission of any content deemed "obscene, indecent, lewd, lascivious,filthy, or harassing."  Leahy's bill would direct the Department of Justice, in consultation withthe Commerce Department, to conduct a study to address technical means forempowering users to control information they receive over interactivecommunications systems such as the Internet, commercial online services,independent BBS's, and future interactive media.  The bill is beingco-sponsored by Senators Bob Kerry (D-NE) and Herb Kohl (D-WI), and isexpected to generate support across party lines.The Communications Decency Act, which Leahy seeks to replace, is nowpending before the Senate as part of the "Telecommunications Competitionand Deregulation Act of 1995' (S. 652).In a statement announcing the introduction of the bill, Senator Leahy urgedCongress to carefully consider the implications of imposing contentrestrictions on interactive media. "Heavy-handed efforts by government toregulate obscenity on interactive information services will only stifle thefree flow of information, discourage the robust development of newinformation services, and make users avoid using the system" Leahy said.Instead, Leahy urged a careful consideration of possible alternativesbefore Congress attempts to legislate in this area.  Under the legislationintroduced today, the Department of Justice, in consultation with theDepartment of Commerce, would examine:* Whether current laws prohibiting the distribution of obscenity and child  pornography by means of computers are sufficient.* Whether current law enforcement resources are sufficient to enforce  existing laws.* The availability of technical means to enable parents and other users to  control access to "commercial, non-commercial, violent, sexually explicit,  harassing, offensive, or otherwise unwanted" content. * Recommendations to encourage the development and deployment of such  technologies* The availability of technical means to promote the free flow of  information consistent with Constitutional values.The Center for Democracy and Technology commends Senator Leahy for hisleadership on this issue and his efforts to promote the free flow ofinformation in cyberspace.  CDT will work to support Senator Leahy'sefforts and to develop alternatives to content restrictions in interactivemedia.------------------------------------------------------------------------LEAHY STATEMENT ON INTRODUCTION OF S. 714STATEMENT OF SENATOR LEAHYOn Introduction of The Child Protection, User Empowerment, and FreeExpression In Interactive Media Study BillApril 7, 1995Mr. President: I rise today to introduce a bill calling for a study by theDepartment of Justice, in consultation with the U.S. Department of Commerceon how we can empower parents and users of interactive telecommunicationssystems, such as the Internet, to control the material transmitted to themover those systems. We must find ways to do this that do not inviteinvasions of privacy, lead to censorship of private online communications,and undercut important constitutional protections.Before legislating to impose government regulation on the content ofcommunications in this enormously complex area, I feel we need moreinformation from law enforcement and telecommunications experts. My billcalls for just such a fast-track study of this issue.There is no question that we are now living through a revolution intelecommunications with cheaper, easier to use and faster ways tocommunicate electronically with people within our own homes andcommunities, and around the globe.A byproduct of this technical revolution is that supervising our childrentakes on a new dimension of responsibility. Very young children are soadept with computers that they can sit at a keypad in front of a computerscreen at home or at school and connect to the outside world through theInternet or some other on-line service. Many of us are, thus, justifiablyconcerned about the accessibility of obscene and indecent materials on-lineand the ability of parents to monitor and control the materials to whichtheir children are exposed. But government regulation of the content of allcomputer and telephone communications, even private communications, inviolation of the First Amendment is not the answer -- it is merely aknee-jerk response.Heavy-handed efforts by government to regulate obscenity on interactiveinformation services will only stifle the free flow of information,discourage the robust development of new information services, and makeusers avoid using the system.The problem of policing the Internet is complex and involves many importantissues. We need to protect copyrighted materials from illegal copying. Weneed to protect privacy. And we need to help parents protect theirchildren. Penalties imposed after the harm is done is not enough. We needto find technical means from stopping the harm done before it happens.My bill calls for a study to address the legal and technical issues forempowering users to control the information they receive over electronicinteractive services. Instead of rushing to regulate the content ofinformation services, we should encourage the development of technologythat gives parents and other consumers the ability to control theinformation that can be access over a modem.Empowering parents to manage what their kids access over the Internet withtechnology under their control is far preferable to some of the billspending in Congress that would criminalize users or deputize informationservice providers as smut police.Let's see what this study reveals before we start legislating in ways thatcould severely damage electronic communications systems, sweep awayimportant constitutional rights, and undercut law enforcement at the sametime.I ask unanimous consent, to have printed in the record at this pint, the"Child Protection, User Empowerment, and Free Expression in InteractiveMedia Study" bill.------------------------------------------------------------------------TEXT OF S. 714                               104th Congress                                1st Session                                   S. 714                        -------------------------------                      IN THE SENATE OF THE UNITED STATESMr. Leahy introduced the following bill; which was read twice and referredto the committee on_______                        -------------------------------                                    A BILLTo require the Attorney General to study and report to Congress on themeans of controlling the flow of violent, sexually explicit, harassing,offense, or otherwise unwanted material in interactive telecommunicationssystems.Be it enacted by the Senate and House of Representatives of the UnitedStates of America in Congress assembled,SECTION 1.      STUDY ON MEANS OF RESTRICTING ACCESS TO UNWANTED MATERIALIN INTERACTIVE TELECOMMUNICATIONS SYSTEMS.        (a) STUDY AND REPORT. -- Not later than 150 days after the date ofenactment of this Act, the Attorney General shall complete a study andsubmit to the Committee on the Judiciary of the Senate and the Committee onthe Judiciary of the House of Representatives a report containing --(1) an evaluation of whether current criminal laws governing thedistribution of obscenity over computer networks and the creation anddistribution of child pornography by means of computers are fullyenforceable  in interactive media;(2) an assessment of the Federal, State, and local law enforcementresources that are currently available to enforce those laws;(3) an evaluation of the technical means available to --        (A) enable parents to exercise control over the information thattheir children receive and enable other users to exercise control over thecommercial and noncommercial information that they receive over interactivetelecommunications systems so that they may avoid violent, sexuallyexplicit, harassing, offensive, or otherwise unwanted material; and        (B) promote the free flow of information consistent, withConstitutional values, in interactive media; and(4) recommendations to encourage the development and deployment oftechnical means, including hardware and software, to enable parents toexercise control over the information that their children receive andenable other users of exercise control over the information that theyreceive over interactive telecommunications systems so that they may avoidharassing, violent, sexually explicit, harassing, offensive, or otherwiseunwanted material.        (b) CONSULTATION -- In conducting the study and preparing thereport under subsection (a), the Attorney General shall consult with theNational Telecommunications and Information Administration of theDepartment of Commerce. ---------------------------------------------------------------------ABOUT THE CENTER FOR DEMOCRACY AND TECHNOLOGYThe Center for Democracy and Technology is a non-profit public interestorganization. The Center's mission is to develop and advocate publicpolicies that advance constitutional civil liberties and democratic values in new computer and communications technologies. Contacting us:General information on CDT can be obtained by sending mail to CDT's www site is up! Visit us at http://www.cdt.org/Our ftp and gopher sites will be up soon.voice: 202.637.9800                                  ###WT02-B05-47IA095-001027-B011-160http://www.cdt.org:80/publications/pp070330.html 205.177.10.31 19970215011657 text/html 12151HTTP/1.0 200 OKDate: Sat, 15 Feb 1997 01:15:40 GMTServer: Apache/1.1.1Content-type: text/html CDT POLICY POST No.7 -- 03/30/95 ------------------------------------------------------------------------   ******    ********    *************  ********   *********   *************     **         **      **       ***               POLICY POST    **         **      **       ***                 **         **      **       ***               March 30, 1995  **         **      **       ***               Number 7  ********   *********        ***                 ******    ********         ***                  CENTER FOR DEMOCRACY AND TECHNOLOGY------------------------------------------------------------------------  A briefing on public policy issues affecting civil liberties online------------------------------------------------------------------------CDT POLICY POST 3/30/95                                      Number 7CONTENTS: (1) Senator Leahy's Floor Statement Opposing Exon Bill          (2) About the Center For Democracy and TechnologyThis document may be re-distributed freely providing it remains in its entirety.------------------------------------------------------------------------The Center for Democracy and Technology is pleased to distribute thisstatement delivered by Senator Patrick Leahy (D-VT) on the floor of theSenate today.  Leahy makes clear his opposition to the bill, explains thatthe Exon approach is the wrong way to regulate interactive media, anddeclares that the bill would threaten the free speech and privacy rights ofall users of interactive services.  At the close of his statement, Senator Leahy calls on the InteractiveWorking Group (an ad hoc group of civil liberties andcomputer/telecommunications industry groups coordinated by CDT) to explorealternatives to the Exon bill.  We are delighted to have such a strongcivil liberties advocate on our side in the struggle over protecting anddefining free speech in interactive media.STATEMENT OF SENATOR LEAHY ON CENSORING CYBERSPACEMARCH 30, 1995Mr. President:  I rise today to speak about legislation that would *impose*government regulation on the content of communications transmitted overcomputer networks.  Ironically, this legislation was accepted withoutdebate by the Commerce Committee as an amendment to a drafttelecommunications bill whose purported purpose is to *remove* regulationfrom significant parts of the telecommunications industry.  It is rumoredthat this matter could be headed for consideration by the Senate on Monday,although the bill has yet to be introduced and the Commerce Committee hasyet to issue its report on the measure.There is no question that we are now living through a revolution intelecommunications with cheaper, easier to use and faster ways tocommunicate electronically with people within our own homes andcommunities, and around the globe.A byproduct of this technical revolution is that supervising ourchildren takes on a new dimension of responsibility.  Very young childrenare so adept with computers that they can sit at a keypad in front of acomputer screen at home or at school and connect to the outside worldthrough the Internet or some other on-line service.  Many of us are, thus,justifiably concerned about the accessibility of obscene and indecentmaterials on-line and the ability of parents to monitor and control thematerials to which their children are exposed.  But government regulationof the content of all computer communications, even private communications,in violation of the First Amendment is not the answer-- it is merely aknee-jerk response.Although well-intentioned, my good friend from Nebraska, SenatorExon, is championing an approach that I believe unnecessarily intrudes intopersonal privacy, restricts freedoms and upsets legitimate law enforcementneeds.  He successfully offered the Commerce Committee an amendment thatwould make it a felony to send certain kinds of communications overcomputer networks, even though some of these communications are otherwiseconstitutionally protected speech under the First Amendment.  Thisamendment would chill free speech and the free flow of information over theInternet and computer networks, and undo important privacy protections forcomputer communications.  At the same time, this amendment would underminelaw enforcement's most important tool for policing cyberspace byprohibiting the use of court-authorized wiretaps for any "digitalcommunications".Under this Exon Amendment, those of us who are users of computere-mail and other network systems would have to speak as if we were inSunday School every time we went on-line.  I, too, support raising ourlevel of civility in communications in this country, but not with agovernment sanction and possible prison sentence when someone uses anexpletive.  The Exon amendment makes it a felony punishable by two yearsimprisonment to send a personal e-mail message to a friend with "obscene,lewd, lascivious, filthy, or indecent" words in it.  This penalty adds newmeaning to the adage, "Think twice before you speak."  All users ofInternet and other information services would have to clean up theirlanguage when they go on-line, whether or not they are communicating withchildren.It would turn into criminals people, who in the privacy of theirown homes, download racy fiction or "indecent" photographs.  This wouldhave a significant chilling effect on the free flow of communications overthe Internet and other computer networks.  Furthermore, banning the use of"lewd, filthy, lascivious or indecent words, which fall underconstitutional protection, raises significant First Amendment problems.Meanwhile, the amendment is crafted to protect the companies whoprovide us with service.  They are given special defenses to avoid criminalliability.  Such defenses may unintentionally encourage conduct that iswrong and borders on the illegal.For example, the amendment would exempt those who exercise noeditorial control over content.  This would have the perverse effect ofstopping responsible electronic bulletin board system (BBS) operators fromscreening the boards for hate speech, obscenity and other offensivematerial.  Since such screening is just the sort of editorial control thatcould land BBS operators in jail for two years if they happened to miss abit of obscenity put up on a board, they will avoid it like the plague. Thus, this amendment stops responsible screening by BBS operators.On the other hand, another defense rewards with complete immunityany service provider who goes snooping for smut through private messages. According to the language of the amendment, on-line providers who takesteps "to restrict or prevent the transmission of, or access to" obscene,lewd, filthy, lascivious, or indecent communications are not only protectedfrom criminal liability but also from any civil suit for invasion ofprivacy by a subscriber.  We will thereby deputize and immunize others toeavesdrop on private communications.  Overzealous service providers, in theguise of the smut police, could censor with impunity private e-mailmessages or prevent a user from downloading material deemed "indecent" bythe service provider.I have worked hard over my years in the Senate to pass bipartisanlegislation to increase the privacy protections for personal communcationsover telephones and on computer networks.  With the Exon amendment, I seehow easily all that work can be undone -- without a hearing or evenconsideration by the Judiciary Committee, which has jurisdiction overcriminal laws and constitutional matters such as rights of privacy and freespeech.Rather than invade the privacy of subscribers, one Vermonter toldme he would simply stop offering any e-mail services or Internet access. The Physician's Computer Company in Essex Junction, Vermont, providesInternet access, e-mail services and medical record tracking services topediatricians around the country.  The President of this company let meknow that if this amendment became law, he feared it would "cause us tolose a significant amount of business."  We should be encouraging these newhigh-tech businesses, and not be imposing broad-brush criminal liability inways that stifle business in this growth industry.These efforts to regulate obscenity on interactive informationservices will only stifle the free flow of information and discourage therobust development of new information services.  If users realize that toavoid criminal liability under this amendment, the information serviceprovider is routinely accessing and checking their private communicationsfor obscene, filthy or lewd language or photographs, they will avoid usingthe system.I am also concerned that the Exon Amendment would totally underminethe legal authority for law enforcement to use court-authorized wiretaps,one of the most significant tools in law enforcement's arsenal for fightingcrime.  The Exon Amendment would impose blanket prohibition on wiretapping"digital communications."  No exceptions allowed.This means that parents of a kidnapping victim could not agree tohave the FBI listen in on calls with the kidnapper, if these calls werecarried in a digital mode.  Or, that the FBI could not get a court order towiretap the future John Gotti, if his communications were digital.  Many ofus worked very hard over the last several years and, in particular, duringthe last Congress, with law enforcement and privacy advocates to craft acarefully balanced digital telephony law the increased privacy protectionswhile allowing legitimate law enforcement wiretaps.  That work will beundercut by the amendment.  Our efforts to protect kids from on-lineobscenity need not gut one of the most important tools the policy have tocatch crooks, including on-line criminals, their ability to effectuatecourt-ordered wiretaps.The problem of policing the Internet is complex and involves manyimportant issues.  We need to protect copyrighted materials from illegalcopying.  We need to protect privacy.  And we need to help parents protecttheir children.I have asked a coalition of industry and civil liberties groups,called the Interactive Working Group, to address the legal and technicalissues for policing electronic interactive services.  Instead of rushing toregulate the content of information services with the Exon amendment, weshould encourage the development of technology that gives parents and otherconsumers the ability to control the information that can be accessed overa modem.Empowering parents to control what their kids access over theInternet and enabling creators to protect their intellectual property fromcopyright infringement with technology under their control is farpreferable to criminalizing users or deputizing information serviceproviders as smut police.Let's see what this coalition comes up with before we startimposing liability in ways that could severely damage electroniccommunications systems, sweep away important constitutional rights, andundercut law enforcement at the same time.We should avoid quick fixes today that would interrupt and limitthe rapid evolution of electronic information systems -- for the publicbenefit far exceeds the problems it invariably creates by the force of itsmomentum.---------------------------------------------------------------------ABOUT THE CENTER FOR DEMOCRACY AND TECHNOLOGYThe Center for Democracy and Technology is a non-profit public interestorganization. The Center's mission is to develop and advocate publicpolicies that advance constitutional civil liberties and democratic values in new computer and communications technologies. Contacting us:General information on CDT can be obtained by sending mail to www/ftp/gopher archives are currently under construction, and should be up and running by the end of March.voice: 202.637.9800                                  ###WT02-B05-48IA095-001027-B011-181http://www.cdt.org:80/publications/pp060323.html 205.177.10.31 19970215011711 text/html 22554HTTP/1.0 200 OKDate: Sat, 15 Feb 1997 01:15:50 GMTServer: Apache/1.1.1Content-type: text/html CDT Policy Post No.6 -- CDT Analysis of Revised Exon Indecency Bill ------------------------------------------------------------------------   ******    ********    *************  ********   *********   *************     **         **      **       ***               POLICY POST    **         **      **       ***                 **         **      **       ***               March 24, 1995  **         **      **       ***               Number 6  ********   *********        ***                 ******    ********         ***                  CENTER FOR DEMOCRACY AND TECHNOLOGY------------------------------------------------------------------------  A briefing on public policy issues affecting civil liberties online------------------------------------------------------------------------CDT POLICY POST 3/24/95                                      Number 6CONTENTS: (1) CDT Analysis of Revised Exon Indecency Legislation          (2) Section 223 as amended by Communications Decency Act          (3) About the Center For Democracy and TechnologyThis document may be re-distributed freely provided it remains in its entirety.------------------------------------------------------------------------CDT ANALYSIS OF REVISED EXON INDECENCY LEGISLATIONI.  OVERVIEWA revised version of the Communications Decency Act (S.314) was added to the Senate telecommunications reform legislation as the reform bill was reported out of the Senate Commerce Committee.  In an important improvement over the original version, several exemptions have been created to limit criminal liability of online services providers where they exercise no control over content.  However, despite this significant change the bill is still an unconstitutional intrusion of the free speech and privacy rights of Internet users and all content providers in interactive media.   (The complete text of the bill interleaved into the current statute is attached at the end of this Policy Post.)In simple terms, the Communications Decency Act would enshrine in statute a sharp distinction between the print medium and new interactive media.  The bill subjects interactive media to the same weak First Amendment protections that have evolved for mass media.  Moreover, it places all speech that occurs on the Internet and elsewhere in cyberspace under the jurisdiction of the Federal Communications Commission.  Both the interactive media and the print media are arenas in which individuals and organizations exercise core First Amendment free speech rights.  Thus, new interactive media -- which includes not only email and Internet servicese, but also interactive TV, video on demand and distance learning -- must be protected by the First Amendment.The Center for Democracy and Technology (CDT) remains actively opposed to this bill.  With the help of Senator Leahy and other civil liberties advocates in Congress, we will fight to keep it from being enacted and continue to search for alternatives to this dangerous legislation.  CDT believes that federal legislation is needed to solidify free speech rights and clarify online service provider liability.  Without such legislation, a series of state legislative proposed as bad or worse than the Exon/Gorton bill will proliferate.  Restrictive proposals already under consideration in states such as Maryland, Oregon, and Washington must be pre-empted.  We will work with concerned legislators and the Interactive Working Group (an ad hoc coalition of public interest organizations, and computer, communication, and publishing firms) to develop alternatives.II.  ANALYSIS OF CURRENT PROPOSALThe Exon/Gorton bill was introduced to promote the important purpose of protecting minors from access to controversial and inappropriate sexually explicit material in interactive media including the Internet, other commercial online services, electronic bulletin board services (BBS's).  However, because the proposed statute is grafted onto a twenty five year-old provision of the Communications Act which was designed for a centralized monopoly telephone environment, instead of diverse, decentralized interactive media, it both fails to accomplish its goal and is unconstitutional on its face.  In spite of the changes made by Senator Exon, the bill still suffers the following critical defects from the standpoint of users and content providers:1.      SECOND CLASS FIRST AMENDMENT RIGHTS FOR USERS AND CONTENT PROVIDERS ON         THE NET AND ALL INTERACTIVE MEDIA:  Even though many laud cyberspace as         the new electronic gutenberg printing press accessible to all, the Exon         bill treats the Internet, interactive television, and video dialtone         systems as if they were one big radio station whose broadcasts are         constantly assaulting unwilling listeners.  Those who use these new         technologies know that this is not the case.  However, viewing         interactive media as an extension of broadcasting diminishes the First         Amendment rights of all who use these systems and create content for         them.  For example, though an individual is allowed to go into a         bookstore and buy a sexually-explicit magazine or a "lewd" work of art,         one would not be able to access the identical information over the         Internet if this legislation is enacted.  2.      FEDERAL COMMUNICATIONS COMMISSION JURISDICTION OVER ONLINE SPEECH:  The         defenses to prosecution established in the new version of the bill gives        the Federal Communications Commission jurisdiction to establish rules         governing distribution of content online.  This will have a dramatic         chilling effect on online activity and squelch the development of         interactive media.  Regulation of indecency in this new medium is a bad         precedent for all kinds of speech in the interactive world.3.      CRIMINALIZATION OF BOTH PUBLIC AND PRIVATE MESSAGES THAT ARE NOT         OBSCENE: The Act criminalizes not only obscene, but also "lewd,         lascivious, filthy, or indecent" communications, all of which are         protected by the First Amendment and cannot be banned.  4.      IMPERMISSIBLY INTRUSIVE MEANS OF ACHIEVING LEGITIMATE GOAL:  First         Amendment jurisprudence requires that restrictions on speech adopt the         "least restrictive means" available for achieving a compelling purpose.        Relying on technological assumptions applicable only to 900 number         services and a centrally-controlled telephone system, the Act fails to         account for the fact that government restriction on content is         unnecessary in interactive media, where parents can control the content         that their children access.5.      FAULTY ANALOGY TO BROADCAST MEDIA: Proponents of the Act have justified        the constitutionality by improper reliance on content restrictions found        acceptable in broadcast media. These arguments fail to recognize that         while broadcast media may "assult" unwilling listeners, who may be        in need of government protection, interactive media enables users to        control the information that they receive.6.      INVASION OF PRIVACY:  By criminalizing the content of private, non-        obscene messages, the Act would force an invasion of the realm of         private electronic communications and end the individual's ability to         control the content of information he or she chooses to access in         private.Alternative means of achieving the goal of protecting minors from access to material considered inappropriate by their parents would include:1.      FEDERAL LEGISLATION ESSENTIAL TO PROTECT FREE SPEECH ON THE NET:         CDT believes that there mujst be federal legislation to solidify free        speech rights and clarify carrier liability which pre-empts state        legislation in this area.  Otherwise, as series of state legislative        proposed where are as bad or worse than the Exon/Gorton bill will        proliferate.  2.      MAXIMUM RELIANCE ON TECHNOLOGY TO EMPOWER PARENTS:  Interactive media         offers parents and other users the ability to filter certain kinds of         content.  Instead of relying on government censorship, or even         government-imposed rating systems, parents should be able to block the         delivery of certain information to their children on the basis of their         own individual tastes and preferences.3.      CLEAR PROTECTION FOR CONSTITUTIONALLY-PERMISSIBLE SPEECH:  Any         alternative legislation must provide affirmative protection for         constitutionally-permissible speech, even if it is lewd, filthy or         otherwise controversial.  The First Amendment demands that offensive or         disturbing speech must be treated separately than that which is clearly         obscene and unprotected.4.      EMPHASIS ON ENFORCEMENT OF EXISTING STATUTES:  Federal and state law         already prohibits transportation of obscenity, child pornography, as         well as, in many instances threats, stalking and harassment.  To the         extent that there are obstacles to enforcing these laws in the new on-        line environment, Congress should examine whether new law is required,         or whether more resources for enforcement (including training for law         enforcement in interactive services and cooperative efforts with the         industry).5.      CODIFICATION SEPARATELY FROM EXISTING DIAL-A-PORN STATUTE:        Modification of the existing  223, originally written for the analogue        telephone system, to regulate new interactive media causes unnecessary         confusion, both for the treatment of the new technology and with         respect to the stability of the regulation of audiotext services. If new         is written, it should stand on its own. Moreover, Congress should         consider which elements properly belong in the Communications Act and         which in the Criminal Code.The regulation of speech, commerce, and privacy rights in new interactive communications systems raises many difficult issues of public policy and constitutional law.  Before proceeding with legislation, Congress must provide the opportunity for public hearings to identify clearly the problems that exist, and to identify solutions that are appropriate to the new technology.  Failure to do so will result in ineffective policy, years of constitutional litigation, and a disastrous chilling effect on the development and growth of a very promising new communications medium.For More Information Contact:Center for Democracy and Technology     Jerry Berman            Daniel Weitzner         (voice) +1.202.637.9800--------------------------------------------------------------------TEXT OF STATUTE WITH PROPOSED AMENDMENT:Substantial changes from previous version include:-- the term 'knowingly' has been added to section (a)(1)(A)-- additional defenses have been added in subsection (d)**NOTE:         [] = deleted                                 ALL CAPS = additionsTITLE 47.  TELEGRAPHS, TELEPHONES, AND RADIOTELEGRAPHS  CHAPTER 5.  WIRE OR RADIO COMMUNICATION  COMMON CARRIERS47 USCS | 223 (1992)| 223.  [Obscene or harassing telephone calls in the Districtof Columbia or in interstate or foreign communications]OBSCENE OR HARASSING UTILIZATION OF TELECOMMUNICATIONS DEVICES AND FACILITIES IN THE DISTRICT OF COLUMBIA OR IN INTERSTATE OR FOREIGN COMMUNICATIONS"   (a) Whoever--   (1) in the District of Columbia or in interstate or foreign communication by means of [telephone] TELECOMMUNICATIONSDEVICE--  [ (A) makes any comment, request, suggestion or proposal which is obscene, lewd, lascivious, filthy, or indecent;]   (A) KNOWINGLY --                (i)  MAKES, CREATES, OR SOLICITS, AND        (ii) INITIATES THE TRANSMISSION OF,ANY COMMENT, REQUEST, SUGGESTION, PROPOSAL, IMAGE, OR OTHER COMMUNICATION WHICH IS OBSCENE, LEWD, LASCIVIOUS, FILTHY, OR INDECENT;   (B) makes a telephone call, whether or not conversation ensues, without disclosing his identity and with intent to annoy, abuse, threaten, or harass any person at the called number;   (C) makes or causes the telephone of another repeatedly or continuously to ring, with intent to harass any person at the called number; or   (D) makes repeated telephone calls, during which conversation ensues, solely to harass any person at the called number; or   (2) knowingly permits any [telephone] TELECOMMUNICATIONS facilityunder his control to be used for any purpose prohibited by this section, shall be fined not more than $[50,000]100,000 or imprisoned  not more than [six months] TWO YEARS, or both.                                            (b)(1) Whoever knowingly--   [(A) within the United States, by means of telephone, makes (directly or by recording device) any obscene communication for commercial purposes to any person, regardless of whether the maker of such communication placed the call;]    (A) WITHIN THE UNITED STATES, BY MEANS OF TELECOMMUNICATIONS DEVICE --        (i)  MAKES, CREATES, OR SOLICITS, AND        (ii) PURPOSEFULLY MAKES AVAILABLE,ANY OBSCENE COMMUNICATION FOR COMMERCIAL PURPOSES TO ANY PERSON, REGARDLESS OF WHETHER THE MAKER OF SUCH COMMUNICATION PLACED THE CALL OR INITIATED THE COMMUNICATION; OR          (B) permits any [telephone facility] TELECOMMUNICATIONS FACILITY under such person's control to be used for an activity prohibited by subparagraph (A), shall be fined in accordance with title 18, United States Code, or imprisoned not more than two years, or both.   (2) Whoever knowingly--  [ (A) within the United States, by means of telephone, makes (directly or by recording device) any indecent communication for commercial purposes which is available to any person under 18 years of age or to any other person withoutthat person's consent, regardless of whether the maker of such  communication placed the call; or ]   (A) WITH THE UNITED STATES, BY MEANS OF TELEPHONE OR TELECOMMUNICATIONS DEVICE,        (i)  MAKES, CREATES, OR SOLICITS, AND        (ii) PURPOSEFULLY MAKES AVAILABLE (DIRECTLY OR BY RECORDING DEVICE)ANY INDECENT COMMUNICATIONS FOR COMMERCIAL PURPOSES WHICH IS AVAILABLE TO ANY PERSON UNDER 18 YEARS OF AGE OR TO ANY OTHER PERSON WITHOUT THAT PERSON'S CONSENT, REGARDLESS OF WHETHER THE MAKER OF SUCH COMMUNICATION PLACED THE CALL; OR                                                   (B) permits any [telephone facility] TELECOMMUNICATIONS FACILITY under such person's control to be used for an activity prohibited by subparagraph (A), shall be fined not more than $[50,000] 100,000 or imprisoned not more than [six months]TWO YEARS, or both.   (3) It is a defense to prosecution under paragraph (2) of this subsection that the defendant restrict access to the prohibited communication to persons 18 years of age or older in accordance with subsection (c) of this section and with such procedures as the Commission may prescribe by regulation.   (4) In addition to the penalties under paragraph (1), whoever, within the United States, intentionally violates paragraph (1) or (2) shall be subject to a fine of not more than $[50,000] 100,000 for each violation. For purposes of this paragraph, each day of violation shall constitute a separate violation.   (5)(A) In addition to the penalties under paragraphs (1), (2), and (5), whoever, within the United States, violates paragraph (1) or (2) shall be subject to a civil fine of not more than $[50,000] 100,000 for each violation. For purposes of this paragraph, each day of violation shall constitute a separate violation.   (B) A fine under this paragraph may be assessed either--   (i) by a court, pursuant to civil action by the Commission or any attorney employed by the Commission who is designated by the Commission for such purposes, or   (ii) by the Commission after appropriate administrative proceedings.   (6) The Attorney General may bring a suit in the appropriate district court of the United States to enjoin any act or practice which violates paragraph (1) or (2). An injunction may be granted in accordance with the Federal Rules of Civil Procedure.   (c)(1) A common carrier within the District of Columbia or within any State, or in interstate or foreign commerce, shall not, to the extent technically feasible, provide access to a communication specified in subsection (b) from the[telephone] TELECOMMUNICATIONS DEVICE  of any subscriber who has not previously requested in writing the carrier to provide access to such communication if the carrier collects from subscribers an identifiable charge for such communication that the carrier remits, in whole or in part, to the provider of such communication.   (2) Except as provided in paragraph (3), no cause of action may be brought in any court or administrative agency against any common carrier, or any of its affiliates, including their officers, directors, employees, agents, or authorized representatives on account of--   (A) any action which the carrier demonstrates was taken in good faith to restrict access pursuant to paragraph (1) of this subsection; or    (B) any access permitted--   (i) in good faith reliance upon the lack of any representation by a provider of communications that communications provided by that provider are communications specified in subsection (b), or   (ii) because a specific representation by the provider did not allow the carrier, acting in good faith, a sufficient period to restrict access to communications described in subsection (b).   (3) Notwithstanding paragraph (2) of this subsection, a provider of communications services to which subscribers are denied access pursuant to paragraph (1) of this subsection may bring an action for a declaratory judgment or similar action in a court. Any such action shall be limited to the question of whether the communications which the provider seeks to provide fall withinthe category of communications to which the carrier will provide access only to subscribers who have previously requested such access.        (d) ADDITIONAL DEFENSES; RESTRICTIONS ON ACCESS; JUDICIAL REMEDIES RESPECTING RESTRICTIONS. --                (1) NO PERSON SHALL BE HELD TO HAVE VIOLATED THIS SECTIONWITH RESPECT TO ANY ACTION BY THAT PERSON OR A SYSTEM UNDER HIS CONTROLTHAT IS LIMITED SOLELY TO THE PROVISION OF ACCESS, INCLUDING TRANSMISSION,DOWNLOADING, INTERMEDIATE STORAGE, NAVIGATIONAL TOOLS, AND RELATEDCAPABILITIES NOT INVOLVING THE CREATION OR ALTERATION OF THE CONTENT OF THECOMMUNICATIONS, FOR OTHERPERSON'S COMMUNICATIONS TO OR FROM A SERVICE, FACILITY, SYSTEM, OR NETWORK NOT UNDER THAT PERSON'S CONTROL.                (2) IT IS A DEFENSE TO PROSECUTION UDER SUBSECTIONS (a)(2),(b)(1(B), AND (b)(2)(B) THAT A DEFENDANT LACKED EDITORIAL CONTROL OVER THECOMMUNICATIONS SPECIFIED IN THIS SECTION.                (3) IT IS A DEFENSE TO PROSECUTION UNDER SUBSECTIONS(a)(2), (b)(1)(B), AND (b)(2)(B) THAT A DEFENDANT HAS TAKEN GOOD FAITH,REASONABLE STEPS, AS APPROPRIATE --                        (A) TO PROVIDE USERS WITH THE MEANS TO RESTRICT                ACCESS TO COMMUNICATIONS DESCRIBED IN THIS SECTION;                        (B) PROVIDE USERS WITH WARNINGS CONCERNING THE         POTENTIAL FOR ACCESS TO SUCH COMMUNICATIONS;                        (C) TO RESPOND TO COMPLAINTS FROM THOSE WHO ARE                SUBJECTED TO SUCH COMMUNICATIONS;                        (D) TO PROVIDE MECHANISMS TO ENFORCE A PROVIDER'S              TERMS OF SERVICE GOVERNING SUCH COMMUNICATIONS; OR                        (E) TO IMPLEMENT SUCH OTHER MEASURES AS THE                    COMMISSION MAY PRESCRIBE TO CARRY OUT THE PURPOSES OF THISPARAGRAPH. NOTHING IN THIS SECTION IN AND OF ITSELF SHOULD BE CONSTRUED TOTREAT ENHANCED INFORMATION SERVICES AS COMMON CARRIAGE.                (4) INADDITION TO OTHER DEFENSES AUTHORIZED UNDER THISSECTION, IT SHALL BE A DEFENSE TO PROSECUTION UNDER SECTION (b) THAT ADEFENDANT IS NOT ENGAGED IN A COMMERCIAL ACTIVITY THAT HAS AS A PREDOMINATEPURPOSE AN ACTIVITYSPECIFIED IN THAT SUBSECTION.                (5) NO CAUSE OF ACTION MAY BE BROUGHT IN ANY COURT OR ANYADMINISTRATIVE AGENCY AGAINST ANY PERSON ON ACCOUNT OF ANY ACTION WHICH THEPERSON HAS TAKEN IN GOOD FAITH TO IMPLEMENT A DEFENSE AUTHORIZED UNDER THISSECTION OR OTHERWISE TO RESTRICT OR PREVENT THE TRANSMISSION OF, OR ACCESSTO, A COMMUNICATION SPECIFIED IN THIS SECTION. THE PRECEDING SENTENCE SHALL NOT APPLY WHERE THE GOOD FAITH DEFENSES UNDER SUBSECTION (c)(2) APPLY.        (6) NO STATE OR LOCAL GOVERNMENT MAY IMPOSE ANY LIABILITY IN CONNECTION WITH A VIOLATION DESCRIBED IN SUBSECTION (a)(2), (b)(1)(B), (b)(2)(B) THAT IS INCONSISTENT WITH THE TREATMENT OF THOSE VIOLATIONS UNDER THIS SECTION PROVIDED, HOWEVER, THAT NOTHING HEREIN SHALL PRECLUDE ANY STATE OR LOCAL GOVERNMENT FROM ENACTING AND ENFORCING COMPLEMENTARY OVERSIGHT, LIABILITY, AND REGULATORY SYSTEMS, PROCEDURES, AND REQUIREMENTS SO LONG AS SUCH SYSTEMS, PROCEDURES, AND REQUIREMENTS GOVERN ONLY INTRASTATE SERVICES AND DO NOT RESULT IN THE IMPOSITION OF INCONSISTENT OBLIGATIONS ON THE PROVISION OF INTERSTATE SERVICES.        (e) FOR PURPOSES OF SUBSECTION (a) AND (b), THE TERM 'KNOWINGLY'MEANS AN INTENTIONAL ACT WITH ACTUAL KNOWLEDGE OF THE SPECIFIC CONTENT OFTHE COMMUNICATION SPECIFIED IN THIS SECTION TO ANOTHER PERSON.---------------------------------------------------------------------ABOUT THE CENTER FOR DEMOCRACY AND TECHNOLOGYThe Center for Democracy and Technology is a non-profit public interestorganization. The Center's mission is to develop and advocate publicpolicies that advance constitutional civil liberties and democratic values in new computer and communications technologies. Contacting us:General information on CDT can be obtained by sending mail to www/ftp/gopher archives are currently under construction, and should be up and running by the end of March.                                  ###WT02-B05-49IA095-001027-B011-196http://www.cdt.org:80/publications/pp050322.html 205.177.10.31 19970215011730 text/html 3341HTTP/1.0 200 OKDate: Sat, 15 Feb 1997 01:16:14 GMTServer: Apache/1.1.1Content-type: text/html CDT Policy Post No.5 -- Exon Indecency Bill Approved by Sen. Commerce Committee ------------------------------------------------------------------------   ******    ********    *************  ********   *********   *************     **         **      **       ***               POLICY POST    **         **      **       ***                 **         **      **       ***               March 23, 1995  **         **      **       ***               Number 5  ********   *********        ***                 ******    ********         ***                  CENTER FOR DEMOCRACY AND TECHNOLOGY------------------------------------------------------------------------  A briefing on public policy issues affecting civil liberties online------------------------------------------------------------------------CDT POLICY POST 3/23/95                                      Number 5CONTENTS: (1) Exon Indecency Bill Approved by Sen. Commerce Committee          (3) About the Center For Democracy and TechnologyThis document may be re-distributed freely providing it remains in its entirety.------------------------------------------------------------------------EXON INDECENCY BILL APPROVED BY SENATE COMMERCE COMMITTEEThe Senate Commerce Committee voted unanimously today to adopt S. 314, Senator Exon's "Communications Decency Act", as an amendment to the Senate telecommunications reform legislation. The amendment was introduced by Senator Slade Gorton (R-WA) on behalf of himself an Exon (D-NE). It received no significant debate and was unanimously approved on a voice vote.The bill was amended from its original form to limit liability for telecommunications carriers and online service providers, but users  and content providers would still be criminally liable for any communications that are deemed "obscene, lewd, lascivious, filthy, or indecent".   An analysis of these provisions by CDT, as well as the full text of the bill will be posted later today.On initial analysis, CDT still believes that the bill is an unconstitutional violation of the free speech and privacy rights of network users and content providers. Although the Commerce Committee did vote to send the Telecommunications reform legislation to the Senate floor, there are still serious disputes about the entire package. Because of this, there are still many opportunities to remove the "Indecency Provision" as the bill moves to the floor.Stay tuned for further analysis and additional information from CDT.---------------------------------------------------------------------ABOUT THE CENTER FOR DEMOCRACY AND TECHNOLOGYThe Center for Democracy and Technology is a non-profit public interestorganization. The Center's mission is to develop and advocate publicpolicies that advance constitutional civil liberties and democratic values in new computer and communications technologies. Contacting us:General information on CDT can be obtained by sending mail to info@cdt.orgwww/ftp/gopher archives are currently under construction, and should be up and running by the end of March.                                  ###WT02-B05-50IA095-001027-B011-210http://www.cdt.org:80/publications/pp040316.html 205.177.10.31 19970215011817 text/html 8822HTTP/1.0 200 OKDate: Sat, 15 Feb 1997 01:16:43 GMTServer: Apache/1.1.1Content-type: text/html CDT POLICY POST No.4 -- SENATOR LEAHY TO SEEK ALTS. TO EXON CDT POLICY POST Number 4 3/16/95 A briefing on public policy issues affecting civil liberties online CONTENTS: (1) Senator Leahy asks CDT led coalition to explore alternatives to Communications Decency Act (S. 314) (2) What you can do to help stop S. 314 (3) About the Center For Democracy and Technology This document may be re-distributed freely providing it remains in its entirety. SENATOR LEAHY ASKS CDT LED COALITION TO EXPLORE ALTERNATIVES TO S. 314 Senator Patrick Leahy (D-VT), a strong proponent of civil libertiesand the development of new communications technologies,has raised seriousconcerns about the Communications Decency Act (S. 314). In a letter to CDTExecutive Director Jerry Berman and th e Interactive Working Group,Senator Leahy stated that "The proposed legislative solutions . . . raiseserious concerns about the free flow of information in new communicationsmedia, threaten to squelch the development of the Internet and a vital newind ustry along with it." Senator Leahy has asked the Interactive Working Group (a coalition ofpublic interest organizations, members of the computer and communicationsindustry, and associations representing librarians and the press, chairedby the Center For Democracy and Techn ology) to "explore alternatives thatbalance constitutional liberties, competitiveness, and the legitimateinterest of protecting children from accessing controversial content." Theletter is attached below. Leahy's efforts to explore alternatives to S. 314 come at an importanttime in this debate over S. 314. The Senate Commerce Committee may stillincorporate S. 314 into telecommunications reform legislation, expected tobe introduced as early next Monday ( 3/20). It is critical that you contact Commerce Committee Chairman Pressler(R- SD), Senator Packwood (R-OR), Senator Hollings (D-SC), and your ownSenators and urge them to: Take S. 314 off the fast track, Keep S. 314 out of the Senate telecommunications reform legislation, and, Support Senator Leahy's effort to explore alternatives that are consistent with the First Amendment and the free flow of information. For more information on how to contact members ofcongress, send email to the Voter's Telecommunications Watch vtw@vtw.org. While you are at it, you might send a note of thanks to Senator Leahyfor his efforts on behalf of free speech and the free flow of informationin cyberspace. He can be reached by email at senator_leahy@leahy.senate.gov The Center for Democracy and members of the Interactive Working Groupare grateful to Senator Leahy for his leadership on this issue and hiswillingness to explore the implications of government efforts to imposecontent regulations on interactive media. SENATOR LEAHY'S LETTER TO INTERACTIVE WORKING GROUP March 15, 1995 Mr. Jerry Berman Interactive Working Group Center for Democracy and Technology 1001 G St., NW Suite 700 East Washington, DC 2000 Dear Mr. Berman: Interactive communications media are growing at an astonishing rate,promising great advances for domestic commerce, internationalcompetitiveness, and political and cultural life. Nearly ten years ago, webegan work on the Electronic Communications Priva cy Act ("ECPA"), inrecognition of the fact that new computer and communications technologieswould only flourish in an environment where the privacy rights of users,the intellectual property rights of content providers, and the obligationsof service pr oviders are clear under statute. We continued that work lastyear in the Communications Assistance for Law Enforcement Act ("CALEA").Today, as interactive communications systems expand in the consumermarket, there is a critical need to clarify the First Amendment rights andresponsibilities of information providers, users and carriers. As you know, a number of bills have been introduced in the Senate thatwould regulate a wide range of controversial content on interactiveinformation services, including the Internet. This legislation ismotivated by two important goals. First, parents s hould be able tocontrol their children's access to controversial material. Second, adultusers should be able to exercise reasonable control over the informationthey receive so they may avoid material offense to them. The proposedlegislative solutions to achieve these goals raise serious concerns aboutthe free flow of information in new communications media, and threaten tosquelch the development of the Internet and a vital new industry alongwith it. I understand that industry and public interest organizations haveindependently come together to form the Interactive Working Group in orderto address these issues. My hope is that the group will explore publicpolicy and technology options for addressin g the problems of children'saccess to obscene content in a manner which promotes parental empowermentand First Amendment values. I would appreciate the Interactive Workinggroup Consideration of and recommendation on the following issues: 1. THE NATIONAL AND INTERNATIONAL INFORMATION INFRASTRUCTURE: Whateffect will content regulation have on the development of the national andglobal information infrastructure, including the Internet and otherinteractive services? 2. CURRENT LAW AND ENFORCEMENT EFFORTS: What is the current lawregulating obscenity and harassment online? Whatgaps, if any, are there in current federal and state laws which hamperprosecution of criminal activity, including violations of the copyrightand obscenity laws, in interactive media ? 3. TECHNOLOGICAL SOLUTIONS: Does interactive technology enable parents to control their children'saccess to information in online services today? If not, what steps wouldbe required to enable such parental control? Can the Working Group providedemonstrations of these user control technologies? 4. CONSTITUTIONAL FREE SPEECH AND PRIVACY ISSUES: What are the First Amendment implications of content regulation ininteractive media? What is the impact of carrier liability for content onECPA , CALEA and constitutional privacy protections? Since the passage of the ElectronicCommunications Privacy Act, and again in CALEA, we have always worked toassure a proper balance of constitutional liberties, competitiveness andlegitimate government interest in the regulation of new communications technologies. As I receive input from a number of sources on these importantissues, I look forward to your advice as well. My staff is available tomeet with members of your group to discuss these issues further. Sincerely, [sig] Patrick J. Leahy United States Senator FOR MORE INFORMATION ON S. 314 AND WHAT YOU CAN DO * HELP STOP S.314 Send a letter or call your Senator! For information onhow you can help, send a message to vtw@vtw.org * DOCUMENTS CDT's analysis ofS. 314 and the text of the bill can be obtained at the VotersTelecommunications Watch (VTW) archive: WWW URL:gopher://gopher.panix.com/11/vtw/exon Gopher command : gopher -p 1/vtw/exon gopher.panix.com You can also obtain information by sendinga message to s314-info@cdt.org. ABOUT THE CENTER FOR DEMOCRACY AND TECHNOLOGY The Center for Democracy and Technology is a non-profit publicinterest organization. The Center's mission is to develop and advocatepublic policies that advance constitutional civil liberties and democraticvalues in new computer and communications tech nologies. Contacting us: General information on CDT can be obtained by sending mail to info@cdt.org. www/ftp/gopher archives are currently under construction, and shouldbe up and running by the middle of March. Return to the CDT HOME PAGE Last Updated 03/17/95 | For More Information Write webmaster@cdt.org WT02-B05-51IA095-001027-B011-228http://www.cdt.org:80/publications/pp30302.html 205.177.10.31 19970215011833 text/html 9367HTTP/1.0 200 OKDate: Sat, 15 Feb 1997 01:17:12 GMTServer: Apache/1.1.1Content-type: text/html Policy Post # 3 - 03/02/95 CDT POLICY POST Number 3 March 3, 1995 A briefing on public policy issues affecting civil liberties online The Center for Democracy and Technology is a non-profit public interest organization. The Center's mission is to develop and advocate public policies that advance constitutional civil liberties and democratic values in new computer and communications technologies. CDT POLICY POST 2/9/95 CONTENTS: (1) CDT led coalition sends letter to Senators Exon and Pressler Urges Committee to remove S. 314 from fast track. (2) What you can do to help stop S. 314 (3) About the Center For Democracy and Technology This document may be re-distributed freely providing it remains in its entirety. CDT LED COALITION SENDS LETTER TO SENATORS EXON AND PRESSLER MESSAGE: REMOVE S. 314 FROM FAST TRACK The Interactive Working Group (a coalition of public interest organizations, members of the computer and communications industry, and associations representing librarians and the press, chaired by the Center For Democracy and Technology) today sent a letter to Senators Pressler, Exon, and the Senate Commerce Committee. The letter expresses serious concerns about S. 314 (the "Communications Decency Act of 1995") from the standpoint of the First Amendment and the viability of the entire communications industry. Because of these and other concerns, the coalition asked Senator Pressler and Exon not to incorporate S. 314 into Senate telecommunications reform legislation which is expected to be introduced later this month. The letter and a list of signatories are attached below. S. 314 would expand current law restricting indecency and harassment on telephone services to all telecommunications providers and expand criminal liability to all content carried by all forms of telecommunications networks. The bill would amend Section 223 of the Communications Act (47 U.S.C. 223), which requires carriers to take steps to prevent minors from gaining access to indecent audiotext and criminalizes harassment accomplished over interstate telephone lines. If enacted, S. 314 would compel service providers to severely restrict your online activities. Your access to email, discussion lists, usenet, the world wide web, gopher, and ftp archives would be substantially reduced or cut off entirely. The bill would also force providers to closely monitor and pre-screen your electronic mail, and refuse to transmit any message or other content which may be considered to be indecent. This bill poses a significant threat to freedom of speech and the free flow of information in cyberspace. The bill also raises fundamental questions about the right of government to control content on communications networks, as well as the locus of liability for content carried in these new communications media. INTERACTIVE WORKING GROUP LETTER March 2, 1995 Chairman Larry Pressler Senate Commerce Committee United States SenateWashington, DC Senator James Exon United States Senate 528 Hart Senate Office Building Washington, DC Dear Chairman Pressler and Senator Exon: We write regarding the Communications Decency Act of 1995 (S. 314), introduced recently by Senator James Exon and Senator Slade Gorton. We request that such legislation not be considered as part of the fast track telecommunications reform measure now before the Commerce Committee. The undersigned members of the computer and communications industry, the press, and the public interest community believe that this legislation raises fundamental questions regarding the involvement of government in content regulation in new interactive media. Developing means for detecting and holding wrong-doers responsible for illegal activity, and permitting parents to control access by their children to adult material while still preserving our constitutional liberties, are important goals shared by many in our society. However, the choice of methods for achieving these goals raises serious free speech and censorship problems. Our commitment is to work with you and your colleagues to resolve these issues in ways which will enable individual and parental choice, without impairing the free flow of information or stifling development of emerging technology through bureaucratic regulation. In recognition of the seriousness of these issues, the undersigned organizations have formed a working group to identify legal and regulatory options that maximize parental control, individual accountability, and the free flow of information in new communication technologies. We are encouraged that new interactive communications technologies -- including online services and interactive television offered by cable, telephone companies, and others in the public sector -- already offer technological means to give consumers choice over the content that they receive and enable parents to control access to controversial material. Many more such features are in development. Market signals already indicate to those of us who are building the Information Superhighway that users want choice of programming and control over the materials to which their children are exposed. Information providers in the public and private sector are working to meet these needs. We plan to devote intensive effort toward developing comprehensive solutions to the problems raised by S. 314. Desirable solutions will take advantage of the empowering potential of new technology for increased user control over programming and information content. However, we must emphasize that we strongly disagree with the approach embodied in this legislation that would in effect require those who merely provide the means of transmitting messages to censor the content of such materials, as well as become liable for the criminal actions of others based solely on the content of the messages transmitted. Applying the regulatory models developed for today's mass media to the interactive media of tomorrow, will only serve to thwart the development of new media. In the coming year, we hope to have the opportunity to work diligently with you and other policy makers to assure that the empowering potential of interactive media is achieved, and to arrive at comprehensive, forward looking solutions to the issues before us without jeopardizing fundamental First Amendment values. Sincerely, American Civil Liberties Union America Online, Inc. Association of Research Libraries American Society of Newspaper Editors American Association of Law Librarians American Library Association Apple Computer Business Software Alliance Cavanagh Associates Center for Democracy and Technology Compuserve Incorporated Consumer Federation of America Cox Enterprises, Inc Electronic Frontier Foundation Electronic Messaging Association Information Technology Industry Council Interactive Services Association Media Access Project Newspaper Association of America National Newspaper Association National Retail Federation People for the American Way Action Fund Recreational Software Advisory Council SmithKline Beecham Software Publishers Association Targetbase Marketing The Internet Company Time Warner cc: Members, Senate Commerce Committee FOR MORE INFORMATION ON S. 314 AND WHAT YOU CAN DO HELP STOP S.314Send a letter or call your Senator! For information on how you can help, send a message to vtw@vtw.org. DOCUMENTS CDT's analysis of S. 314 and the text of the bill can be obtained at the Voters Telecommunications Watch (VTW) archive: WWW URL: gopher://gopher.panix.com/11/vtw/exon Gopher command : gopher -p 1/vtw/exon gopher.panix.com You can also obtain information by sending a message to (s314-info@cdt.org) ABOUT THE CENTER FOR DEMOCRACY AND TECHNOLOGY The Center for Democracy and Technology is a non-profit public interest organization. The Center's mission is to develop and advocate public policies that advance constitutional civil liberties and democratic values in new computer and communications technologies. Contacting us:General information on CDT can be obtained by sending mail to: (info@cdt.org) Return to the CDT Home Page. WT02-B05-52IA095-001027-B011-245http://www.cdt.org:80/publications/pp20213.html 205.177.10.31 19970215011848 text/html 12885HTTP/1.0 200 OKDate: Sat, 15 Feb 1997 01:17:28 GMTServer: Apache/1.1.1Content-type: text/html Policy Post # 2 - 02/13/95 CDT POLICY POST Number 2 February 13, 1995 A briefing on public policy issues affecting civil liberties online The Center for Democracy and Technology is a non-profit public interest organization. The Center's mission is to develop and advocate public policies that advance constitutional civil liberties and democratic values in new computer and communications technologies. CDT POLICY POST 02/13/95 CONTENTS: (1) X9 Committee Agrees to Develop 3x DES Encryption Standard (2) About the Center for Democracy and Technology This document may be re-distributed freely provided it remains in its entirety. X9 COMMITTEE AGREES TO DEVELOP 3x DES ENCRYPTION STANDARD Major Setback for NSA The NSA's efforts to push the adoption the Clipper/Skipjack government-escrowed encryption scheme encountered a major setback earlier this month with the decision by the Accredited Standards Committee X9 to proceed with the development of a data security standard based on triple-DES. The ASC X9 committee is responsible for setting data security standards for the US banking and financial services industries. These industries are heavy users of commercial cryptography, and standards developed for this community tend to drive the development of applications for the entire market. As a result, the committee's decision to proceed with a triple-DES standard has important implications for future cryptographic standards and US cryptography policy generally. The NSA, a voting member of the X9 committee, had lobbied hard against the proposal. In a November letter to committee members, the NSA threatened to prevent the export of triple- DES, citing existing US law and potential threats to national security (see attached NSA letter). The decision sets the stage for the development of a next generation of security standards based on publicly available, non-escrowed encryption schemes. A battle over the exportability of triple-DES applications is also on the horizon. Through export controls on cryptography, the proposed Clipper initiative, and interference in the standards setting processes, US government policies have consistently sought to make strong encryption and other privacy protecting technologies unavailable to the general public. The X9 decision and development of triple-DES and other alternitives to government-escrowed cryptography is an important victory in that it will increase the public's access to strong, privacy enhancing technologies. BACKGROUND Banks and other financial institutions use encryption to protect the billions of dollars in transactions and fund transfers which flow every day across the world's communications networks. The current encryption standard used by the banking industry is based on DES, which has been available since the early 1970's. DES is widely trusted because it has been repeatedly tested and is considered by experts to be unbreakable except by brute force (trying every possible key combination). The US government has also allowed the limited export of DES. Despite its popularity, DES is considered to be reaching the end of its useful life. The increasing speed and sophistication of computer processing power has begun to render DES vulnerable to brute force attacks. Cryptographers have recently demonstrated that DES codes can be cracked in as little as three hours with $1 million worth of currently available equipment. As a result, the banking and financial services industries have begun to explore alternatives to DES. Although there are many potential alternatives to DES, triple-DES is widely seen as the most practical solution. Triple-DES is based on DES, but has been enhanced by increasing the key length and by encrypting through multiple iterations. These enhancements make triple-DES less vulnerable to brute force attacks. Triple-DES is also popular because it can be easily incorporated into existing DES systems and is based on standards and procedures familiar to most users. NSA SETBACK IS A VICTORY FOR CLIPPER OPPONENTS In their November letter to X9 committee members, the NSA attempted to undermine the attractiveness of triple-DES by arguing that it is cryptographically unsound, a potential threat to national security, and would not be exportable under US law. The NSA, while offering no specific alternative to triple-DES, seemed to be attempting to push the committee to adopt the only currently available option -- Clipper. Privacy advocates also lobbied the X9 committee. In a letter sent in advance of the December 1994 ballot, CDT Deputy Director Daniel Weitzner (then EFF Deputy Policy Director) and EFF board member John Gilmore, an expert in this field, sent a letter to X9 committee members urging them to adopt the triple-DES standard. A copy of the letter is appended at the end of this post. By agreeing to develop a triple-DES standard, the X9 committee has clearly and decisively rejected Clipper as a solution. This vote thus represents a further repudiation to Clipper and yet another victory for opponents of government efforts to establish Clipper or other government-escrowed solutions as a national standard. NEXT STEPS X9F, a subcommittee of the X9 committee, will now develop technical standards for implementing triple-DES based applications. This process is expected to take one or two years to complete. Once technical standards are developed, the full X9 committee will vote as to whether to implement the subcommittee's technical recommendations. The availability of triple-DES applications received a further boost recently with the announcement by AT&T and VLSI Technologies that they were developing new data security products based on triple-DES. This will presumably provide additional options for X9 committee members, but the exportability of these products is still in doubt. The stage is thus set for a further battle between the NSA and the X9 committee over the exportability of triple-DES and final approval of the X9 standard. As a sitting member of the committee, NSA will presumably continue to lobby against efforts by the committee to develop triple-DES applications. Furthermore, the banking and financial services industries must still persuade the government to allow for the export of triple-DES. As an opponent of government-escrowed cryptography, CDT applauds the recent actions of the X9 committee. While CDT supports the development of a variety of security standards and alternatives to DES, we recognize the need of the banking and financial services industries to develop temporary stop- gap solution. CDT will continue to work towards the relaxation of export controls on cryptography and will support X9 committee members in their efforts to gain the ability to export triple-DES applications. For more information contact: Daniel J. Weitzner, Deputy Director (djw@cdt.org) Jonah Seiger, Policy Analyst (jseiger@cdt.org) +1.202.637.9800 GILMORE/WEITZNER LETTER TO X9 COMMITTEE MEMBERS November 18, 1994 Dear Accredited Standards Committee-X9 Member: The X9 Committee is currently voting as to whether to recommend the development of a standard for triple-DES (ballot number X9/94-LB#28). The Electronic Frontier Foundation (EFF) strongly urges you to vote in favor of the triple-DES standard. EFF supports the development of a variety of new data security standards and alternatives to DES. We believe the triple-DES standard provides the best immediate short term alternative because: The basic algorithm, DES, is strong and has been tested repeatedly. There are no known attacks that succeed against triple-DES. It is clearly no less secure than DES. It eliminates the brute-force problem completely by tripling the key length. It runs at high speeds in easy-to-build chips. It can be easily incorporated into existing systems. NSA's opposition to triple-DES appears to be an indirect attempt to push Clipper by eliminating credible alternatives. Clipper is not a viable alternative to triple-DES, and carries substantial liabilities. There has been no evidence of foreign acceptance of the standard and the skipjact algorithm is classified. The likelihood of any government accepting secret standards developed by a foreign security agency is slim. Clinton Administration efforts, through the NSA, to push Clipper as a domestic standard over the past two years have failed. We urge you to carefully consider the alternatives before you cast your ballot. We believe that the triple-DES issue should be decided on its own merits. Sincerely, John Gilmore Board of Directors Electronic Frontier Foundation Daniel J. Weitzner Deputy Policy Director Electronic Frontier Foundation NSA LETTER TO X9 COMMITTEE MEMBERS X9 Member: I will be casting a NO vote on the NWI for triple-DES, Letter Ballot X9/94-LB#28. The reasons are set forth below. You may find these useful as you determine your position. Jerry Rainville NSA REASONS FOR A NEGATIVE VOTE While NSA supports the use of DES in the global financial sector, we believe that standardization of triple-DES is ill- advised for a number of reasons. The financial community should be planning to transition to a new generation of cryptographic algorithms. When DES was first introduced, it represented the "only game in town". It supported encryption, authentication, key management, and secure hashing applications. With a broader interest in security, the market can now support optimized algorithms by application. Going through the expense of installing a stop- gap can only serve to delay progress in achieving interoperable universal appropriate solutions. While we understand the appeal of a snap-in upgrade, our experience has been that any change is expensive, especially one where the requirements on the key management system change. We do not agree that replacing DES with triple-DES is significantly less expensive than upgrading to more appropriate technology. Tripling of any algorithm is cryptographically unsound. Notice that tripling DES, at best, only doubles the length of the cryptovariable (key). Phrased another way, the DES was optimized for security at 56 bits. We cannot vouch that any of the schemes for doubling the cryptovariable length of DES truly squares security. We understand the financial community has concerns with current key escrow based encryption, however, we are committed to searching for answers to those concerns. But the government is also committed to key escrow encryption, and we do not believe that the proposal for triple DES is consistent with this objective. US export control policy does not allow for general export of DES for encryption, let alone triple-DES. Proceeding with this NWI would place X9 at odds with this long standing policy. It also violates the newly accepted X9 cryptographic policy. The US government has not endorsed triple-DES; manufacturers and users may be reluctant to use triple-DES products for fear of possible liability. Finally, further proliferation of triple-DES is counter to national security and economic objectives. We would welcome the opportunity to discuss these concerns with an appropriate executive of your institution. ABOUT THE CENTER FOR DEMOCRACY AND TECHNOLOGY The Center for Democracy and Technology is a non-profit public interest organization. The Center's mission is to develop and advocate public policies that advance constitutional civil liberties and democratic values in new computer and communications technologies. Contacting us: General information on CDT can be obtained by sending mail to (info@cdt.org) Return to the CDT Home Page.WT02-B05-53IA095-001027-B011-261http://www.cdt.org:80/publications/pp10209.html 205.177.10.31 19970215011859 text/html 19117HTTP/1.0 200 OKDate: Sat, 15 Feb 1997 01:17:42 GMTServer: Apache/1.1.1Content-type: text/html Policy Post # 1 - 02/09/95 CDT POLICY POST Number 1 February 9, 1995 A briefing on public policy issues affecting civil liberties online The Center for Democracy and Technology is a non-profit public interest organization. The Center's mission is to develop and advocate public policies that advance constitutional civil liberties and democratic values in new computer and communications technologies. CDT POLICY POST 2/9/95 SUBJECT: SENATOR EXON INTRODUCES ONLINE INDECENCY LEGISLATION A. OVERVIEW Senators Exon (D-NE) and Senator Gorton (R-WA) have introduced legislation to expand current FCC regulations on obscene and indecent audiotext to cover *all* content carried over all forms of electronic communications networks. If enacted, the "Communications Decency Act of 1995" (S. 314) would place substantial criminal liability on telecommunications service providers (including telephone networks, commercial online services, the Internet, and independent BBS's) if their network is used in the transmission of any indecent, lewd, threatening or harassing messages. The legislation is identical to a proposal offered by Senator Exon last year which failed along with the Senate Telecommunications reform bill (S. 1822, 103rd Congress, Sections 801 - 804). The text of the proposed statute, with proposed amendment, is appended at the end of this document. The bill would compel service providers to chose between severely restricting the activities of their subscribers or completely shutting down their email, Internet access, and conferencing services under the threat of criminal liability. Moreover, service providers would be forced to closely monitor every private communication, electronic mail message, public forum, mailing list, and file archive carried by or available on their network, a proposition which poses a substantial threat to the freedom of speech and privacy rights of all American citizens. S. 314, if enacted, would represent a tremendous step backwards on the path to a free and open National Information Infrastructure. The bill raises fundamental questions about the ability of government to control content on communications networks, as well as the locus of liability for content carried in these new communications media. To address this threat to the First Amendment in digital media, CDT is working to organize a broad coalition of public interest organizations including the ACLU, People For the American Way, and Media Access Project, along with representatives from the telecommunications, online services, and computer industries to oppose S. 314 and to explore alternative policy solutions that preserve the free flow of information and freedom of speech in the online world. CDT believes that technological alternatives which allow individual subscribers to control the content they receive represent a more appropriate approach to this issue. B. SUMMARY AND ANALYSIS OF S. 314 S. 314 would expand current law restricting indecency and harassment on telephone services to all telecommunications providers and expand criminal liability to *all* content carried by *all* forms of telecommunications networks. The bill would amend Section 223 of the Communications Act (47 U.S.C. 223), which requires carriers to take steps to prevent minors from gaining access to indecent audiotext and criminalizes harassment accomplished over interstate telephone lines. This section, commonly known as the Helms Amendment (having been championed by Senator Jesse Helms), has been the subject of extended constitutional litigation in recent years. CARRIERS LIABLE FOR CONDUCT OF ALL USERS ON THEIRNETWORKS S. 314 would make telecommunication carriers (including telephone companies, commercial online services, the Internet, and BBS's) liable for every message, file, or other content carried on its network -- including the private conversations or messages exchanged between two consenting individuals. Under S. 314, anyone who "makes, transmits, or otherwise makes available any comment, request, suggestion, proposal, image, or other communication" which is "obscene, lewd, lascivious, filthy, or indecent" using a "telecommunications device" would be subject to a fine of $100,000 or two years in prison (Section (2)(a)). In order to avoid liability under this provision, carriers would be forced to pre-screen all messages, files, or other content before transmitting it to the intended recipient. Carriers would also be forced to prevent or severely restrict their subscribers from communicating with individuals and accessing content available on other networks. Electronic communications networks do not contain discrete boundaries. Instead, users of one service can easily communicate with and access content available on other networks. Placing the onus, and criminal liability, on the carrier as opposed to the originator of the content, would make the carrier legally responsible not only for the conduct of its own subscribers, but also for content generated by subscribers of other services. This regulatory scheme clearly poses serious threats to the free flow of information throughout the online world and the free speech and privacy rights of individual users. Forcing carriers to pre-screen content would not only be impossible due to the sheer volume of messages, it would also violate current legal protections. CARRIERS REQUIRED TO ACT AS PRIVATE CENSOR OF ALL PUBLIC FORUMS AND ARCHIVES S. 314 would also expand current restrictions on access to indecent telephone audiotext services by minors under the age of 18 to cover similar content carried by telecommunications services (such as America Online and the Internet). (Sec (a)(4)). As amended by this provision, anyone who, "by means of telephone or telecommunications device, makes, transmits, or otherwise makes available (directly or by recording device) any indecent communication for commercial purposes which is available to any person under the age of 18 years of age or to any other person without that person's consent, regardless of whether the maker of such communication placed the call or initiated the communication" would be subject of a fine of $100,000 or two years in prison. This would force carries to act as private censors of all content available in public forums or file archives on their networks. Moreover, because there is no clear definition of indecency, carriers would have to restrict access to any content that could be possibly construed as indecent or obscene under the broadest interpretation of the term. Public forums, discussion lists, file archives, and content available for commercial purposes would have to be meticulously screened and censored in order to avoid potential liability for the carrier. Such a scenario would severely limit the diversity of content available on online networks, and limit the editorial freedom of independent forum operators. ADDITIONAL NOTABLE PROVISIONS AMENDMENT TO ECPA Section (6) of the bill would amend the Electronic Communications Privacy Act (18 USC 2511) to prevent the unauthorized interception and disclosure of "digital communications" (Sec. 6). However, because the term "digital communication" is not defined and 18 USC 2511 currently prevents unauthorized interception and disclosure of "electronic communications" (which includes electronic mail and other forms of communications in digital form), the effect of this provision has no clear importance. CABLE OPERATORS MAY REFUSE INDECENT PUBLIC ACCESS PROGRAMMING Finally, section (8) would amend sections 611 and 612 of the Communications Act (47 USC 611 - 612) to allow any cable operator to refuse to carry any public access or leased access programming which contains "obscenity, indecency, or nudity". C. ALTERNATIVES TO EXON: RECOGNIZE THE UNIQUE USER CONTROLCAPABILITIES OF INTERACTIVE MEDIA Government regulation of content in the mass media has always been considered essential to protect children from access to sexually-explicit material, and to prevent unwitting listeners/views from being exposed to material that might be considered extremely distasteful. The choice to protect children has historically been made at the expense of the First Amendment ban on government censorship. As Congress moves to regulate new interactive media, it is essential that it understand that interactive media is different than mass media. The power and flexibility of interactive media offers a unique opportunity to enable parents to control what content their kids have access to, and leave the flow of information free for those adults who want it. Government control regulation is simply not needed to achieve the desired purpose. Most interactive technology, such as Internet browsers and the software used to access online services such as America Online and Compuserve, already has the capability to limit access to certain types of services and selected information. Moreover, the electronic program guides being developed for interactive cable TV networks also provide users the capability to screen out certain channels or ever certain types of programming. Moreover, in the online world, most content (with the exception of private communications initiated by consenting individuals) is transmitted by request. In other words, users must seek out the content they receive, whether it is by joining a discussion or accessing a file archive. By its nature, this technology provides ample control at the user level. Carriers (such as commercial online services, Internet service providers) in most cases act only as "carriers" of electronic transmissions initiated by individual subscribers. CDT believes that the First Amendment will be better served by giving parents and other users the tools to select which information they (and their children) should have access to. In the case of criminal content the originator of the content, not the carriers, should be responsible for their crimes. And, users (especially parents) should be empowered to determine what information they and their children have access to. If all carriers of electronic communications are forced restrict content in order to avoid criminal liability proposed by S. 314, the First Amendment would be threatened and the usefulness of digital media for communications and information dissemination would be drastically limited. D. NEXT STEPS The bill has been introduced and will next move to the Senate Commerce Committee, although no Committee action has been scheduled. Last year, a similar proposal by Senator Exon was approved by the Senate Commerce committee as an amendment to the Senate Telecommunications Bill (S. 1822, which died at the end of the 103rd Congress). CDT will be working with a wide range of other interest groups to assure that Congress does not restrict the free flow of information in interactive media. For more information contact: Daniel Weitzner, CDT Deputy Director (djw@cdt.org) Jonah Seiger, CDT Policy Analyst (jseiger@cdt.org) +1.202.637.9800 TEXT OF 47 U.S.C. 223 AS AMENDED BY S. 314 **NOTE: [] = deleted ALL CAPS = additions 47 USC 223 (1992) Sec. 223. [Obscene or harassing telephone calls in the District of Columbia or in interstate or foreign communications] OBSCENE OR HARASSING UTILIZATION OF TELECOMMUNICATIONS DEVICES AND FACILITIES IN THE DISTRICT OF COLUMBIA OR IN INTERSTATE OR FOREIGN COMMUNICATIONS" (a) Whoever-- (1) in the District of Columbia or in interstate or foreign communication by means of [telephone] TELECOMMUNICATIONS DEVICE-- (A) [makes any comment, request, suggestion or proposal] MAKES, TRANSMITS, OR OTHERWISE MAKES AVAILABLE ANY COMMENT,REQUEST, SUGGESTION, PROPOSAL, IMAGE, OR OTHER COMMUNICATION which is obscene, lewd, lascivious, filthy, or indecent; [(B) makes a telephone call, whether or not conversation ensues, without disclosing his identity and with intent to annoy, abuse, threaten, or harass any person at the called number;] "(B) MAKES A TELEPHONE CALL OR UTILIZES A TELECOMMUNICATIONS DEVICE, WHETHER OR NOT CONVERSATION OR COMMUNICATIONS ENSUES,WITHOUT DISCLOSING HIS IDENTITY AND WITH INTENT TO ANNOY, ABUSE, THREATEN, OR HARASS ANY PERSON AT THE CALLED NUMBER OR WHO RECEIVES THE COMMUNICATION; (C) makes or causes the telephone of another repeatedly or continuously to ring, with intent to harass any person at the called number; or [(D) makes repeated telephone calls, during which conversation ensues, solely to harass any person at the called number; or] (D) MAKES REPEATED TELEPHONE CALLS OR REPEATEDLY INITIATES COMMUNICATION WITH A TELECOMMUNICATIONS DEVICE, DURING WHICH CONVERSATION OR COMMUNICATION ENSUES, SOLELY TO HARASS ANY PERSON AT THE CALLED NUMBER OR WHO RECEIVES THE COMMUNICATION, (2) knowingly permits any [telephone facility] TELECOMMUNICATIONS FACILITY under his control to be used for any purpose prohibited by this section, shall be fined not more than $[50,000]100,000 or imprisoned not more than [six months] TWO YEARS, or both. (b)(1) Whoever knowingly-- (A) within the United States, by means of [telephone] TELECOMMUNICATIONS DEVICCE, makes (directly or by recording device) any obscene communication for commercial purposes to any person, regardless of whether the maker of such communication placed the call or INITIATED THE COMMUNICATION; or (B) permits any [telephone facility] TELECOMMUNICATIONS FACILITY under such person's control to be used for an activity prohibited by subparagraph (A), shall be fined in accordance with title 18, United States Code, or imprisoned not more than two years, or both. (2) Whoever knowingly--(A) within the United States, [by means of telephone], makes BY MEANS OF TELEPHONE OR TELECOMMUNICATIONS DEVICE, MAKES, TRANSMITS, OR MAKES AVAILABLE(directly or by recording device) any indecent communication for commercial purposes which is available to any person under 18 years of age or to any other person without that person's consent, regardless of whether the maker of such communication placed the call OR INITIATED THE COMMUNICATION; or (B) permits any [telephone facility] TELECOMMUNICATIONS FACILITY under such person's control to be used for an activity prohibited by subparagraph (A), shall be fined not more than $[50,000] 100,000 or imprisoned not more than [six months] TWO YEARS, or both. (3) It is a defense to prosecution under paragraph (2) of this subsection that the defendant restrict access to the prohibited communication to persons 18 years of age or older in accordance with subsection (c) of this section and with such procedures as the Commission may prescribe by regulation. (4) In addition to the penalties under paragraph (1), whoever, within the United States, intentionally violates paragraph (1) or (2) shall be subject to a fine of not more than $[50,000] 100,000 for each violation. For purposes of this paragraph, each day of violation shall constitute a separate violation. (5)(A) In addition to the penalties under paragraphs (1), (2), and (5), whoever, within the United States, violates paragraph (1) or (2) shall be subject to a civil fine of not more than $[50,000] 100,000 for each violation. For purposes of this paragraph, each day of violation shall constitute a separate violation. (B) A fine under this paragraph may be assessed either-- (i) by a court, pursuant to civil action by the Commission or any attorney employed by the Commission who is designated by the Commission for such purposes, or (ii) by the Commission after appropriate administrative proceedings. (6) The Attorney General may bring a suit in the appropriate district court of the United States to enjoin any act or practice which violates paragraph (1) or (2). An injunction may be granted in accordance with the Federal Rules of Civil Procedure. (c)(1) A common carrier within the District of Columbia or within any State, or in interstate or foreign commerce, shall not, to the extent technically feasible, provide access to a communication specified in subsection (b) from the telephone of any subscriber who has not previously requested in writing the carrier to provide access to such communication if the carrier collects from subscribers an identifiable charge for such communication that the carrier remits, in whole or in part, to the provider of such communication. (2) Except as provided in paragraph (3), no cause of action may be brought in any court or administrative agency against any common carrier, or any of its affiliates, including their officers, directors, employees, agents, or authorized representatives on account of-- (A) any action which the carrier demonstrates was taken in good faith to restrict access pursuant to paragraph (1) of this subsection; or (B) any access permitted-- (i) in good faith reliance upon the lack of any representation by a provider of communications that communications provided by that provider are communications specified in subsection (b), or (ii) because a specific representation by the provider did not allow the carrier, acting in good faith, a sufficient period to restrict access to communications described in subsection (b). (3) Notwithstanding paragraph (2) of this subsection, a provider of communications services to which subscribers are denied access pursuant to paragraph (1) of this subsection may bring an action for a declaratory judgment or similar action in a court. Any such action shall be limited to the question of whether the communications which the provider seeks to provide fall within the category of communications to which the carrier will provide access only to subscribers who have previously requested such access. Return to the CDT Home Page. WT02-B05-54IA095-001027-B027-231http://www.cdt.org:80/publications/cdt-pfaw-314const.html 205.177.10.31 19970215004208 text/html 30075HTTP/1.0 200 OKDate: Sat, 15 Feb 1997 00:40:22 GMTServer: Apache/1.1.1Content-type: text/html Constitutional Analysis of the Comm Decency Act Center for Democracy and Technology People for the American Way M E M O R A N D U M To: Interested Parties Re: Constitutional Analysis of "Communications Decency Act" (S.314) From: Center for Democracy and Technology and People for the American Way Date: March 21, 1995 I. Overview The Communications Decency Act (S.314) was introduced to promote the laudable purpose of protecting minors from access to controversial and inappropriate sexually explicit material in interactive media including the Internet, other commercial online services, and electronic bulletin board services. However, because the proposed statute is grafted onto a twenty five year old provision of the Communications Act which was designed for a centralized monopoly telephone environment, instead of diverse, decentralized interactive media, it both fails to accomplish its goal and is unconstitutional on its face. Most importantly, the legislation fails to take advantage of the empowering aspects of new interactive media, which can allow parents and other users to exercise control over the information that to which they and their children have access. This memorandum will suggest an alternative means for achieving the purpose outlined by Senator Exon and will show that the proposed Act suffers from the following constitutional infirmities: Overbreadth and Vagueness: The Act criminalizes not only obscene, but also "lewd, lascivious, filthy, or indecent" communications, all of which are protected by the First Amendment and cannot be banned. Impermissible intrusive means of achieving legitimate goal: First Amendment jurisprudence requires that restrictions on speech adopt the "least restrictive means" available for achieving a compelling purpose. Relying on technological assumptions applicable only to 900 number services and a centrally-controlled telephone system, the Act fails to account for the fact that government restriction on content is unnecessary in interactive media, where parents can control the content that their children access. Faulty analogy to broadcast media: Proponents of the Act have justified the constitutionality by improper reliance on content restrictions found acceptable in the broadcast media. These arguments fail to recognize that while broadcast media may "assault" unwilling listeners, who may be in need of government protection, interactive media enables users to control the information that they receive. Invasion of privacy: By criminalizing the content of private, non-obscene messages, the Act would force an invasion of the realm of private electronic communications and end the individual's ability to control the content of information he or she chooses to access in private. Creation of private censors: Holding service providers criminally-liable for the content of all messages that they carry will force providers to become private censors and prescreen all communications traveling across their system. In simple terms, the Communications Decency Act would enshrine in statute a sharp distinction between the print medium and new interactive media. For example, though an individual is allowed to go into a bookstore and buy a sexually-explicit magazine or a "lewd" work of art, one would not be able to access the identical information over the Internet. Both the interactive media and the print media are arenas in which individuals and organizations exercise core First Amendment free speech rights. Before Congress elects to diminish the First Amendment protections available in this new medium, we believe that careful, public consideration is required. Legislating about new interactive media requires a careful understanding of the unique attributes of this new medium. First and foremost, interactive media enable users (including parents) to exercise choice over the information that they and their children have access to. In sharp contrast to older media, government content regulation is simply not necessary in order to shield children from possibly inappropriate information. Furthermore, given the heavily fact-based determination required to justify regulation of indecency, legislative findings based on open hearings and a public record are essential before any legislation could pass constitutional muster. In light of the serious constitutional concerns raised about the Act, and the danger that it poses for the development of a vital new communications medium, we believe that it is essential that the Senate and House hold hearings before taking any further action on this bill. II. General prohibition against indecent and obscene communications is unconstitutional If enacted, Subsection (a) of the Communications Decency Act of 1995, which amends Section 223 of the Communication Act, would violate the First Amendment to the Constitution of the United States because it includes an outright ban on making any "comment, request, suggestion, proposal, image or other communication" by means of a "telecommunications device" if that communication is "obscene, lewd, lascivious, filthy, or indecent." The failure of the statute to distinguish between obscenity and several other categories of speech -- i.e. lewd, lascivious, filthy or indecent -- makes the proposed legislation constitutionally infirm. Sable Communications, Inc. v. FCC 492 U.S. 115 (1989). As articulated below, a total ban on constitutionally protected speech in a media that permits user selection as to that which he or she chooses to receive is unconstitutional. The principle that each person should decide for him or herself the "ideas and beliefs deserving of expression, consideration and adherence" lies at the heart of the First Amendment. Turner Broadcasting v. FCC , 114 U.S. 2445 (1994) This principle has been interpreted to mean that individuals should be able to speak freely and frankly about issues of their choosing, without fear of reprisal because many people may not agree with or appreciate the nature and content of their messages. At the same time, the Supreme Court has recognized that despite this fundamental guarantee, there are certain kinds of speech that fall into a category of unprotected speech -- obscenity is one such category, indecency is not.1 Because of the difficulty is defining obscenity in the context of the First Amendment, it took numerous attempts for the Supreme Court to find five justices to agree on defining principles. 2 Finally, in 1973 the Supreme Court in Miller v. California, 3 established the definition of obscenity and the narrow area of sexually explicit speech that is unprotected by the Constitution.4 Since that time, the definition has not been expanded or changed. By contrast, indecent speech which may include important political views, even if crudely stated, is protected by the First Amendment. As such, government cannot enact a ban on the speech without illustrating a compelling governmental interest, and restricting such speech in the least restrictive manner.5 The ban on indecent communications in subsection (a) of the proposed amendment to Section 223 of the Communications applies to point-to-point communications between users of telecommunications devices. In other words, it applies to each and every one of the millions of messages sent between individuals by way of electronic mail every day over both public and private computer networks. And, it is beyond question that there is no recognized compelling governmental interest in protecting consenting individuals from exchanging "indecent, lewd or lascivious" words. Indeed, we can find no case law in which a federal court has ever enforced even the existing statute regarding telephone communications to cover communications between consenting adults. Courts have analyzed 223(a) only in the context of "harassing" communications which, by their very nature, include a nonconsensual element. Given this fact, there are numerous dangers inherent in expanding the reach of 233(a) to electronic communications where the provision may apply not only to communications between individuals but also to electronic messages appearing on public bulletin boards where individuals convene in virtual communities. Admittedly, it would theoretically be possible for a court simply to attempt to "rewrite" the Communications Decency Act to correct one constitutional infirmity of the bill by reading in a lack of consent requirement. However, even such a rewrite would likely not make 223(a) constitutional as applied to new media and would represent a mistaken and overreaching use of judicial resources particularly when Congress has the power to enact constitutional legislation and is on notice that the existing plain language of Section 223(a) is flawed. III. Restrictions on indecent communications are unconstitutional for failure to adopt least restrictive means As amended by S.314, 223(b) of the Communications Act would extend criminal penalties for all who "make, transmit, or make available," indecent materials which are accessible on a commercial basis to people under age 18. This addition to  223(b) targets those who provide access to the Internet, commercial online services, and all electronic bulletin board systems. Under this new provision, both the author of the information, and any entity involved in the distribution of the material would be criminally liable. The current statute and associated Federal Communications Commission regulations does provide a safe harbor against prosecution for those providers who either 1) verify in writing through the US Mail that the person requesting the communication is over 18, 2) require payment by credit card for each piece of information accessed, or 3) deliver the information in scrambled form such that it can only be unscrambled with a device made available by providers upon prior age verification. See 47 USC  223(b) and 47 CFR  64.201. A key legislative motivation for imposing these rules during the 1980s was that indecent information available through audiotext services in the telephone system were openly available to children in such a way that it was difficult for parents to control access by their children. The views of Congressman Bliley recounts the prevailing view of the need for the legislation: "It constitutes an ATTRACTIVE NUISANCE in every home in America where children are present. There is no completely effective way to prevent children from being exposed to "indecent" or "obscene" dial-a-porn so long as it is lawfully and commercially marketed. . . ." Bliley continues: "Telephones are precisely like radio and television because of their easy accessibility to children and the virtual impossibility for parents to monitor their use . . . . [D]ial-a-porn is presently in the home whether the homeowner wants it or not. Today one cannot have telephone service in the privacy of one's family environment without being required to [have] dial-a-porn with it. Families with children must give up telephone service to be "left alone" from exposure of their children to this intruder."6 The current statute and Federal Communications Commission regulations promulgated thereunder were found constitutional after nearly ten years of litigation and efforts by Congress and the Commission to bring the statute within constitutionally acceptable bounds. Notwithstanding the narrow finding of constitutionality in the case of the current statute, the changes proposed by the Act require a wholesale review of the constitutionality as applied to new, interactive media such as online services and the Internet. Interactive media operates in such a different manner, that the constitutional issues must be considered afresh given the new factual backdrop. We argue here that the current rules, as amended by S.314, would be found unconstitutional in interactive media given the standards set out by the courts reviewing the  223 rules as they applied to older telephone technology. A. Censorship of indecent, but not obscene, communications for the purpose of protecting minors must employ the least restrictive means available to accomplish their goal Indecent communications are protected by the First Amendment, unlike obscenity which is altogether unprotected. Sable Communications of California v. FCC, 492 US 115; 109 S.Ct. 2829; 106 L.Ed. 2d 93 (1989). However, indecent communications, which do not rise to the level of obscenity,7 can only be limited in order to serve a compelling state purpose and must be done using the least restrictive means possible. Id. at 125. The Sable court found that the protection of minors from access to indecent material is a compelling state purpose, but that "it is not enough that the Government's ends are compelling; the means must be carefully tailored to achieve those ends." Id.8 As a threshold matter, the Sable court found that the constitutional basis for upholding indecency regulations in broadcast media articulated in Pacifica Foundation v. FCC, 438 US 726, 98 S.Ct. 3026, 57 L.ED. 2d 1073 (1978), were inapplicable in any other media besides over-the-air broadcasting.9 492 U.S. at 127. Pacifica upheld the FCC content regulation based on the dual finding that 1) radio was a "uniquely pervasive medium"10 that intruded (dirty words and all) into peoples homes, and 2) the only way to protect children from exposure to objectionable content was to keep it off the air altogether.11 Sable rejects this finding of "pervasiveness" as "emphatically narrow" and irrelevant to other media such as telephone audiotext services. 492 U.S. at 127 Thus, the Sable"least restrictive means" standard became the test by which all regulations on access to constitutionally protected indecent material were judged. Nearly ten years of litigation along with adjustment of statute and regulation was required before the current statute was found constitutional under this standard. See Dial Information Services v. Thornburg, 938 F.2d 1535 (2d Cir., 1991)(finding FCC regulations implementing  223(b) constitutional). During the course of the dispute over the application of  223 to audiotext services, courts considered and rejected a number of means by which carriers were required to shield minors from access to indecent information. First, time channeling rules, requiring that services only be accessible during hours when children were asleep, were found to violate the First Amendment because they had the effect of denying access to adults as well as children. Carlin Communications v. FCC, 749 F.2d 113, 121 (2d Cir. 1984) (Carlin I). Next, the courts rejected a requirement that carriers provide access to indecent services only once customers entered access codes or passwords, which were to be issued after verification that the customer was over 18. Carlin Communications v. FCC, 787 F.2d 846 (2d Cir. 1986)(Carlin II). The finding of the Dial court, approving the constitutionality of  223 and associated regulations depended on the legislative determination that the telephone company blocking of service pending age verification or use of a credit card are the only means to enable parents to restrict their children from access to indecent audiotext services.12 B. Means chosen in S.314 of limiting access to online services fail to take into account the fact that interactive media offers parents a much greater degree of control then broadcast services or 900 number services. While S.314 adopts the same goal of protecting minors as the existing statute, the means adopted for achieving the goal are impermissible under the First Amendment because they are not the least restrictive means of accomplishing the legitimate government purpose. Interactive media is materially different than analog telephone and audiotext technology in that is offers users the ability to exercise control over precisely what information one accesses. Given the dramatic difference between telephone technology and interactive services such as the Internet and other online services, we believe that blocking by the carrier as demanded by  223 and S.314 would not meet the "least restrictive means" test. Just as the Sable court found broadcast indecency regulations inapplicable to the telephone system because of differences in the medium, regulations designed for audiotext services in the telephone system are constitutionally inapplicable to new interactive media. Technologies already exist that enable users to access certain information based on a variety of characteristics, or, to exclude certain types of information from access. With such filtering technology, users, instead of the government or network operators, can exercise control over the information content that they receive in an interactive network environment. User control could be exercised in two ways. First, one could screen out all messages or programs based on information in the header. If a parent wanted to prevent a child from seeing a particular movie or from participating in a particular online discussion group, then the computer or other information appliance used by the child could be set by the parent to screen out the objectionable content. Such features can often be protected with passwords which would be assigned, for example, by the responsible adults in the house. Second, the same systems can be used to enable blocking of content based on third-party rating systems. For example, those parents who accept TV Guide's judgment about the presence of nudity and/or violence in particular programs, could program their interactive TV sets to screen out all programs that TV Guide has classified as violent.13 Given the flexibility of interactive technology, we need not rely on just one rating system. In fact, a single rating system or a single set of filters would merely replace a single government censor with a single private censor, no real gain for the free flow of information. Properly implemented, interactive media can accommodate multiple filtering systems, giving users and parents the opportunity to select and block information based on a true diversity of criteria. The National Parent-Teachers Association or different religious organizations could set up rating systems which would be available on the network to those who desired them. Rather than relying on the judgment of the government, or of the TV network, viewers can limit access to content based on the judgment of a group whose values they share. Interactive media can enable customers (in particular, parents) to prevent themselves or others using their PCs or TVs (in particular, their children) from accessing certain kinds of content. With such control mechanisms within the practical reach of parents the governmental purpose generally cited for indecency regulations -- the protection of children -- could be accomplished without government content restrictions. In particular, the reasoning of Pacifica (intrusion of the indecent message into homes) and Sable (inability of parents to exercise control) would no longer justify most content regulation. IV. Forcing online service providers to become private censors impairs First Amendment values by restricting the free flow of information Making carriers responsible for the content of all information and communication on their systems is a grave policy error which will restrict the free flow of information and is contrary to First Amendment values. If service providers are held liable for all of the content on their networks, then they will be forced to attempt to screen all content before it is allowed to enter the system. In many cases, this would be simply impossible. But even where it is possible, such prescreening can severely limit the diversity and free flow of information in the online world. To be sure, some system operators will want to offer services that prescreen content. However, if all systems were forced to do so, the usefulness of digital media as communication and information dissemination systems would be drastically limited. Where possible, we must avoid legal structures that force those who merely carry messages to screen their content. Relying on user control is a real alternative to the draconian approach now being considered and sure to be proposed again and again. A media environment in which parents -- or anyone else who has particular preferences about the content of information to which he or she is exposed -- would give users the control that courts have determined they lack in the mass media, without involving the government in content control which we believe would not survive appropriate First Amendment scrutiny in this new medium. V. Banning private, sexually-explicit communications violates constitutional privacy rights S.314 seeks to regulate not only information that is made available in public, but also private communications between individuals. The Supreme Court has also made clear that absolute restrictions on indecency or obscenity cannot pass constitutional muster under the Fourteenth Amendment's guarantee of personal privacy. Though the Court has explicitly recognized that what the government may have an interest in protecting in public, Paris Adult Theater I v. Slaton, 413 U.S. 49 (1973) or in a place that caters to the public, Schad v. Mt Ephraim, 452 U.S. 61 (1981); California v.LaRue, 409 U.S. 109 (1972). it does not have a right to ban information maintained in private. Stanley v. Georgia, 394 U.S. 557 (1969). "If the First Amendment means anything, it means that a State has no business telling a man, sitting alone in his house, what books he may read or what films he may watch." Id. at 598. If enacted, S.314, would empower federal authorities to intrude on the private communications and information used by individuals, in clear violation of Stanley. As reflected in passage of the Video Privacy and Library Protection Act of 1988 (protecting records of video rents), and the Electronic Communications Privacy Act (ECPA) of 1986 (18 U.S.C  2510), Congress has long recognized the privacy interest in information that we read and otherwise use. A number of surveys have confirmed that America's care deeply about their privacy. In a 1983 analysis of their survey results, Louis Harris & Associates concluded: Particularly striking is the pervasiveness of support for tough new ground rules governing computers and other information technology . . . . This support permeates all subgroups in society and represents a mandate for initiatives in public policy. (L. Harris, The Road after 1984: A Nationwide Survey of the Public and its Leader on the New Technology and its Consequences for American Life, December, 1983). The plain meaning of the Communications Decency Act, however, requires that online service providers violate the privacy rights, and statutory protection established by the Electronic Communications Privacy Act in order to assure that criminal violations do not occur. ECPA established that users of online communications systems have a substantial privacy interest in the communications that they transmit over computer networks. ECPA also set out clear conditions under which law enforcement agencies, and, in narrow cases, system operators could access these private communications. The provisions of S.314 would require a dramatic expansion of the access rules established in ECPA. While there may be some justification for regulation of communication and information made public, or made available directly to minors, there must be no intrusion on private or closed group communications unless there is evidence of criminal wrongdoing. VI. Constitutional alternatives to the Communications Decency Act censorship regime Though the Communications Decency Act adopted means that we believe are unconstitutional, the goals espoused by Senator Exon are, indeed, important. Alternative means of achieving the goal of protecting minors from access to material considered inappropriate by their parents would include: Maximum reliance on technology to empower parents: Interactive media offers parents and other users the ability to filter certain kinds of content. Instead of relying on government censorship, or even government-imposed rating systems, parents should be able to block the delivery of certain information to their children. Clear protection for constitutionally-permissible speech: Any alternative legislation must provide affirmative protection for constitutionally-permissible speech, even if it is lewd or filthy. Controversial speech must be treated separately than that which is clearly obscene and unprotected. Emphasis on enforcement of existing statutes: Federal and state law already prohibits transportation of obscenity, child pornography, as well as, in many instances threats, stalking and harassment. To the extent that there are obstacles to enforcing these laws in the new on-line environment, Congress should examine whether new law is required, or whether more resources for enforcement (including training for law enforcement in interactive services and cooperative efforts with the industry). Codification separately from existing dial-a-porn statute: Modification of the existing  223, originally written for the analog telephone system, to regulate new interactive media causes unnecessary confusion, both for the treatment of the new technology and with respect to the stability of the regulation of audiotext services. If new law is written, it should stand on its own. Moreover, Congress should consider which elements properly belong in the Communications Act and which in the Criminal Code. The regulation of speech, commerce, and privacy rights in new interactive communications systems raises many difficult issues of public policy and constitutional law. Before proceeding with legislation, Congress must provide the opportunity for public hearings to identify clearly the problems that exist, and to identify solutions that are appropriate to the new technology. Failure to do so will result in ineffective policy, years of constitutional litigation, and a disastrous chilling effect on the development and growth of a very promising new communications medium. For more information contact: Center for Democracy and Technology Jerry Berman jberman@cdt.org Daniel Weitzner djw@cdt.org +1.202.637.9800 People for the American Way Leslie Harris laharris@tmn.com Jill Lesser jlessern@reach.com +1.202.467.4999 1 In very limited circumstances, the Supreme Court has found indecency to be "unprotected" speech. See Ginsberg v. New York, 390 U. S. 629 (1969)(holding indecency unprotected where distrubted to minors). See the discussion of proposed Section 223(b) below. 2 See, e.g., Roth v. United States, 354 U.S. 476 (1957) and Memoirs v. Massachusetts, 383 U.S. 413 (1966) 3 413 U.S. 15 (1973)(adopting standards that were later rejected by the Supreme Court). 4 The Court in Miller held that the guidelines for determining obscenity are as follows: "(a) whether the average person applying contemporary community standards would find that the work, taken as a whole, appeals to the prurient interest, (b) whether the work depicts or describes, in a patently offensive way, sexual conduct defined by the applicable state law; and (c) whether the work taken as a whole, lacks serious literary, artistic, political or scientific value." (citations omitted). 5 Sable Communications of Cal. v. FCC, 492 U.S. 115 (1989). 6 134 Cong. Rec. H1693-4 (daily ed. April 19, 1988)(statement of Rep. Blilely)(emphasis added). 7 Given the national and international reach of new interactive media, determinations of obscenity based on traditional "community standards" doctrine also raises a whole host of questions. 8 See also Carlin Communications v. FCC, 837 F.2d 546, 555 (2nd Cir. 1988). 9 Pacifica upheld a FCC rule which barred the comedian George Carlin and others from repeating the "seven dirty words" in over-the-air radio broadcasts. 10 Id. at 748 11 Id at 749-50. The Pacifica court recognized that the radio station (WBAI in New York City) had actually broadcast a warning as to the possibly objectionable content, but that this warning failed to protect those who tuned in after it was given. Id. at 731. 12 Rep. Blilely asserts as much in his comments on the legislation. He states, "...It became clear that there was not a technological solution that would adequately and effectively protect our children from the effects of this material. We looked for effective alternatives to a ban -- there were none." 13 Cong. Rec. H1691. 14 Several companies, including the publishers of TV Guide, are developing interactive program guides that incorporate blocking features such as those described here.WT02-B05-55IA095-001027-B012-38http://www.cdt.org:80/publications/FTC_June96_test.html 205.177.10.31 19970215011932 text/html 67007HTTP/1.0 200 OKDate: Sat, 15 Feb 1997 01:18:05 GMTServer: Apache/1.1.1Content-type: text/html CDT Testimony at FTC Hearings, June 1996 Statement of the Jerry Berman Janlori Goldman Daniel J. Weitzner Deirdre K. Mulligan before the Federal Trade Commission Workshop on Consumer Privacy on the Global Information Infrastructure June 4-5, 1996 Contents Executive Summary I. Privacy in the Digital Age A. Privacy and Democracy B. Weakness of current privacy protections C. New challenges to privacy II. The Empowered User: Implementing Privacy Policy inthe Digital Age A. Individual Empowerment Solutions Support CorePrivacy Priniciples 1. Advancing Individual Control 2. Maximizing the Democratic Potential of theInternet III. Technologies of Privacy A. Privacy Preferences: Enable Individuals to Controlthe Flow of Personal Information Scenario 1: The Web Site that pleases all users Scenario 2: The Perfect Match: Individual's privacypreferences and Web site's practices match. Scenario 3: A Mis-match of Preference and Practice:Individual's preferences and Web site's practices differ. B. Block Bad Actors: Limit Access to Sites With AbusiveInformation Collection Practices Scenario 1: The Pro-privacy list: Individualonly wants to visit "good" actors Scenario 2: The Protective Parent: Parent limitschild's access to "good" actors IV. Protecting Children's Privacy Online A. Empowering Parents B. Avoiding rules that may infringe on other rights V. European Union Data Protection Directive A. Goals of the Directive B. U.S. Privacy Policy, the Internet, and the EU Directive Conclusion Footnotes Executive Summary The Center for Democracy and Technology believes that interactive communicationsmedia such as the Internet hold great potential for enhancing democraticvalues and supporting the full realization of individual freedoms. Policiesthat support and encourage the development of technologies that give individualscontrol over the ideas and beliefs to which they are exposed, and the collection,use and disclosure of their personal information, will lay the foundationfor a robust, thriving democracy in the Digital Age. While optimistic about the privacy enhancing potential of the Digital Age,we believe that the core privacy principles of notice and individual controlover personal information must inform the design of the information infrastructureif this potential is to be fully realized. We have a window of opportunity-- offering the chance to put privacy-enhancing technologies into the handsof individuals. To realize this promise, all members of the Internet communitymust come together to build an infrastructure that supports privacy policiesand applications. Our testimony offers a vision of an individual with the information andtools to make decisions about the collection, use and disclosure of personalinformation during each and every transaction on the Internet. Section I sets the stage for a discussion of the IndividualEmpowerment solution by providing an overview of privacy considerationsin the Digital Age. Sections II and IIIoutline our Individual Empowerment model and offer a number of models forits implementation. Section IV examines the applicationof Individual Empowerment solutions to protecting children's privacy. Finally,Section V explores the potential of the IndividualEmpowerment model to move the Internet towards compliance with the EU Directive. The Center for Democracy and Technology (CDT) is dedicated to preservingand enhancing democratic values and civil liberties on the Internet andother interactive communications media. CDT pursues its mission throughpublic education, grass roots organizing, litigation, and coalition building.CDT is a non-profit, public interest organization (501 (c)(3)). I. Privacy in the Digital Age At its core, the Digital Age represents a dramatic shift in computing andcommunication power. The decentralized, open nature of the network coupled,with an emphasis on user control over information, are central to achievingthe First Amendment potential of the Internet. Through interactive technology,individuals today can enjoy a here-to-fore unknown ability to exercise FirstAmendment freedoms. Access to the Internet empowers individuals with anenormous capacity to speak and be heard, and listen and learn. The developmentof filtering and blocking devices that empower individuals to control theinflow of information gives new meaning to the core First Amendment principlethat individuals should determine the ideas and beliefs deserving of expression,consideration, and adherence.1 However, at this moment the impact of the Digital Age on individual privacyremains an open question. Will the Digital Age be a period in which individualslose all control over personal information? Or does the Digital Age offera renewed opportunity for privacy? The development of technologies thatempower individuals to control the collection and use of personal informationand communications -- such as encryption, and anonymous remailers, web browsersand payment systems -- are inspiring examples of the privacy-enhancing possibilitiesof interactive technology. However, we believe that the architecture ofthe Internet must be designed to advance individual privacy by facilitatingindividual control over personal information. The rise of technologies that empower users of interactive communicationsmedia to affirmatively express control over personal information can fundamentallyshift the balance of power between the individual and those seeking information.CDT believes this technological shift is possible and necessary, and offersus an unprecedented opportunity to advance individual privacy. However,this shift will only occur if interactive media is harnessed to advanceindividual privacy. Rather than responding to the very real risks posed by new technology withthe Luddite-call of "smash the machine," we are calling for areversal of the technological status quo by demanding that technology bedesigned to empower people. We should seize the opportunity to vest individualswith the information and tools to express their desire for privacy in clearand effective ways, and have those desires acknowledged by information users,we can advance privacy. We believe that this post-Luddite approach willreinvigorate individual privacy in the Digital Age. While strengthening existing laws, such as the Fair Credit Reporting Actand the Right to Financial Privacy Act, and enacting legislation to protecthealth records, are crucial to protecting individual privacy, individualempowerment technologies offer a powerful method of implementing the coreprinciple of individual control where current gaps and weaknesses leaveindividual privacy vulnerable. We believe that user controlled technologiesthat enable individuals to protect the privacy of their communications andpersonal information, offer an unprecedented opportunity to extend realprotections for individual privacy around the world. A. Privacy and Democracy Understanding the value of privacy to individuals and society, and developingthe principles through which privacy can best be preserved is essential,if we are to develop a cohesive, rational model for realizing individualprivacy on the Internet.2 We must understandwhy preserving and enhancing privacy is an ultimate "good," andagree upon a set of privacy principles, before we can come to decisionson how best to apply them to this new media. An emblem of a vibrant, participatory democracy is the ability of peopleto develop as individuals, separate and distinct from one another, withthe confidence to hold and express their own political opinions, beliefsand preferences. A free society tolerates -- even revels in -- such individuality,recognizing it as the bedrock of an open society, as a necessary precursorto free speech and political participation. People must be able to maintain some control over personal information inorder to fully realize other core values, including autonomy, liberty, freeexpression and civic participation. This facet of privacy is uniquely implicatedin our move to interactive technology.3 Bypreserving privacy, society provides individuals with the solitude and isolationnecessary for the individual to develop her identity, form her own thoughtsand opinions, and establish intimate connections with others. Equally important,privacy allows the individual to step forward to participate in the affairsof society without losing all control over personal information. It is axiomaticthat an individual's willingness to engage in the activities of the communitywill be tempered by the degree to which he or she is able to maintain controlover the development and presentation of one's self.4In the absence of control over the development of one's self, individualautonomy and self-determination are eroded. B. Weakness of current privacy protections A number of factors have contributed to the weak state of individual privacyprotection in the U.S. First, until fairly recently, technology has beenin the hands of the government and large corporations. It has been deployedto meet governmental needs -- often the need to monitor, survey, and trackindividuals -- using increasingly invasive techniques. Similarly, technologyhas been used by businesses to collect information on individuals oftenwithout their knowledge or consent and, frequently, to use personal informationcollected for one purpose to make decisions about the individual in unrelatedcontexts. Second, in the U.S., privacy protections for personal information are incompleteand scattered throughout case law5 , federaland state statutes, and executive branch reports.6Despite the clear articulation of principles that would, if implemented,preserve individual privacy, individuals continue to experience an erosionof privacy. In particular, individuals in this country report an escalatingfear that individual privacy is in greater peril each day due to increasedcomputerization of personal information.7 The use of technology to meet the information needs of government and businesshas disempowered individuals. Technology has escalated the collection ofdetailed personal information and enabled massive data sharing between entitiesfor unrelated purposes -- all without the individual's consent. Today, privacyprotection frequently takes the form of an eight page disclaimer waivingany claim to privacy which the individual must sign prior to receiving aservice or benefit. The perception of technology as an invasive tool of"big brother" and "big government" has led civil libertariansand average citizens to consistently demand legal protection -- be it judicialor legislative -- from the incursions on privacy and liberty made possibleby the uncontrolled use of technology. Even where there has been an attempt to codify fair information practicesthrough statute, regulations, or industry guidelines, the results have generallyfallen far short of the desired goal -- to have individuals control thecollection, use, and disclosure of personal information. This is not tounderestimate the importance of hard fought battles to craft statutory privacyprotections for personal information. Existing privacy laws in areas suchas banking, cable, credit, educational and video records set important limitson the use and disclosure of personal information. However, there is nota statute on the books that gives the individual simple, meaningful, up-front,control over personal information. The sector by sector approach of existingU.S. law makes analytic sense, but progress has been slow and many gapsremain. As a result of this dynamic, efforts to preserve information privacy canbe characterized as a constant struggle to set limits on the invasions ofprivacy -- the misuse, unauthorized collection, and unauthorized disclosureof personal information -- made possible and practical through technology. C. New challenges to privacy Once divulged, bits of personal information can reveal what we think, believe,and feel. No other medium generates personal information with the granularityof the Internet. Information is generated and captured each time an individualenters a Web site, views a picture, FTP's a file, or sends an email. Informationis needed to complete each transaction; however, this information, disclosedover a period of time, in a variety of circumstances, can reveal detailsof the individual's habits, beliefs, and affiliations. The individual "wombto tomb dossiers" of personal information Arthur Miller warned us of30 years ago may be readily available -- not stored in a central database,but culled from a variety of sources and pulled together instantaneouslyto create a detailed profile of nearly anyone on the Internet.8 Currently few people are aware of the vast amount of information generatedand captured -- and potentially used and disclosed -- during the use ofinteractive communications media. Unlike the traditional paper-based worldwhere the individual is typically aware that they are providing an entitywith information (they present a credit card, or receive a billing statementfrom the phone company) much of the information gathering on the Internetoccurs during browsing or other relatively passive activities. Individualsvisit Web sites, read articles, and examine pictures under the illusionthat their activities are anonymous or at least unobserved. In an effort to increase public demand for privacy protection, last weekCDT launched a privacy demonstration Web site which greets each visitorwith detailed personal information including their name, email address,computer and browser type and the universal resource locator (URL) indicatingthe Web site from which they came. Initial visitors expressed alarm at thedetailed personal information that is routinely recorded by Web sites, Internetproviders, and online commercial service providers. In addition, CDT hasestablished an online clearinghouse to highlight existing privacy policiesof commercial online service providers. Over the next year, we will expandthe clearinghouse to include information on the information practices ofInternet service providers, content providers and browsers. Through educationwe hope to create public demand for stronger more ubiquitous privacy policiesand applications.9 Interactive media offers new challenges to privacy. There is growing publicconcern that the non-consensual, surreptitious collection of personal informationis undermining individual privacy.10 Thelack of transparency about information collection and use on the Internetbuilds upon this concern. Without the knowledge that information is beingcollected and used, individuals are unable to make informed decisions topreserve their privacy. People are uncomfortable when they learn that softwareis available and in use that allows Web site operators and other contentproviders to easily record their online activities unbeknownst to them.11 As news stories expose the privacy risks of new services and applicationssuch as Deja News12, and cookies13,individuals may become more reticent in their use of the Internet. The lackof accurate information about the collection, use and disclosure practicesof entities on the Internet, may chill speech and political activity onthe Internet. Individuals may hesitate and pull back from participatingin desirable activities such as signing online petitions to Congress.14They may withdraw from participating in online discussions or visiting Websites that contain information on sensitive topics such as sex and health. Policy makers around the world our beginning to address the privacy concernsthat threaten to undermine individuals' willingness to partake in FirstAmendment and commercial activities on the Internet. While few concretesolutions have been proposed, privacy's pivotal role in promoting speechand other democratic values has been recognized. Despite general agreementthat individual privacy must be preserved -- and even enhanced -- in cyberspace,we are just beginning to explore the means to make privacy work in thisnew media.15 II. The Empowered User: Implementing Privacy Policy in the Digital Age Interactive communications media offer both risks and opportunities to securingindividuals' privacy. To have privacy in the Digital Age one must be ableto both enjoy solitude and to make decisions about what, if any, personalinformation to divulge, to whom and for what purpose. In the Digital Agetechnology can be harnessed to advance privacy by empowering individualsto control the flow of information on a case by case, setting by settingbasis, by expressing his or her privacy desire. Through the implementationof existing laws, continued pressure to develop additional laws to protectpersonal information in various sectors, and the implementation of individualempowerment solutions that give people the ability to control personal informationthrough full notice and meaningful consent, the Internet can be shaped tosupport individual privacy. From the Luddite movement of the early Nineteenth century through publicationof David Burnham's Rise of the Computer State, technology has rightfullybeen viewed as a tool by which the interests of the individual are subsumedto the more powerful interests of the government and big business. Whileprivacy advocates must continue to push for laws, the ability to empowerpeople to directly express privacy choices through user controlled technologieshas the potential to significantly alter the traditional relationship betweenindividuals and technology. We must seize the opportunity to move beyond the current debate over theintrusive nature of technology and seize the opportunity to ensure thatprivacy protection is a core element of this new communications media.16By building privacy in at the front-end we can craft an environment whereeach individual gets to decide the level at which information is protectedinstead of relying on the government and the private sector to mete outweak protections on a sector by sector basis leaving large quantities ofpersonal information unprotected and vulnerable. The privacy potential of interactive communications media will be realizedonly through the concerted efforts of policy makers, the public interestcommunity and the communications and computer industries. CDT is exploringthe creation of a PICS-like process for privacy with the Massachusetts Instituteof Technology (MIT), the World Wide Web Consortium, public interest organizations,and Internet content and service providers. If embraced and implemented,we believe that technology tools, coupled with fair information practicescan provide an effective method of making individual privacy a reality onthe Internet. Individual empowerment technologies which facilitate boththe communication of Web site operator's information practices to users,and the communication of individuals' privacy preferences to Web site operators,will give users maximum control over personal information. A. Individual Empowerment Solutions Support Core Privacy Principles Individual empowerment solutions support core individual privacy and FirstAmendment principles and offer an effective method of ensuring respect forindividual privacy in a medium populated by a diversity of players. Whileexisting laws that protect personal information in particular sectors mustapply regardless of the medium, much of the information generated online,and many of the Internet service and content providers who collect and useinformation, are not covered by existing statutes. Due to the extent and detailed nature of personal information that can begenerated, collected and used during online activities, it is essentialthat individuals be able to control the flow of this information. Throughthe implementation of core privacy principles through policies and technologiesthat empower the individual to independently control the flow of personalinformation, we can give individuals a meaningful tool with which to fillexisting gaps in both law and practice. 1. Advancing Individual Control CDT believes that people should be provided meaningful notice of informationpractices, and the tools to control the use and disclosure of personal information.Privacy is valued differently by each person. Similarly, an individual'sdesire for privacy may vary in different situations. Decisions about thecollection, use and disclosure of personal information have a profound impacton an individual's ability to exercise First Amendment protected activities.The individualized nature of privacy and the impact that privacy decisionsmay have on other rights and activities, support an approach that vestscontrol in the individual. Individual empowerment solutions can provideindividuals with the information and tools to make decisions with independenceand flexibility.17 Through individual empowerment solutions we can advance individual controlover personal information by: enabling individuals, and parents, to exercise control over the collection,use and disclosure of their or their children's personal information througha set of individually chose preferences; developing a common language to assist Web site operators in notifyingusers of their information practices in a standard, easily understood format; enabling third parties to provide additional information to users regardingthe information practices of information providers. 2. Maximizing the Democratic Potential of the Internet Individual empowerment solutions use the Internet's unique features to advanceprivacy. Individual empowerment solutions build upon the medium's interactivity.The two-way communication supported by interactive media make the exchangeof information about privacy preferences and practices simple, inexpensive,and in many instances seamless. The diversity of players on the Internet-- from the individual with a personal Web site, to the many political Websites, to large corporations, require that if we are to develop a uniformapproach to privacy -- which we believe we should -- it must be a solutionthat addresses the privacy needs of individuals in each interaction. Shapingthe architecture of the Internet to support individual control over personalinformation offers an effective method of preserving privacy in this context. Similar to the characteristics of the medium itself, the social and politicalnature of Internet users is distinct in ways that may be important to privacyconsiderations. First, even in its nascent stage, the Internet has shownitself to be responsive to those who populate it.18Second, many pioneers of the electronic frontier are self-described libertarians.Third, the Internet is alive with people engaged in a host of activitiesthat many consider sensitive.19 Both thepeople engaged in these activities and those establishing the areas wherethey take place, have a strong interest in developing an environment thatengenders trust and confidence in its users. This may bode well for privacy.The combination of a medium that has been responsive to its users, earlyusers who are known privacy fundamentalists, and a tradition of people engagingin activities that they want to keep private, may prove a hopeful combinationfor individual privacy. III. Technologies of Privacy We believe that technologies must be designed to give people control overpersonal information by allowing users to avoid Web sites with inappropriateinformation collection and use practices, and allowing them to set privacypreferences that prevent or limit the collection, use and disclosure ofpersonal information. Building upon the success of the Platform for InternetContent Selections (PICS) -- a values-neutral platform that enables parentsto exercise control over children's access to inappropriate material --and other user empowering technologies, CDT believes that we can developapplications that maximize individual control over information. In the pastten months, the PICS platform has evolved from concept to final releaseof standards. Over the next few months, every major browser and online servicewill update products to include the programming necessary to read and interpretPICS labels. At least four different content labeling and rating serviceswill be available to the public. And there will be two Web-based bureauswhere content owners can create their own descriptive labels. In the verynear future, PICS will be widely available on the Internet. A. Privacy Preferences: Enable Individuals to Control the Flow of PersonalInformation Technologies that allow users to communicate privacy preferences to Websites can promote individual control over the extent and nature of personalinformation, if any, that flows to each Web site and its subsequent useand disclosure. In the normal course of an interaction between a Web siteand a user much information is exchanged in both directions. The user receiveswhatever content the Web site has to display. The Web site often maintainslogs of personal transactional information on each visitor. By allowing the individual or parent to configure their own privacy preferencesthat are communicated by their browser to each Web site they visit, individualempowerment solutions enable individuals to view material on a Web sitewhile maintaining control over personal information. Technology can be usedto communicate limits on the use and disclosure of personal informationrevealed20, or block the collection of personalinformation altogether.21 The following three scenarios play out possible interactions between a Website equipped with this enhanced PICS application and a user who has configuredprivacy preferences. Scenario 1 describes the interactionbetween a Web site with a policy of accepting all visitors and complyingwith all limits they have set on the collection, use and disclosure of personalinformation. Scenarios 2 and 3 describe the interaction between the individualand a Web site with specific information practices. In Scenario2 the individual's privacy preferences and the Web site's informationpractices match. In Scenario 3 the individual'sprivacy preferences and the Web site's information practices are incompatible. Scenario 1: The Web Site that pleases all users A Web site operator has made the decision to maximize the number of individualswho visit their site. Using capabilities built into his server softwarethat carry individuals' privacy preferences along with their personal information,the Web site operator has configured his site to accept individuals withall privacy preferences. Step 1 Using a standard format to describe information preferences, the individualsets her privacy preferences, indicating how she wants personal informationhandled. Step 2 The Web site operator configures his server software to accept individualswith various privacy preferences. (For example preferences such as: do notcollect information; or, do not use for unrelated purposes.) Step 3 Once her privacy preferences are set, the individual browses the Internet.The browser will automatically communicate her preferences to the site whichwill then record the appropriate restrictions on the collection, use, anddisclosure of her personal information. Step 4 Notice and choice about information practices in this instance occurstransparently, providing users of the Internet the seamless flow of informationthey expect. The Web site has decided to conduct business regardless ofthe individually established limits on the use of personal information. Scenario 2: The Perfect Match: Individual's privacy preferences and Web site's practicesmatch. Using a standard format a Web site operator provides notice of their informationpractices which is read by the individual's browser and compared with theindividual's privacy preference. They are compatible so the person entersthe Web site without further dialogue. Step 1 The individual sets her privacy preferences, indicating how she wantspersonal information handled. Step 2 The Web site operator develops a notice accurately describing the site'sinformation practices. (For example, notice would include information aboutcollection, use, disclosure, access, correction, and retention and otherfactors.) Step 3 Once her privacy preferences are set, the individual browses the Internet.The browser will automatically compare her preferences with the notice ofinformation practice provided by sites. Step 4 When the user enters the URL for a Web site, the browser will automaticallycompare the individual's preferences with the individual's configured preferences.Where the individual's preferences and site's notice of information practicesmatch (or if site's practices are more privacy protective) she will enterthe site directly. Step 5 Notice and choice about information practices in this instance occurstransparently, providing users of the Internet the seamless flow of informationthey expect on the Internet. Scenario 3: A Mis-match of Preference and Practice: Individual's preferences and Website's practices differ. As in scenario 2, a Web site operator has provided a notice of informationpractice in a standard format and the individual has a browser which iscapable of, and configured to, read and compare the notice with the individual'sprivacy preference. In this instance the individual's preference and Website's practices are incompatible. Step 1 The individual sets her privacy preferences (or sets preferences fortheir children), indicating how she wants personal information handled. Step 2 The Web site operator develops a notice accurately describing the site'sinformation practices. (For example, notice would include information aboutcollection, use, disclosure, access, correction, and retention and otherfactors.) Step 3 Once her privacy preferences are set, the individual browses the Internet.The browser will automatically compare her preferences with the notice ofinformation practice provided by sites. (Does this require a common descriptionof information practices?) Step 4 When the user enters the URL for a Web site, the browser will automaticallycompare the individual's preferences with the individual's configured preferences. Step 5 In this case, the Web site's practices do not match the individual'sprivacy preferences. The browser will notify the individual of the mis-matchin one of two ways: 1) the Web site may choose to respond -- a window would appear informingthe individual of the mis-match and allowing the individual to choose toview the information practices, directly enter the site, or leave; or, 2) the Web site may choose not to respond (or if they have no informationpractice notice they will have nothing to respond with), in which case oncenotified of the mis-match the individual can choose whether to enter thesite. B. Block Bad Actors: Limit Access to Sites With Abusive InformationCollection Practices Existing PICS technology can enable individuals to block access to WorldWide Web sites which engage in unfair information collection procedures(defined by either the individual or an organization).22The PICS approach is flexible enough that an individual can prevent accessto pages that contain information collection forms, without prohibitingaccess to the entire Web site. Today, consumer groups, privacy organizations,or industry self-regulatory bodies can easily create PICS rating systemswhich would be used to block access to Web pages based on the strength orlack of privacy practices. The following two scenarios play out the privacy applications possible withcurrent PICS technology. In Scenario 1 a third-party has developed a listof "good actors" (based on any subjective criteria) which is usedby an individual to control her access to the Web. In Scenario 2 a third-partyhas developed a list of "good actors" which a mother is usingto direct her child's access to Web sites. Scenario 1: The Pro-privacy list: Individual only wants to visit "good" actors Consumer only wants to visit sites that Privacy First has placed on itsindex of pro-privacy Web sites. Step 1 Using her PICS-compatible web browser an individual would set her browserto only allow access to Web sites that are on Privacy First's pro-privacylist (held on a server somewhere). Step 2 When she enters a URL, her browser will compare the entry with the listcompiled by Privacy First. Step 3 If the site is on the pro-privacy list the connection will be made seamlessly. Step 4 If the site is not on the pro-privacy list the connection will be blocked.The user can choose to override her preference and enter anyway, or canchoose not to enter the site. Scenario 2: The Protective Parent: Parent limits child's access to "good"actors Parent only wants child to visit Internet sites that are on Privacy First's"child list" of Web sites that don't solicit personal information. Here we have a parent who is concerned about her son's activities on theInternet. In particular, she is concerned that her son may be revealinghis name, and email and street addresses to others. She is interested inlimiting her son's access to pages of Web sites that contain informationcollection forms. Step 1 Using her PICS-compatible web browser an individual would set her browserto only allow her son access to Web sites that are on Privacy First's "childlist." Step 2 When her eight year old son enters a URL, the browser will compare theentry with the list compiled by Privacy First. Step 3 If the site is on the "child list" the connection will bemade seamlessly. Step 4 If the site is not on the "child list" the connection willbe blocked. Her son will be notified that the site is blocked and he canrequest his mom's permission to enter. The scenarios above represent the potential for the Internet to developand flourish as a medium that allows the strongest expression of personalprivacy. The individual is able to decide in an informal manner, at thefront-end, without coercion, what if any information to divulge and forwhat purpose it may be used. We have an opportunity to truly empower individualsto take charge and control the flow of personal information by developingand implementing technologies that vest simple methods for exercise meaningfulcontrol over personal information in the individual. If our goal is to fullyimplement the core privacy principle -- individual's have the right to controlthe collection, use and disclosure of their personal information -- on theInternet, policies that build upon the innate ability of interactive communicationsmedia to support individual control hold great promise. Clearly individual empowerment solutions are meaningless unless they areeffective. Enforcement is a crucial part of any privacy solution. We believethe FTC has an effective method of enforcing privacy policy on the Internet.Once an entity has put forth a privacy policy or agreed to adhere to anindividual's preferences, any deviation or breach of the terms set out wouldbe actionable as a deceptive and unfair practice. We believe the FTC hasfull jurisdiction to ensure that entities operate fairly on the Internetand conform to their stated information practice policies. IV. Protecting Children's Privacy Online The issue of children's information privacy on the Internet has caught thepublic's eye. Children are an increasingly large segment of the Internetuser population. The Internet offers children, like adults, a tremendousopportunity to exchange ideas and participate in a world outside their window.However, the ease with which children can access ideas, reveal informationabout themselves, and participate in a range of activities without parentalsupervision, has and will continue to be a subject of concern. CDT is dedicated to enhancing children's privacy on the Internet. We believethat individual empowerment solutions coupled with fair information practicesand policies, parental involvement, and strong government response to deceptiveand unfair information collection practices, can best protect children'sprivacy. A. Empowering Parents The Internet is currently being designed to support parental empowermentsolutions which can be implemented without curtailing the availability ofinformation, nor limiting the speech and associational rights of other Internetusers. Through user control technology parents can: prevent their child from accessing Web sites with inappropriate informationpractices -- as defined by the parent or a consumer or privacy organizationof the parent's choice; prevent their child from revealing personal information such as name,address, and email address to others; allow their child to access sites but limit the collection, use and/ordisclosure of their child's personal information; exercise control over their child's personal information without directlysupervising their Internet activities; install security measures such as passwords that prevent their childfrom changing rules established by the parent regarding Web site accessor information disclosure, collection and use. CDT believes that parental empowerment technologies provide a solution thatgives parent's real control over information. Technologies that allow minorsor parents to exercise control over the collection, use and disclosure ofchildren's personal information both affirm minors' independent interestin making decisions regarding personal information, and provide the flexibilityto accommodate different parental judgments and preferences regarding childrearingand privacy. By allowing parents to decide the age at which, or situationsin which, a minor is mature enough to independently exercise control overpersonal information, and those in which the parent will decide in theirstead, user controlled technologies support minors' independent rights,facilitate parental involvement, and avoid one-size-fits-all solutions. B. Avoiding rules that may infringe on other rights The close nexus between individual privacy and First Amendment freedomsdemands careful inspection of rules designed to protect privacy. Protectingchildren's privacy online requires a policy that fosters individual privacywhile facilitating minors and parents to in addressing their particularprivacy and safety concerns. Individual empowerment technologies avoid a host of thorny constitutionalissues raised by age-based limitations and provide parents with the abilityto exercise control over personal information on behalf of their children.Alternative proposals for protecting children which turn on age-based rulesto control information use may require entities operating online to verifythe age of each individual with whom they interact. Age verification maywell escalate the collection of personal information and ultimately leadto the creation of a nation-wide lists of users and their ages which woulddirectly implicate fundamental rights of freedom of association,23and undermine individual privacy. In addition, implementing identificationrequirements on the Web would limit all Internet users ability to read,speak, receive information24, and interactonline under Constitutionally-protected conditions of anonymity.25 V. European Union Data Protection Directive In July, 1995, the European Union (EU) adopted the Directive On the Protectionof Individuals with regard to the Processing of Personal Data and on theFree Movement of such Data (known as the "Data Protection Directive").In essence, the Directive sets forth rules relating to individual accessto personal data, requires individual consent prior to certain uses of personalinformation, calls for "appropriate" security safeguards to beput in place by companies handling personal information, and requires membercountries to create "supervisory authorities" to oversee implementationof the Directive. The intent behind the Directive is to harmonize the dataprotection laws within the EU, providing European citizens with a minimumlevel of data protection. The Directive's reach stretches far beyond the limits of the European communityby limiting the transfer of data to non-member countries that do not ensurean "adequate" level of data protection.26Although the contours of the "adequacy" standard are unclear,it is certain that the Directive has the potential to seriously impede theflow of data from member states to the United States. A. Goals of the Directive The goal of the Directive is "to protect the fundamental rights andfreedoms of natural persons, and in particular their right to privacy, withrespect to the processing of personal data "that is automated or containedin a "filing system" structured to permit easy access to personaldata. (Articles 1 & 3) Data protection -- referred to in the UnitedStates as information privacy --is considered a fundamental human rightin Europe, which must be preserved as the EU moves to a common, internalmarket.27 To protect privacy, the Directiveestablishes a core set of fair information practice principles to applyto data held by both the public and private sectors. Consistent with the Fair Information Practice Principles developed by HEWin 1973, the Directive calls for clear notice, informed consent for datause, individual access and correction rights, and data reliability and security. In addition, the Directive calls on Member countries to provide judicialremedies for failures to comply with the directive and to establish independent"supervisory authorities"-- with whom all data controllers mustregister -- to oversee implementation and enforcement of the Directive. The core of the Directive -- as with information privacy policy in general-- is the consent provision. The Directive requires that all processingof personal data occur only with the subject's unambiguous consent. Consentis defined by the Directive as "any freely given specific and informedindication" of the data subject's wishes, by which he or she "signifiesagreement to personal data relating to him being processed." (Article2 (h)) Further, the Directive requires that data subjects be able to objectto data processing for commercial or charitable marketing activity at nocost. (Article 14b) Buttressing the consent provision is the requirementthat all individuals be given full and accurate information about the dataprocessing activity.28 The Directive sets additional limits on the collection of data. All datamust be adequate, relevant and not excessive in relation to the purposesfor which they are processed," and the purposes must be explicit andlegitimate and determined at the time of collection. The purpose of anyadditional processing "shall not be incompatible with the purposesas they were originally specified." (Articles 6 & 7) The Directive carves out particular types of information for heightenedprotection. It requires "the data subject's explicit consent"for the processing of sensitive data (capable by their nature of infringingfundamental freedoms or privacy, such as data relating to racial or ethnicorigin, political opinions, religious or philosophical beliefs, trade unionmembership, and data relating to health or sex life). In addition, the Directiveallows that some countries may prohibit the processing of data despite theconsent of the subject. (Article 8) The Directive acknowledges that privacy, like other values, is not absoluteand exists in relation to, and at times in tension with, other importantsocietal values. The Directive acknowledges circumstances in which personaldata may be processed without consent, such as for " the performanceof a task carried out in the public interest or in the exercise of officialauthority, or in the legitimate interests of a natural or legal person,provided that the interests or the rights and freedoms of the data subjectare not overriding." Further, the Directive explicitly recognizes andprovides exceptions to protect important speech and free flow of informationinterests. The Directive states that where processing is solely for journalistic,artistic or literary purposes, exceptions may apply if they are necessaryto reconcile the right to privacy with the rules governing freedom of expression.(Article 9) Most important for U.S. policy, the Directive prohibits the transfer ofpersonal data to non-Member countries that do not have "adequate levelsof protection." The Directive provides that the adequacy of a non-membercountry's protection "must be assessed in light of all the circumstancessurrounding the transfer operation. Particular consideration shall be givento the nature of the data... and the rules of law, both general and sectional,in force, and the professional rules and security measures which are compliedwith in that country." (Article 25) Further, even where a non-membercountry's protection is deemed inadequate, the transfer of data may stillbe acceptable if the data subject has consented, or the transfer is necessaryin relation to a contract, the protection of an important public interest,or where the "controller" of the data offers "appropriatesafeguards." (Article 26) B. U.S. Privacy Policy, the Internet, and the EU Directive The EU Directive has been an external force subtlety driving U.S. policymakers and industry to examine privacy issues. As its implementation loomsnear, industry, privacy advocates, and policy makers alike are attemptingto discern how the Internet should meet the "adequacy" standard. CDT believes that individual empowerment solutions, along with a continuedemphasis on strengthening existing statutes, crafting new laws to protectinformation on a sector by sector basis, strong enforcement, and prosecutionof unfair and deceptive information practices, will advance individual privacyon the Internet -- consistent with the core goals of the EU Directive. The implementation of individual empowerment technologies that allow individualsto exercise control over information in a simple, effective manner are ameans of implementing the core notice and consent requirements of the EUDirective. Through the development of a standard format for expressing informationpractices and a method for exchanging individual privacy preferences andentities information practices, individual empowerment solutions would assistentities operating on the Internet to meet the notice and consent provisionsof the EU Directive in a nearly seamless fashion. There are a number of factors that should guide attempts to apply the EUDirective to the Internet. First, the global, decentralized nature of theInternet does not easily lend itself to regional regulation. Second, unlikethe sectoral approach taken by U.S. policy makers, the EU Directive -- especiallywhen applied to the Internet -- casts a wide net over a very disparate castof content providers, including the operators of hundreds of thousands ofWeb sites. Third, the Internet has shown itself to be particularly suitedto supporting First Amendment activities and careful attention should bepaid not to unintentionally interfere with its ability to support robustspeech. In considering the Directive's application we should be particularly carefulof its impact on other core values. For example, the requirement that eachdata controller register with the "supervisory authority" appearsat first to be a useful accountability provision. However, in practice,requiring every individual with a Web site to register with a governmentauthority may have a chilling effect on individual speech and communication.The application of similarly well-intentioned regulations have been foundinfirm where they may impact on protected First Amendment rights.29 While the impact of applying the entire EU Directive to the Internet raisessome concerns, meeting the notice and consent provisions of the EU directiveis a goal that is attainable, and one that would advance individual privacyand the democratic potential of the Internet. Currently very few entitiesoperating on the Internet provide individuals with notice of their informationpractices. Similarly, the consent requirement set out in the Directive,while codified in certain sectors, is not a standard on which the Internetcurrently operates. The development of statutory protections to fill themany holes in U.S. privacy law is unlikely, and it is clear that currentpractice on the Internet does not meet the Directive's adequacy standard. While there are a host of additional factors that will be examined in determiningadequacy, we believe that assisting individuals to exercise meaningful,front-end control over the collection, use and disclosure of personal informationwill bring the Internet in line with the Directive's core mission of advancingindividual privacy and support individuals' continued ability to speak andreceive information on the Internet. VI. Conclusion In the Digital Age, technology can be the individual's ally, not the intrusive,meglomaniacal villain, it has been in so many other settings. Through technologicalmechanisms that put individuals in control of their information by providingthem with notice of companies information practices and real opportunitiesto clearly express the method in which they want their information handled,the Internet can offer individuals the capacity to protect their privacywhile preserving core First Amendment values. The potential to meet the goals of protecting privacy and speech, and increasechild safety through a solution that maximizes individual and parental controlshould be attractive to privacy advocates, First Amendment advocates andchild advocates alike. We have the opportunity to reverse the pattern ofusing technology to undermine individual privacy. Ensuring that the architectureof the Global Information Infrastructure is designed to support individualempowerment solutions will have a profound effect on individual privacyin the Twenty-first Century. Footnotes 1 See Turner Broadcasting Syst., Inc. v. FCC, 114 S.Ct. 2445, 2458 (1994). 2 Information privacy incorporates two components -- at times distinct andat times inextricable -- "the right to be let alone " first articulatedby Justice Louis Brandeis over a century ago, and the right to control informationabout oneself, even after divulging it to others, first defined by ProfessorAlan Westin in Privacy and Freedom. 3 See the writings of Erving Goffman, Edward Blaustein and Julie Innessfor more discussion of the societal impact of inadequate privacy. 4 For a discussion of legal theories related to the development of "personhood"and autonomy in society, see Margaret Radin, "Property and Personhood,"34 STANF. L.F. 957 (1982), "The Consequences of Conceptualism,"41 U. MIAMI L.Rev. 239 (1986), "Market-Inalienability," 100 HARV.L.R. 1849 (1987); and Charles Reich, "The New Property," 73 YALELAW J. 733 (1964), "Beyond the New Property," 56 BROOK. L.R. 731(1990); "The Liberty Impact of the New Property," 31 WM. &MARY L. REV. 295 (1990). 5 While there is no definitive case finding a constitutional right of informationprivacy, the Supreme Court acknowledged that such a privacy right existsin Whalen v. Roe.429 U.S. 589 (1977) (upholding a state statute that requireddoctors to disclose information on individuals taking certain highly addictiveprescription drugs for inclusion on a state database) "This informationis made available only to a small number of public health officials witha legitimate interest in the information. [Broad] dissemination by stateofficials of such information, however, would clearly implicate constitutionallyprotected privacy rights. . . Id. at 606. However, the "reasonable expectation" standard set out in U.S..v. Katz , initially hailed as the landmark privacy decision, has consistentlybeen used to permit the use of technology to undermine privacy interests.As technology has advanced, and as societal demands for sensitive personalinformation have increased, the Court has increasingly circumscribed the"zones" one may justifiably consider private. Subsequent decisionshave consistently allowed the circumstances of modern existence to definethe "reasonable expectation of privacy." If an intrusion is technicallypossible, one's expectation of privacy in certain activities is unreasonable. 6 The lack of strong constitutional privacy protection has placed addedemphasis on federal and state statutory protections. While statutory privacyprotections for personal information have been crafted on a sector by sectorbasis, many are based on a common set of principles -- The Code of FairInformation Principles . Developed by the Department of Health Educationand Welfare in 1973 printed in the Report of the Secretary's Advisory Committeeon Automated Personal Data Systems, Records, Computers and the Rights ofCitizens, U.S. Dept. of Health, Education & Welfare, July 1973. 7 See recent polls on the public's growing worries over the lack of informationprivacy, by Louis Harris & Associates, Time/CNN, Mastercard and theAmerican Civil Liberties Union. 8 Deja News is an example of the profiling capacity made available to anyoneon the Internet. Through the use of a search engine it is simple to compileall usenet postings of a single indivdiual. While usenet is a public forum,the capacity to at the stroke of a key pull together an indivdiuals wordsscattered between 1979 and 1996 in potentially thousands of different usenetgroups provides a glimpse of the type of profiling that is made inexpensiveand practical in this media. 9 http://www.cdt.org/privacy/ 10 See recent polls on the public's growing worries over the lack of informationprivacy, by Louis Harris & Associates; Time/CNN; Mastercard; and, theAmerican Civil Liberties Union. 11 Margot Williams, Usenet Newsgroups Great for Research, But Watch WhatYou Say, Wash. Post., March 11, 1996, at WashTech; Public Cyberspace, Wash.Post, March 14, 1996, A26; Anne Eisenberg, Privacy and Data Collection onthe Net, Scientific American, March 1996, p 120; Mark Powell, OrwellianSnooping, USA Today, April 2, 1996, 13A. 12 DejaNews is a service that organizes all usenet postings into a searchableindex by author's name. 13 Cookies is a Netscape feature that assists merchants in tracking usersactivities at Web sites. See, Joan E. Rigdon, Internet Users Say They'dRather Not Share Their `Cookies', WSJ, Feb. 14, 1996, B6. 14 McIntyre v. The Ohio Elections Comm., 115 S.Ct. 1511 (1995); NAACP v.Alabama ex rel. Patterson, 357 U.S. 449, 463-65 (1958) (reversing civilcontempt judgment against NAACP for failure to turn over membership list). 15 In addition to the Federal Trade Commission's ongoing efforts, The NationalInformation Infrastructure Advisory Council issued its "Privacy andSecurity-Related Principles" last year, followed by the Inter-agencyInformation Infrastructure Task Force's Privacy Principles. More recently,the Department of Commerce's NTIA released its report on "Privacy andTelecommunications-Related Data," which concluded that the privatesector must implement privacy standards or face a legislative mandate. Inaddition, Rep. Bob Franks (R-NJ) recently introduced the "Children'sPrivacy Protection and Parental Empowerment Act," to protect children'sprivacy. 16 As the recent Department of Commerce report, "Privacy and the NII:Safeguarding Telecommunications-Related Personal Information," concluded:"The promised interactivity of the NII may diminish the need to makea policy choice between opt-in and opt-out. Such interactivity would makeit possible for service providers to obtain consent to use transaction-relatedpersonal information] from subscribers electronically before any serviceswere rendered." October, 1995 report, p.26. 17 Of course there are instances where the individual's ability to makedecisions regarding the flow of personal information may be encumbered.For example, where the government seeks access to personal information onan individual held by a third-party the individual's ability to interveneand exercise control may demand that they receive notice of the requestfor access. Similarly, in the context of medical treatment, providing individualswith the ability to exercise meaningful control over the flow of personalmay require procedures that protect the individual during this moment ofvulnerability from rapacious information demands. These settings shouldbe addressed with solutions that assist individuals, or those acting intheir stead, to control personal information. 18 Internet users have sent powerful responses to those who have "abused"the Net. Mass emailings typically result in spamming -- tons of angry messagesdeluging the original sender. Deja News quickly added a mechanism to allowusers to flag postings that they did not want archived. Similarly, most"look-up" services on the Net give individuals the opportunityto opt-out via the Net. 19 Support groups on topics ranging from sexual abuse to drug addiction,discussions on political topics from anarchy to Cuba to Newt Gingrich, andpictures and stories of sexual and other fantasies abound on the Internet. 20 After several press stories about DejaNews, a service that organizesall usenet postings into a searchable index by author's name, the companystated that they were instituting a flag that would allow people to notifythem that they did not want a particular posting to be archived. This isan example of a limit on subsequent use of information, it is particularlyinteresting because many users of the Internet would state that usenet postingsare public and subject to no reasonable privacy expectation. 21 Community Connexion, an Internet Service Provider, recently debuted theAnonymizer which allows individuals to surf the Internet without revealingtransactional data to the Web sites they visit. 22 In addition, software -- similar to products on the market to limit children'saccess to objectionable content -- could be developed to limit access tosites that have unacceptable information practices. 23 NAACP v. Alabama ex rel. Patterson, 357 U.S. 449, 463-65 (1958) (reversingcivil contempt judgment against NAACP for failure to turn over membershiplist). 24 Lamont v. Postmaster General, 381 U.S. 301 (1965) (invalidating restrictionson the mailing of foreign communist political propaganda). 25 Plaintiffs in ACLU's case challenging the constitutionality of the CommunicationsDecency Act, including EFF, EPIC, and others, made this point quite eloquently.In addition, parental empowerment approach allows children, like all Internetusers, to remain relatively anonymous during transactions and interactionson the Internet. This anonymity may help protect them from people who wouldsingle children out for harm. 26 The Directive has been five years in the making, the first draft circulatedin the fall, 1990. Earlier drafts of the Directive required non-Member countriesto have "equivalent" levels of data protection before personaldata could flow from Member countries. An "equivalency" test wasconsidered to be too stringent by many in the private sector. A debate withinthe EU continues as to how "adequacy" will be measured, and whether,in application, an adequacy test will be lass rigorous than an equivalencystandard. 27 As the Directive states in its preamble: " Whereas data processingsystems are designed to serve man; whereas they must, whatever the nationalityor residence of natural persons, respect their fundamental rights and freedoms,notably the right to privacy, and contribute to economic and social progress,trade expansion, and the well-being of individuals. The Directive relies,inpart on the 1980 OECD Data Protection Guidelines, as well as the Councilof Europe Convention of 1981 for the Protection of Individuals with Regardto Automatic Processing of Personal Data. 28 The Directive requires that data subjects learn of the existence of aprocessing operation, where data is collected from the individual, and mustbe given full and accurate information about the data processing activity. 29 See, NAACP v. Button, 371 U.S. 415 (1963) (holding a provision whichprohibited any organization from retaining a lawyer in connection with litigationto which it was not a party invalid as applied to the NAACP's activities). Back to the CDT Privacy Issues Page Back to the CDT Publications Page Back to the CDT Home Page Posted on June 5, 1996 | For more information, write webmaster@cdt.org WT02-B05-56IA095-001027-B012-59http://www.cdt.org:80/publications/annuals/96_report.html 205.177.10.31 19970215011945 text/html 56872HTTP/1.0 200 OKDate: Sat, 15 Feb 1997 01:18:24 GMTServer: Apache/1.1.1Content-type: text/html CDT 1996 Annual Report Democratic Values for a Digital Age First Annual Report and 1996 Work in Progress March 1996 Executive Summary Overview CDT's 1996 Agenda CDT's Key Accomplishments In 1995 Interactive Working Group (IWG) 1996 IWG Activities 1995 IWG Accomplishments The Digital Privacy and Security Working Group 1996 DPSWG Projects 1995 DPSWG Activities The Privacy Forum The Privacy Forum 1996 Activities The Privacy Forum's 1995 Transactional PrivacyActivities Digital Access Coalition World Internet Freedom Project CDT Special Projects CDT Staff Executive Summary Overview In its first full year of activity, the Center for Democracy and Technology(CDT) has emerged as a leading voice in the critical public policy debatesaffecting the future of free expression and privacy in the Information Age.Founded in December, 1994, the Center's mission is to develop public policiesthat preserve and advance democratic values and constitutional civil libertieson the Internet and other interactive communications media. CDT pursues its mission through public policy working groups, public interest/industrycoalition building efforts, policy research, litigation, public education,and grass-roots organizing. CDT relies on a combination of staff expertisein relevant law and technology, combined with a unique consultation processthat brings together diverse interests from across the political spectrum,public interest community, and the communications industry to address criticalpublic policy issues. CDT is a non-profit 501(c)(3), public interest organization supported byindividuals, foundations, and a broad cross section of the computer andcommunications industry. CDT's 1996 Agenda The Center's 1996 agenda is ambitious, including several new projects. Highlightsinclude: Constitutional Challenge To Online Indecency Restrictions:CDT, along with the American Library Association, America Online, Peoplefor the American Way, representatives from CDT's Interactive Working Group(IWG), and others, filed a lawsuit in mid-February challenging the constitutionalityof the content regulations imposed on interactive communications media inthe recently enacted Telecommunications Reform Act. Filed under an expeditedappeal process, the lawsuit will reach the Supreme Court and is likely toestablish the First Amendment legal doctrine for the Internet. Because of its critical importance, CDT, together with AOL and ALA, organizedthe Citizens Internet Empowerment Coalition (CIEC) made up of 37 organizationsand users of the Internet to take part in the litigation and educate thejudiciary about the nature of the Internet. The CIEC lawsuit highlightsthe distinct nature of interactive media, and argues that the First Amendmentpolicy regime designed for broadcast mass media, when applied to the Internet,is unconstitutionally restrictive given the tremendous user control inherentin interactive communications technologies. CDT is working with Jenner andBlock's Bruce Ennis, lead attorney in the litigation, to develop the constitutionalchallenge to the indecency restrictions. CDT is also organizing expert testimonyand technical expertise for the litigation to establish the ready availabilityof user control technologies on the Internet. IWG Projects On User Empowerment And Vicarious Liability:The Interactive Working Group is working to educate the communications industry,Congress, the Federal Communications Commission, and the Administrationon the adoption and implementation of PICS (Platform For Internet ContentSelection) and other user control technologies as an alternative to contentregulations. CDT staff serves on the PICS Steering Committee. The IWG, which includes representatives from both the online services andcontent providers, will also serve as a forum to address liability issuesin the context of the debate over intellectual property law. Developing An Alternative National Cryptography Policy ThatWorks Globally: The Digital Privacy and Security Working Group(DPSWG) will develop recommendations for a comprehensive alternative nationalcryptography policy. The DPSWG will emphasize the immediate need for theelimination of cryptography export restrictions, and press for policy andmarket solutions that protect free speech and privacy, and ensure networksecurity and competitiveness in the Global Information Infrastructure. In the spring of 1996, the DPSWG will mount a high visibility public educationcampaign, including open hearings in California and Washington DC, to informthe public and members of Congress about the pressing need for an alternativecryptography policy. Creating A Marketplace For Privacy In Interactive Media: ThePrivacy Forum, a consortium of industry representatives and public interestand consumer advocacy organizations, is working to develop policy optionsand workable standards to empower individuals to exert more control overthe disclosure of personal transactional information, and to create a "market"for privacy enhancing applications. In an effort to promote the development of privacy solutions, CDT will utilizeour popular World Wide Web site to demonstrate the extent of personal transactionalinformation generated in the course of browsing our site. The demonstrationwill also highlight potential mechanisms to enhance individual control overthe collection of personal information. CDT will create an online privacyresource center to showcase government recommendations and policies, existingprivacy policies in use by online services and content providers, and relatedresearch and scholarship. Through its resource center and demonstrationsite, CDT hopes to facilitate a public discussion towards identifying anddeveloping various models for enhancing privacy and individual choice online. Encouraging Affordable, Nation Wide, High-Speed Access To TheInternet: CDT will organize the Digital Access Coalition (DAC),comprised of commerce, education, and library groups, together with smallbusinesses and high technology industry leaders, to make the case for rapidISDN deployment under affordable pricing structures. Establishing Basic Free Expression And Privacy Rights For TheGlobal Internet Community: CDT is launching a World Internet FreedomProject (WIF), to establish awareness for the need for basic free expressionand privacy rights for Internet users around the world. Working with theSoros Foundation, human rights organizations, online service providers,and content providers, the WIF will seek workable solutions to the increasinglyaggressive efforts of foreign governments to regulate online communications. CDT's Key Accomplishments In 1995 Advocating a New Policy Framework For The Internet And InteractiveMedia Based On First Amendment Principles: In 1995, CDT establishedthe Interactive Working Group (IWG), an ad hoc coalition of over 85 publicinterest organizations and communications companies. Recognizing the uniquenature of the Internet to foster individual control over content and thefree flow of information, the IWG works to develop practical policy optionsto government content regulations. The IWG played a critical role in urging Congress to extend constitutionalFirst Amendment principles applicable to print media to the Internet, opposinglegislative attempts to impose content regulations on the Internet and commercialonline services (e.g., the Exon/Coats "Communications Decency Act").Although indecency restrictions were included in the TelecommunicationsReform Act, CDT and the IWG laid the foundation for mounting a challengeto the constitutionality of the restrictions. The IWG successfully foughtto limit vicarious liability for online service providers who merely transmitmaterials created by their subscribers. Advancing Communications Privacy And Network Security:CDT's Digital Privacy and Security Working Group (DPSWG), a coalition ofover 50 public interest organizations and representatives from the computerand communications industries, is a leading voice in the effort to developa cryptography policy based on core First Amendment and privacy principles,which ensures network security and competitiveness in the Global InformationInfrastructure. In a November 1995 letter to Vice President Gore, over 40 DPSWG memberscriticized the Clinton Administration's latest cryptography policy proposal.The DPSWG pledged to undertake a comprehensive fact finding and informationsharing process to develop an alternative cryptography policy that worksglobally. Exploring Policies To Protect The Privacy Of Personal OnlineTransactional Information: CDT's Privacy Forum, a consortium ofpublic interest organizations and leading corporations working to addressinformation privacy issues, is engaged in a process to develop comprehensiveguidelines to protect the privacy of personal transactional data. Re-examining Policies Underlying Disclosure of Personal Information fromPublic Records: In 1995, CDT's Privacy Forum completed its examination ofthe existing policies underlying public records laws, culminating in a full-dayconsultation attended by over 50 representatives from First Amendment andprivacy organizations, and information, communications and computer industries.The increased ability to collect, store and transmit data in digital mediaraise new wrinkles for rules governing public records. The consultationfocused on the heightening tension between the private sector's need foraccess to public records and the growing privacy concerns over disclosureof personal information in the interactive, digital, information environment.A Forum-commissioned "white paper" served as the foundation forthe consultation. Grass-Roots Organizing And Public Education: CDT ispioneering the use of the Internet to conduct unique and effective grass-rootspublic education campaigns. CDT's online organizing efforts have helpedto establish an informed, active constituency on the Internet. As part of CDT's yearlong online campaign against the "CommunicationsDecency Act," over 115,000 Internet users signed an online petitionin support of Senator Leahy's alternative legislative proposal. CDT organizeda National Day of Protest on December 12, 1995, which generated over 20,000phone calls, faxes, and email messages to Congress in opposition to theonline 'indecency' regulations. CDT also spearheaded the "Black ThursdayProtest" during which nearly 2000 World Wide Web pages were turnedblack to illustrate the far reaching impact of the 'indecency' provisionsfor 48 hours after President Clinton signed the Telecommunications ReformAct into law. CDT's World Wide Web site was rated among the top 5% of sites on the Webby Point Survey; "Best of the Web" by 2ask Survey; and received3 out of 4 stars from NetGuide Magazine. CDT's site is widely recognizedas the leading source for information on public policy issues affectingcivil liberties online. The Interactive Working Group CDT's Interactive Working Group (IWG) is an ad hoc coalition of over 85public interest organizations and communications companies dedicated todeveloping practical policy options that support the free flow of informationon the Internet and other interactive communications media. The IWG seeksto develop public policy solutions that recognize the unique characteristicsof interactive media, including its global reach, unlimited publishing capacity,and enhanced user control. In 1995, the IWG worked to develop a constitutional, practical policy alternativesto Congressional efforts to impose content regulations on the Internet andcommercial online information services, such as the Exon/Coats CommunicationsDecency Act. Towards this end, the IWG worked closely with RepresentativesChris Cox (R-CA), Ron Wyden (D-OR), and Rick White (R-WA), along with SenatorPatrick Leahy (D-VT), to develop and build support for alternative legislationthat would prohibit the Federal Communications Commission from imposingcontent regulations on interactive media and remove vicarious liabilityfor online service providers. 1996 IWG Activities The IWG has an ambitious agenda planned for 1996. Activities include: Constitutional Challenge To Online Indecency Restrictions:CDT, along with the American Library Association, America Online, Peoplefor the American Way, representatives from CDT's Interactive Working Group(IWG), and others, filed a lawsuit in mid-February challenging the constitutionalityof the content regulations imposed on interactive communications media inthe recently enacted Telecommunications Reform Act. Filed under an expeditedappeal process, the lawsuit will reach the Supreme Court and is likely toestablish the First Amendment legal doctrine for the Internet. Because of its critical importance, CDT, together with AOL and ALA, hasorganized the Citizens Internet Empowerment Coalition (CIEC) made up of37 organizations and users of the Internet to take part in the litigationand educate the judiciary about the nature of the Internet. The CIEC lawsuithighlights the distinct nature of interactive media, and argues that theFirst Amendment policy regime designed for broadcast mass media, when appliedto the Internet, is unconstitutionally restrictive given the tremendoususer control inherent in interactive communications technologies. CDT is working with Jenner and Block's Bruce Ennis, lead attorney in thelitigation, to develop the constitutional challenge to the indecency restrictions.CDT is also organizing expert testimony and technical expertise for thelitigation to establish the ready availability of user control technologieson the Internet. IWG Project On User Empowerment: The Interactive WorkingGroup will work to educate the communications industry, Congress, the FCC,and the Administration on the adoption and implementation of PICS (PlatformFor Internet Content Selection) and other user control technologies as analternative to content regulations. CDT believes that blocking, filteringand rating server standards being developed through the PICS process presenta compelling case that the least restrictive means to protect children fromharmful material is through such parental-controlled blocking, not intrusive,bureaucratic and unconstitutional government censorship. CDT is on the SteeringCommittee of PICS. The IWG, which includes representatives from both the online service providerand content provider industries, will also serve as a forum to address liabilityissues in the context of the debate over intellectual property law. Access Provider Liability Policy Development And Research:Excessive imposition of vicarious liability on Internet access providersthreatens to stifle the free flow of information and is contrary to constitutionalfree speech and privacy principles. Yet, in areas such as defamation andintellectual property rights, the law is evolving toward dangerous impositionof liability on access providers. Though CDT has no desire to overturn basicintellectual property protection, or to prevent proper recovery under tortlaw, we believe that such imposition of liability threatens the core ofthe Internet. CDT will undertake basic research and exploration of policy alternativesin order to identify possible policies which provide clear and appropriatelegal frameworks for the operation of access providers. This research willinvolve consultation with IWG participants supported by legal and policybackground papers prepared by CDT staff. 1995 IWG Accomplishments: Advocating A New Policy Framework For The Internet And InteractiveMedia Based On First Amendment Principles: The IWG worked to developconstitutional, practical policy options to government content regulationsthat recognized the unique nature of the Internet to foster individual controlover content and the free flow of information. The IWG played a critical role in the debate over Congressional attemptsto impose unconstitutional content regulations on the Internet and commercialonline services (e.g., the Exon/Coats "Communications Decency Act").In addition to urging Congress to extend constitutional First Amendmentprinciples applicable to print media onto the Internet, the IWG successfullyfought to limit vicarious liability for online service providers who merelytransmit materials created by their subscribers. Working Group Report on Technology and Policy Alternatives forInteractive Media: IWG produced a comprehensive report on the casefor a policy framework for interactive media based on the democratic valuesof freedom of speech and the free flow of information, including a overviewon the availability of user control technology, the state of current law,and the legal and policy issues raised by legislative efforts to imposecontent regulations on interactive media. The study was distributed to membersof Congress and the press in July, 1995. Demonstration of User Empowerment Technologies: IWGeducated public and government officials on the availability of less restrictivealternatives to government content regulations, including user control technologies.IWG, working with the Interactive Services Association (ISA), presenteda technological demonstration for members of Congress, their staff, andthe press of user control technologies by America Online, Prodigy, SurfWatch,Netscape and Webster Network Strategies on July 17, 1995. The demonstrationwas instrumental in making the case for the Cox/Wyden approach, and receivedconsiderable press attention nationwide. Public Education, Grass-Roots Activism in Support of IWG Goals:CDT undertook a massive Internet based grass-roots public education campaign,including an online petition drive which yielded over 115,000 signaturesin opposition to government-imposed content regulations and in support ofthe Cox/Wyden/White amendment. CDT's online organizing efforts helped drawpublic and media attention to the issue. Publications: CDT Executive Director Jerry Berman andDeputy Director Daniel Weitzner's article Abundance and User Control: Renewingthe Democratic Heart of the First Amendment in the Age of Interactive Media,was published in the Yale Law Journal in May, 1995. The article makes thecase for a high level of First Amendment protection for interactive media. The Digital Privacy and Security Working Group CDT's Digital Privacy and Security Working Group (DPSWG) is a coalitionof over 50 computer, communications, and public interest organizations workingto develop and implement policies that protect privacy and network securityon the Global Information Infrastructure. Originally formed in 1986, the DPSWG has played a critical role on severalmajor privacy issues, including the drafting of the Electronic CommunicationsPrivacy Act (ECPA), the 1994 defeat of the Clinton Administration's ClipperChip government key escrow encryption plan, and the crafting of a narrowlytailored "Digital Telephony" legislation with strong public accountabilitymechanisms and privacy protections. 1996 DPSWG Projects: In 1996, DPSWG is continuing to play a central role in the increasinglyvisible national debate over cryptography policy. DPSWG is also monitoringthe implementation of the "Digital Telephony" legislation (theCommunications Assistance for Law Enforcement Act) and providing a forumfor discussing other issues relating to information privacy and securityon the GII. The DPSWG Cryptography Policy Project: DPSWG is developingrecommendations for an alternative national cryptography policy that willprovide strong privacy and security for users and meets the demands of acompetitive global marketplace. Following through on the commitment madein its November, 1995 letter to Vice President Gore, DPSWG will hold a seriesof forums, and engage in a broad public education campaign about the needfor widely available strong cryptography on the GII. Activities for 1996include: Briefing for the American People: This Spring, theDPSWG will host a "Briefing for the American People" focusingon the need for a comprehensive national cryptography policy. This highvisibility event, which will include presentations from industry leaders,cryptography experts, and public interest advocates, will launch DPSWG'spublic education campaign. DPSWG Cryptography Summit: This Summer, DPSWG willbring together leading experts from across industry and the public interestcommunity for a Cryptography Policy Summit, to exchange ideas on the directionof cryptography policy and develop a strategy for providing better privacyand security on the GII. White Paper on Encryption Policy: In Fall 1996, DPSWGwill release "A White Paper on Encryption: The Case for a ComprehensiveCryptography Policy," summarizing the findings of the DPSWG Summitand presentations made at the March "Briefing for the American People."The "White Paper" will serve as the basis for DPSWG's recommendationsfor an alternative cryptography policy. Legislative Activities: As Congress considers legislationto address the lack of a comprehensive national cryptography policy, DPSWGstands ready to play a leading role in the process to ensure that the principlesof free speech and privacy, as well as network security and competitivenesson the GII, are addressed. Public Accountability over FBI Electronic Surveillance Authority:The DPSWG is closely monitoring the implementation of the 1994 CommunicationsAssistance For Law Enforcement Act to ensure that The Act's public accountabilitymechanisms are fully utilized and its new privacy protections are strictlyenforced. DPSWG is leading the effort to ensure that the FBI provides historicaljustification for its proposed surveillance capacity request, and is workingwith Senator Leahy (D-VT) and other concerned members of Congress to ensurethat the public is able to assess the reasonableness of the FBI's requestbefore funding to implement the requirements is appropriated. 1995 DPSWG Activities: Developing an Alternative National Cryptography Policy:Throughout 1995, DPSWG worked to mobilize the public interest communityand the computer and communications industry towards developing an alternativenational cryptography policy that satisfies the need for individual privacyand network security, and will meet the demands of a competitive globalmarketplace. Towards this end, in November 1995, over 40 DPSWG members, companies, tradeassociations, and public interest groups wrote to Vice President Gore criticizingthe Administration's current approach to cryptography policy. The coalitionpledged to undertake a process to develop recommendations for a more comprehensivecryptography policy to be presented to the Administration, Congress, andthe public this year. Ensuring Public Accountability over FBI Electronic SurveillanceAbility: In 1995, DPSWG also worked to ensure public accountabilityover FBI electronic surveillance ability granted under the CommunicationsAssistance for Law Enforcement Act (CALEA). Public accountability is essentialin protecting privacy and ensuring reasonable cost recovery. In October,1995, the FBI announced its first proposed surveillance capacity requirementsnotice, as required by CALEA. DPSWG members, in their comments on the FBI'snotice, all stressed the importance of public accountability and disclosureof the basis for the FBI's request. The Privacy Forum CDT's Privacy Forum is a consortium of public interest organizations andleading corporations working to identify ways to enhance privacy, individualchoice, and the free flow of information on the global information infrastructure(GII). The Forum's 1996/1997 mission is to identify existing policies andexplore the development of new policies that encourage technological developmentsthat advance privacy and facilitate the implementation of basic fair informationpractices on the Internet and other interactive communications media. Through a collaborative process of exploration and discussion, the Forumwill seek to educate its members and the public on the privacy landscapein interactive media. The Forum will begin by developing a record of existingpolicies and technological mechanisms that protect privacy and encourageindividual participation in new communications media. From this factualbasis, the Forum will seek to identify and develop model policies that importfair information practices applied in other media into the interactive world.Committed to the principle of extending fair information practices to interactivemedia, the Forum intends to explore how to apply traditional fair informationpractices in light of the unique characteristics of interactive communicationsmedia. The Privacy Forum's 1996 Activities: The focus of the Privacy Forum's 1996 activities is the privacy of transactionalinformation generated during users' interactions on the Internet and commercialonline services. A number of online service and content providers have begunto independently grapple with the privacy ramifications of online activities.However, transactional privacy has not been a key focus of attention forthe Internet as a whole. As the use of interactive communications technologiescontinues to expand, the need for coherent privacy policies and applicationsis becoming increasingly clear. Recognizing that uncertainty about the policies regarding the privacy ofpersonal information will undermine the public's desire to fully participatein social, political, and commercial activities online, the Privacy Forumis working to identify and address key transactional privacy issues. CDT seeks to advance individual privacy by encouraging the adoption of policiesthat enhance the capacity to exercise meaningful choice over the disclosureand use of personal information, and by collaborating with software developersand online services and content providers to explore the possibility ofdesigning and implementing technological mechanisms towards these ends.Through public education, policy expertise, and informed dialogue, CDT hopesto facilitate a public discussion towards creating a marketplace for privacyand individual choice online. The Forum is establishing a Steering Committee on Transactional Privacyto guide its work in this endeavor. Creating a Record of Privacy Policies and Promising Technologies:Foremost on the Forum's agenda is the creation of a factual, public recordon transactional information privacy. Before the Forum can develop strategiesfor advancing individual privacy and control over personal information,it must first educate its members and the public as to the existing privacypolicies, the technological capacity of the systems under consideration,and the strengths, weaknesses, and gaps of each. Privacy Policy Clearinghouse: CDT, on behalf of thePrivacy Forum, is soliciting privacy policies from: online service providers;commercial sites, political sites, non-profit sites and personal sites onthe World Wide Web; Usenet; private and public Internet providers; traditionaltelecommunications carriers; and cable companies. Analysis of State Activities: The Privacy Forum willwork closely with a leading expert in privacy issues and online activitiesto review and comment upon activities at the state level, including pendinglegislative proposals and regulatory activity. Analysis of the European Union's Data Protection Directive:The Forum, in collaboration with a leading privacy expert, will review theEuropean Union's Data Protection Directive and U.S. privacy laws to examinethe current policies and practices governing the generation, collection,and use of personal transactional information online. CDT is participatingwith Privacy & American Business' Global Privacy Policies Project tofoster the implementation of policies consistent with the recent mandateof the Directive. Technology Review: Through a series of technologydemonstrations, the Privacy Forum will create a record of existing technologicalmechanisms that encourage user control over the flow of information. Privacy Forum Compendium on Transactional Privacy:The Forum will publish the product of its public education efforts in acompendium on transactional privacy. The review will be made available inboth paper form and electronically via CDT's World Wide Web Privacy DemonstrationSite. Developing Models for Fair Information Practices in the OnlineEnvironment: Through an intensive and inclusive process of investigationand discussion, the Forum seeks to identify and develop model policies andtechnological mechanisms that translate fair information practices for theonline world. The Forum will use its Compendium on Transactional Privacyas the starting point. A series of public consultations, policy briefings,technology demonstrations and one-on-one meetings between CDT staff andForum members will inform the Forum's process. The proceedings of all Forumactivities will be summarized, annotated, and made publicly available asa single volume. Consultations: The Privacy Forum will hold threeconsultations in 1996 and 1997 on transactional privacy. Consultations willbe open to the public and effort will be made to attract a wide cross sectionof the public interest community, online service providers, software developers,and individuals who maintain sites on the World Wide Web. First Consultation: At its first consultation,to be held in April, 1996, the Forum will present the product of its searchfor existing privacy policies in interactive communications media. The Consultationwill be the focus of a productive, factually based discussion of existingpolicies. The goals of the Consultation will be to compare and contrastexisting policies, where possible to identify "best policies,"to create a record of significant gaps in approaches and policies, and todiscuss the strengths and weaknesses of existing policies. Second Consultation: The Forum's second consultationwill highlight policies that advance individual privacy, choice and thefree flow of information through technological mechanisms that take advantageof the unique characteristics of interactive media. Building upon the "bestpolicies" identified during the first consultation, the Forum willseek to establish Fair Information Models for use in the online environment.Two White Papers, one prepared by CDT in collaboration with the Institutefor Public Representation, and another by the Interactive Services Associationpresenting models for enhancing privacy and choice online, will serve asadditional background for the consultation. Third Consultation: The third consultation willfocus on implementation issues surrounding fair information practices andprivacy policies. The growing number of intermediaries and the distributednature of interactive communications media, raises new wrinkles for applyingfair information and privacy policies. For example, it is unclear who isresponsible for notifying a user of policies, how agreements are passedon to those involved in a transaction, and who is responsible for breachesof policy. The third consultation will seek to identify and explore theseissues. Technology Demonstrations and Briefings: Unique characteristicsof interactive communications media such as increased user control, real-timecommunication, and ease of individualizing systems, have the potential toenhance individual privacy through increased control over the disclosure,generation, collection and use of personal information. Through timely demonstrationsand briefings, the Forum will seek to keep its members and the public up-to-dateon new developments within the privacy field as well as those in other areasthat may be adapted to advance fair information practices and privacy. Public Education - Interactive World Wide Web Privacy Demonstration:CDT is creating a demonstration project to make visible the extent of personallyrevealing transactional information generated by individuals in the normalcourse of browsing CDT's site. The demonstration will serve to illustratethe extent of information that may be revealed to CDT, as well as thirdparties, and potential ways to facilitate individual control over the collectionof such information. Public Dialogue: CDT is continuing to engage in constructivedialogue with others interested in advancing privacy in interactive communicationsmedia. CDT is continuing to work closely with the Federal Trade Commissionon its Privacy Initiative and with the NTIA as it attempts to apply itsPrinciples for Providing and Using Personal Information to various sectors. Scholarship: CDT staff will complete and seek to publishan article on Privacy in the Interactive Age. The Privacy Forum's 1995 Transactional Privacy Activities The Forum's 1995 activities created a foundation on which to launcha collaborative dialogue between the public and private sector for exploringtransactional privacy issues in interactive media. On December 12,1995, the Forum held its first Policy and Technology Briefing to exploretransactional privacy issues. Participants in the December Briefingraised a number of critical points that will inform our future activities: Advances in technology increase the magnitude of risk to individualprivacy. Shabbir Safdar of Voters Telecommunications Watch, notedthat numerous entities touch information flowing between any two pointson the Internet and each entity has the potential ability to capture, storeand reuse transactional data. Questions regarding the generation, storage, and use of personaltransactional data. While there was consensus that the distinctionbetween the content of a communication and the transaction data generatedby that communication is blurring, the policy direction this observationtakes us in is unclear. One participant noted that the recently enactedCommunications Assistance for Law Enforcement Act (Pub. Law 103-414, October1994), with its increased legal barriers to government access to transactiondata, signals that the private sector's use of this data is likely to comeunder increased scrutiny. Private sector and non-profit users of the Internet sharea deep commitment to protecting privacy. Clear rules are seen asessential to building strong consumer trust and confidence. However, LinkHoewing, from Bell Atlantic, and others cautioned that privacy policiesalready in place in the telecommunications arena may not easily translateinto interactive environments, and that the fragmented, ad hoc policiesthat regulate various industries differently are raising sticky problemsas media applications continue to converge, blurring what were once meaningfuldistinctions. Executive branch and other activities are increasing the urgencywith which privacy issues posed by interactive media must be addressed.In 1995, the Federal Trade Commission launched a Privacy Initiative designedto protect consumers in the emerging high-tech, global marketplace; theNTIA released a report that concluded the private sector must implementprivacy standards or face a legislative mandate (the privacy equivalentof Senator Exon's online indecency bill); the European Union finalized itsdata protection directive which threatens to impede the flow of personalinformation across national borders if adequate privacy standards and enforcementmechanisms are not in place. Interactive media offer enormous potential to advance privacyinterests by empowering people to exert greater control over their personalinformation. As Jerry Berman of CDT pointed out, many of the recentlydeveloped filtering devices that enable individuals to control informationthey receive, offer a potentially powerful model for empowering users toexercise increased control over personal information they disclose. In thiscontext, privacy interests must develop consistent with the free flow ofinformation and other fundamental interests. Interactive Media can facilitate greater user control overpersonally identifiable information online. Echoing a recent NTIAreport, Janlori Goldman of CDT concluded that interactivity may make possiblegreater individual participation in personal information choices, howevera collaborative exploration of the full range of policy and technical optionsis needed to seek solutions. Re-examining Policies Underlying Disclosure of Personal Informationfrom Public Records: In 1995, CDT's Privacy Forum completed itsexamination of the existing policies underlying public records laws, culminatingin a full-day consultation attended by over 50 representatives from FirstAmendment and privacy organizations, and information, communications andcomputer industries. The increased ability to collect, store and transmitdata in digital media raise new wrinkles for rules governing public records.The consultation focused on the heightening tension between the privatesector's need for access to public records and the growing privacy concernsover disclosure of personal information in the interactive, digital, informationenvironment. A Forum-commissioned "white paper" served as thefoundation for the consultation. Digital Access Coalition CDT is launching the Digital Access Coalition (DAC) in order to promoteaffordable, nation-wide, high speed digital access to the Internet throughreasonable-priced ISDN service. The DAC will assemble a coalition of consumer,education and library groups, together with small business and high technologymarket leaders, to make the case for the necessity of rapid ISDN deploymentand feasibility of reasonable pricing structures. In recent years, ISDN has overcome its image as "too little, too late"because of the availability of affordable Terminal Adapters, the successof multimedia, PC-based computing, the World Wide Web, and the evident delaysin deploying true broadband services through either telecommunications orcable networks. Indeed, ISDN has the potential to succeed as a mass marketcommunications service that offers affordable access to multimedia applicationssuch as the World Wide Web, advanced commercial online services, and a rangeof video conferencing and telecommuting services. Such applications promisetremendous benefit for education, library and other community-based applications,and are certain to be a boon for small business in rural areas. Yet, ISDNtariffs around the country are either non-existent or priced prohibitivelyhigh. ISDN cannot bring benefits to the mass market if the service is pricedbeyond mass-market levels. Public/Private Coalition: The DAC plans to bring togetherall who stand to benefit from widely available, affordable ISDN servicein order to advocate for reasonably-priced offering. Such a coalition --including schools, libraries, small businesses, community economic developmentgroups, and large and small high-tech multimedia firms -- represent a powerfulforce for stating the need for ISDN. With strong ties to the consumer movementand the high technology sector, CDT is uniquely positioned to build sucha coalition. DAC Activities: With a commitment to pool resources fromkey DAC participants, the Working Group could commence work immediatelyon the following activities: Outreach: Invite interested parties from the publicand private sector to join the DAC efforts. Policy Paper and Model Tariff Development: The keystoneof the DAC's advocacy effort should be a policy paper presenting the casefor affordable ISDN and economic analyses that demonstrate that low-pricetariffs are economically reasonable. Such a paper will give DAC membersa common message and provide Public Service Commissions a rationale forprogressive tariffing decisions. Coordination with FCC ISDN Activities: The FederalCommunications Commission has shown a keen interest in promoting affordableISDN around the country. Thus, the DAC has an opportunity to work with theCommission to help promote ISDN awareness. Public Education: Promoting awareness of the valueof ISDN in the popular and trade press will be an essential component ofDAC activities. Consultation with Local Telephone Companies: At leastsome of the Regional Bell companies have a genuine interest in promotingISDN at mass market pricing. Moreover, these companies have expressed aninterest in developing consensus pricing approaches that satisfy the needsof consumers and avoid unproductive, costly regulatory battles. Track Record of the DAC and CDT: The DAC is a re-castingof the original Open Platform Working Group (OPWG), which first came together to promote affordable ISDNpricing in 1992. OPWG coalition efforts resulted in the Open Platform servicessector of the 1994 Telecommunications Reform bill, which empowered the FCCto promote and encourage reasonably priced ISDN service at the state level.CDT Executive Director Jerry Berman and Deputy Director Daniel Weitzner,both of whom were at the Electronic Frontier Foundation at the time, ledthe Open Platform effort both in the U.S. Congress, and in several statesthat now have reasonably priced ISDN service, such as Massachusetts, Tennesseeand California. World Internet Freedom Project CDT is launching the World Internet Freedom Project (WIF) in Spring 1996.The goal of the WIF is to establish awareness of the need for basic freeexpression and privacy rights for Internet users around the world. As theInternet grows, it has the potential to increase democratic political participation,as well as to bring the economic opportunities of the Information Age tocommunities around the world. Yet, neither the political nor economic potentialof the Internet will be realized unless basic free expression, free association,free flow of information, and privacy rights are established and protectedinternationally. In the last year alone, threats to free expression, free association, andbasic privacy of communications have mushroomed. Yet, there is no coordinatedinternational effort to enable individual rights advocates to mount a concertedresponse to these threats. WIF will be a clearinghouse and organizing basefor public education and coalition-building in support of the politicaland economic vitality of the Internet worldwide. The WIF will address the following critical issues: free expression andthe legal censorship regimes in individual countries as well as the impactof local censorship on the Internet as a whole; free association and anonymity;communications privacy and encryption; government interference with thedesign of telecommunications networks; the lack of uniform, internationalcommunications privacy protections; and cultural segregation that pose athreat to the free flow of information globally. Planning Phase: The planning phase for WIF is funded byan initial grant from the Soros Foundation. Through this phase, CDT willidentify partners around the world who are committed to advancing democraticvalues on the Internet. A small conference of key parties will be held inthe spring, 1996. From this conference, CDT will establish an internationaladvisory committee of activists and other leaders to guide the work of WIF. Full Scale Operation: CDT is currently seeking fundingfor the full scale operation of WIF that will include issue research, andinformation collection and dissemination. Towards this end, proposed legislation,relevant statutes, treaties, and other legal material would be made availableonline on the World Wide Web. CDT will establish the WIF as a liaison betweeninternational governments and non-governmental organizations. Further, theWIF will serve as a presence in international bodies, and engage in publiceducation efforts aimed at the international press. CDT Special Projects In addition to coordinating public policy working groups and advancing ourown positions on critical free speech and privacy issues, CDT conducts researchand advocacy on several other important civil liberties issues, including: Health Information Privacy: CDT is committed to enhancingand preserving information privacy during the transformation to a healthinformation infrastructure. CDT is working to ensure that strong, enforceableprivacy policy is in place to guide the design and implementation of healthinformation systems. National Policy: In October, 1995, Senators Bennett(R-UT) and Leahy (D-VT) introduced the Medical Records Confidentiality Act(S.1360). The introduction of S.1360, the strongest and most comprehensivehealth privacy legislation ever considered by Congress, is a key milestonein CDT's effort to press for a policy that protects the privacy of personalhealth information. In November, 1995, CDT testified in support of S.1360 before the SenateCommittee on Labor and Human Resources. The Senate plans to take actionon the bill in spring, 1996. CDT has been asked to testify in March, 1996on a similar House measure. A CDT-initiated working group of civil liberties and patients' rights groups,along with representatives of the health, information, and communications industry,will continue to press for the strongest, most effective health informationprivacy policy. Georgetown Law School's Federal Legislation Clinic is providingCDT with legal assistance in this activity. State Health Information Systems: CDT continues itshands-on involvement with a number of Community Health Information Systemssites (CHMIS). With the support of the Hartford Foundation and the Foundationfor Health Care Quality, CDT provides policy and technology expertise tothe CHMIS sites on privacy, confidentiality and security issues. The Center'swork with the CHMIS sites includes assisting state legislative efforts toprotect privacy, participating in policy discussions regarding access anduse of personal health information, and recommending appropriate policiesand technologies for health information systems. During 1996, CDT will completea "Privacy Manual" providing policy recommendations to the CHMISsites, and a set of educational materials designed to empower citizens tobetter protect the privacy of their health records for use by civil liberties,patients' rights, and consumer groups in grass-roots educational activities. Public Access to Government Information -- E-FOIA:CDT has been working with congressional staff, the Clinton Administration,press, and open government advocates to develop a revised version of theElectronic Freedom of Information Act amendments that passed the Senatein the 103rd Congress. Online Publications and Resources: Our very popularWeb site is a key spot on the Internet for information on civil libertiesin cyberspace (See URL:http://www.cdt.org). CDT's World Wide Web site wasrated among the top 5% of sites on the Web by Point Survey; "Best ofthe Web" by 2ask Survey; and received 3 out of 4 stars from NetGuideMagazine. The site is widely recognized as the leading source for informationon public policy issues affecting civil liberties online. In addition, ourregular online publication, the CDT Policy Post, has a direct circulationof 9,000, and is read by thousands more on Usenet newsgroups and our onlinearchives. The Center Staff Jerry Berman, Executive Director <jberman@cdt.org> Mr. Berman has extensive experience working on civil liberties and technologypolicy issues. Prior to CDT, Berman was the Executive Director and PolicyDirector at the Electronic Frontier Foundation. He came to EFF from theACLU in 1990 where he was Chief Legislative Counsel and Director of theACLU Information Technology Project. Mr. Berman has led coalitions to draftand enact such legislation as the Foreign Intelligence Surveillance Actof 1978; the Electronic Communications Privacy Act of 1986; the ComputerSecurity Act of 1987; the Video Privacy Protection Act of 1988; and theprivacy protections contained in the Communications Assistance for Law EnforcementAct of 1994. Janlori Goldman, Deputy Director <jlg@cdt.org> Ms. Goldman focuses on information privacy and new technologies. She headedthe American Civil Liberties Union's Privacy and Technology Project untiljoining the Electronic Frontier Foundation in 1994. While at the ACLU, Ms.Goldman led the effort to enact the Video Privacy Protection Act and wasinvolved in efforts to protect personal health, credit and financial information,and personal information held by the government. Daniel J. Weitzner, Deputy Director <djw@cdt.org> Mr. Weitzner is responsible for telecommunications infrastructure policyand communications privacy issues. He has drafted Open Platform networkaccess policies and developed the rationale for the expanded privacy protectionsfor email transactional information enacted by the Congress last year. Beforejoining CDT, Mr. Weitzner was Deputy Policy Director at the Electronic FrontierFoundation. Deirdre Mulligan, Staff Counsel <deirdre@cdt.org> Ms. Mulligan is currently working to ensure the privacy, confidentialityand security of personally identifiable information in automated healthcare information systems. Prior to joining CDT, Ms. Mulligan worked on informationprivacy issues in emerging technologies at the Electronic Frontier Foundationand the American Civil Liberties Union. Alan Davidson, Staff Counsel <abd@cdt.org> Mr. Davidson joins CDT this fall from Yale Law School, and will be coordinatingthe Center's efforts to develop a new national cryptography policy. Mr.Davidson was a consultant with Booz-Allen & Hamilton prior to returningto graduate school, and has also worked on technology and public policyissues at the Office of Technology Assessment and the White House Officeof Policy Development. Jonah Seiger, Policy Analyst <jseiger@cdt.org> Mr. Seiger performs research and analysis on telecommunications infrastructureand communications privacy issues, with a focus on network access and encryption.Mr. Seiger is also responsible for coordinating CDT's policy working groupson Digital Privacy and Interactive Media, and has pioneered the use of theInternet as a means of grass-roots organizing and public education. Priorto joining CDT, Mr. Seiger was Project Coordinator at the Electronic FrontierFoundation, and also worked for Rep. Edward Markey with the House TelecommunicationsSubcommittee. Bob Palacios, Online Organizer/Sysop <bobpal@cdt.org> Mr. Palacios is CDT's online organizer and is responsible for maintainingthe Web and FTP servers. Mr. Palacios is working to cultivate new outlets forCDT on the Internet and develop relationships with other friendly untappedonline organizations and individuals. Previously, Mr. Palacios worked forPeople For the American Way and the Democratic Leadership Council. Danielle Kolb, Executive Manager <dkolb@cdt.org> Ms. Kolb is responsible for the day to day operations of the CDT office.She also assists staff members with their various activities. Ms. Kolb previouslysupervised Patient Registration at Wyoming Medical Center in Casper, Wyoming. Back to the CDT Publications Page Back to the CDT Home Page Posted on June 19, 1996 || For more information, contact webmaster@cdt.org WT02-B05-57IA095-001027-B012-75http://www.cdt.org:80/publications/annuals/cdtovrvw.html 205.177.10.31 19970215011955 text/html 17088HTTP/1.0 200 OKDate: Sat, 15 Feb 1997 01:18:38 GMTServer: Apache/1.1.1Content-type: text/html CDT Overview Democratic Values for a Digital Age 1995 Activities of the Center for Democracy and Technology February 1995 I. Overview The Center for Democracy and Technology is an independent, non-profitpublic interest policy organization in Washington, DC. The Center'smission is to develop and implement public policies to protectand advance individual liberty and democratic values in new digitalmedia. The Center achieves its goals through policy development,public education, and coalition building. With the rapid growth of new media including the Internet, interactivetelevision networks and multimedia information services, manyproponents emphasize their potential to increase entertainment,commerce, and education. Pundits and policy makers also assureus that free speech and privacy will be preserved and our democraticinstitutions strengthened by new communication opportunities.But little actual attention is devoted to assuring that democracyand constitutional values are protected and enhanced by digitalmedia. The Center for Democracy and Technology has been founded to advancethese values in the public policy debates over the evolving communicationsinfrastructure. The Center will strive to achieve its goals byworking with public interest groups, the communications and computerindustry, and policy makers of all political persuasions to buildcoalitions in support of practical policies and solutions . TheCenter, founded by Jerry Berman, Janlori Goldman, and Daniel Weitzner,marshals legal, technical, and public policy expertise on behalfof civil liberties goals, including: Maximizing free speech and the free flow of information inon-line and interactive media: Interactive media, unlike mass media, feature abundant bandwidth,diverse programming, and increased control by users over programmingthey receive and information with which they interact. Thesecharacteristics of new media increasingly undermine past rationalesand future effectiveness of government speech content restrictionswhich have dominated the mass media. Interactive media requiresalternative, less intrusive, means-often relying on technologyrather than content regulation-for achieving public ends. Critical Free Speech Issues in 1995: Exon Amendment: extending indecency liability to all onlineservices; Third Party liability for intellectual property infringement. The Center will oppose government efforts to impose limits onfree speech in interactive information services and work withthe private sector and policy makers to investigate and developalternative policy and technology options which meet legitimategovernment objectives without limiting constitutionally protectedfree speech or stultifying the potential of new media to maximizecontent diversity. Giving citizens more control over sensitive personal information: The Center believes that the use of personal information aboutcitizens to conduct transactions in electronic media pose threatsto individual privacy. At the same time, new technology mayhelp citizens better control the use of information about themselves. The Center will work with privacy advocates, the business and communications industry, and public policy makers to developself regulatory and public policy solutions to strengthen fairinformation practices and explore ways in which interactive technologiescan increase citizen control over the use of personal informationheld by government and other third party institutions. Critical Information Privacy Issues in 1995 Access to public records;\Health information privacy; Online service transactional records access. Protecting communications privacy in a global network environment: Enhancing communications privacy in digital environments With increased reliance on digital communications for sensitivepersonal, political, and financial information, the Center believesthat the law must be constantly updated to protect communicationsprivacy. But laws are not enough. The availability of privacy-protectingtechnology is critical to enable individuals and institutionsto protect their privacy. The Center will work to assure thatthere is broad access to encryption technology, and will continueto insure that the privacy of personal communications are legallyprotected from unauthorized access. Critical Digital Privacy Issues in 1995: Encryption export controls; Digital Telephony bill implementation before the FCC; Clipper alternatives and private key escrow proposals. Guaranteeing public access to electronic government information: New computer and communication technologies can enhance publicaccess to government information. However, the Freedom of InformationAct, the Paperwork Reduction Act, and other access statutes predatethe PC revolution. The Center will work to reform these laws toexpand the public's right to know in the digital age. Critical Information Access Issues in 1995: Electronic Freedom of Information Act amendments (EFOIA); Paperwork Reduction Act amendments. Identifying network architecture that serve democratic values: The national and international information infrastructure isgrowing rapidly, but is still in very early stages of deployment.The Center believes that the design choices made now will havea critical impact on the free speech, access, and privacy. TheCenter will monitor technology trends to identify network developmentswhich contribute to universal digital access and other democraticgoals. II. Summary of 1995 Activities The Center for Democracy and Technology plans to work on privacy,security, free speech, access to public information, and opennetwork issues by conducting the following projects. A. Protecting Communications Privacy: The Digital Privacy and Security Working Group Project The Center will coordinate the Digital Privacy and Security WorkingGroup (DPSWG), a coalition of over 50 computer, communications,and civil liberties organizations and associations working oncommunications privacy and security issues. The Center, on its own and through the DPSWG, will vigorouslymonitor the implementation of the newly enacted Digital TelephonyStatute, "The Communications Assistance for Law EnforcementAct of 1994." The law contains procedures that permit privacyorganizations and industry to intervene at the FCC with respectto standards setting, cost reimbursement, and privacy protectionissues. The Center will work to insure that the spirit and intentof the bill are adhered to and use every opportunity to enforcepublic accountability by requiring the government to reimburseindustry for the cost of meeting statutory wiretap capabilityand capacity requirements. In addition, the Center will continue to oppose mandatory governmentescrowed encryption. Despite the recently announced reexaminationof policy, the Clinton Administration has made it clear that itintends to pursue government escrowed encryption, rigid, secretnational cryptography standards, and ongoing export controls onencryption which pose significant impediments to privacy and innovationin digital media. The Center and the DPSWG will form a task forceto study and report on the privacy and security implications ofpublic key private, non-governmental escrow systems. In its effort to end export controls on cryptography, the Centerwill state its views in the context of the National Research Council'sstudy. The Center will present its input through briefings, presentations,consultations, and testimony at regional public hearings. TheCenter will also work with DPSWG members to educate the new Congresson these critical security and privacy issues. B. Safeguarding Personal Information in the Digital Age: ThePrivacy Forum Project The Center will conduct an ongoing Privacy Forum to serve as acommon meeting ground for public interest groups and businessorganizations who want to explore policy options for resolvingtransactional and database privacy issues posed by new technologies. The Forum will bring together key privacy, consumer and businessinterests on an on-going basis to explore issues based on a mutualcommitment to find solutions that strike a balance between privacyand fair information practices and other important public interests,including: access to public information; free speech and the free flow of information; maximizing consumer choice; fostering business innovation in the information economy,and; the development of a multimedia information superhighway. The Privacy Forum's agenda includes studying ways to balance thecompeting privacy, First Amendment and economic interests posed by recent initiatives to restrict access to and use of publicrecords such as motor vehicle registrations, voting records, andreal estate transactions. The Privacy Forum will also identify problems and solutions regardingthe privacy of transactional information created and used in theconduct of electronic commerce, politics, and entertainment overtelephone, cable, and wireless networks. The Privacy Forum will also work with the online service providers,including America Online, Compuserve, Delphi, Ziff-Davis Interactive,Interchange Online Network, civil liberties groups, and privacyexperts to develop model self-regulatory consumer privacy policiesfor interactive services. The issues will be developed throughresearch and explored in depth at an all day consultation in the fall of 1995. The Privacy Forum will also explore new technology driven meansfor enforcing and abiding by fair information practices. TheForum will meet to discuss how interactive technology can givecitizens new means for "filtering" or "opting out"and correcting, which at the same time providing businesses withmore accurate and relevant information about who wants to receivespecific products and services.In addition to the Privacy Forum,the Center will continue its work on Health Care Privacy Reformsponsored by the Hartford Foundation. C. Protecting Free Speech: The Interactive Working Group Project The Center will organize and coordinate the work of the InteractiveWorking Group in 1995. The IWG is a Center effort to bring togethermajor on-line service providers (America On-line, Compuserve,AT&T Interactive, Delphi, Prodigy), new entrants into interactiveservices such as telephone and cable companies, and public interestgroups to work together to develop policies and guidelines designedto maximize First Amendment values, privacy, commerce, and innovation rapidly developing interactive on-line media. The introduction of legislation by Senators Exon and Conrad andothers to limit indecent and violent programming in interactiveand cable networks underscore the importance of establishing aworking group to explore alternatives and less intrusive meansfor achieving public ends without violating free speech. The Center, working with the IWG, will prepare a white paper,conduct meetings and conferences, and engage in public educationon behalf of the IWG, to lay the groundwork for an alternativeto content restrictions in new interactive media. The white paperwill: explain that interactive media, as contrasted with traditionalbroadcast media, will be characterized by an abundance of contentcarried over potentially unlimited numbers of communications paths; demonstrate that traditional content restrictions, designedto be enforced by network content providers, are going to be difficultif not impossible to police or make effective without severelyrestricting the free flow of information; show the ability and potential of the new interactive mediato increase user (especially parental) control over the contentof media received into the home; and advocate that rather than the government enforcing communitystandards, each citizen should be afforded the opportunity andability to choose or self-select programming consistent with theirown particularized community standards and values. The Center and the IWG will outline a regulatory model for non-massmedia interactive services which (a) permits interactive serviceproviders to transmit, without liability, all lawful content,commercial or non-commercial, provided that they (b) clearlyidentify the nature of the programming (adult, tobacco sponsored,general viewing, etc.) and provide subscribers user-friendlymeans for making viewer choices for themselves and their children. D. Expanding the Public Right to Know: The Electronic PublicInformation Project This year Congress will again take up legislation to establisha right of access to the electronic version of public informationby amending the Freedom of Information Act. Congress will alsoconsider amendments to the Paperwork Reduction Act, which hasimportant implications for governmental dissemination obligations,and the balance between reliance on public, versus private accessoptions. The Center, together with public interest groups, the informationindustry, and press organizations, will work to expand publicaccess to electronic government information. E. Open Networks: Network Architecture and Democracy StudyProject. As the public policy debate about the National Information Infrastructurecontinues, the Center, working with non-profits, and others whoshare free speech and diversity goals, will strive to expand andenlighten the debate over the relationship between various networkarchitecture options and democratic values. The Center believesthere is a critical need for independent research and analysiswhich reflects on the health, vitality, and growth of networks.Critical technology options are often overlooked by both policymakers and public interest organizations because the sources oftechnical information are generally limited to the very networkowners and operators who are the subject of any given policy debate. If the NII is to be a true open platform, public policy mustbe guided by independent technology assessment undertaken withopen network goals in mind. The Center's Network Architecture and Democracy Study Project will track and analyze technology and market trends in the growthnetworks. The Center study will be undertaken in consultationwith public interest organizations such as the Benton Foundation,the Consumer Federation of America, People for the American Way,the American Civil Liberties Union, and the Progress and FreedomFoundation. The Project will strive to facilitate a dialogue betweenthe public interest community, the communications and computerindustry, and policy makers on open network goals. When the 104th Congress consider telecommunications legislation,the Center will be at the core of the debate over the public interestin the development of the Information Infrastructure. Centerstaff, all of whom have had substantial involvement in the telecommunicationsdebate over the last several years, will monitor the legislativedevelopments to assure that the following values are served: Affordable access to high-speed, switched, digital servicesavailable at nondiscriminatory rates and terms; Nationwide access to interconnected network services for ruraland urban areas alike. The Center will also work with other public interest organizationsand industry groups to identify options for insuring continuedaccess to non-commercial programming and information sources. III. Funding The Center is a 501(3) (application pending) organizationand receives funding from individuals, foundations, and a representativecross-section of the communications and computer industry. Return to the CDT Home Page. Last Updated 03/08/95 | For More Information Write webmaster@cdt.org WT02-B05-58IA095-001027-B012-96http://www.cdt.org:80/homes/jberman.html 205.177.10.31 19970215012048 text/html 3164HTTP/1.0 200 OKDate: Sat, 15 Feb 1997 01:19:14 GMTServer: Apache/1.1.1Content-type: text/html Jerry Berman, CDT Executive Director Jerry Berman, CDT Executive Director jberman@cdt.org Jerry Berman is the Executive Director of the Center for Democracy and Technology (CDT) in Washington, DC. CDT is an independent, non-profit public interest policy organization whose mission is to develop and implement public policies to protect and advance individual liberty and democratic values in new digital media. The Center achieves its goals through policy development, public education, and coalition building. The Center, founded by Jerry Berman, Janlori Goldman, and Daniel Weitzner in December 1994, marshals legal, technical, and public policy expertise on behalf of civil liberties goals, including: protecting free speech and the free flow of information in on-line and interactive media; increasing citizen control over sensitive personal information held by third parties; securing communications privacy in a global network environment; guaranteeing public access to electronic government information; and working for network architecture policies that serve universal access and other democratic values. Mr. Berman coordinates the Digital Privacy and Security Working Group comprised of over fifty communications firms, associations and civil liberties groups addressing communications privacy policy issues. The group works on such issues as the Administration's "Clipper Chip" key escrow encryption scheme and monitors the implementation of the recently passed Digital Telephony legislation. Mr. Berman also coordinates the Interactive Working Group, an ad-hoc of public interest groups, online information service companies, telephone and cable companies and broadcasters working on free speech and content regulation issues confronting interactive media today. Prior to founding the Center for Democracy and Technology, Mr. Berman was the Policy Director at the Electronic Frontier Foundation. Until 1988, Mr. Berman was Chief Legislative Counsel at the ACLU and founder and director of ACLU Projects on Privacy and Information Technology. Mr. Berman has led coalitions to draft and enact such legislation as the Foreign Intelligence Surveillance Act of 1978; the Electronic Communications Privacy Act of 1986; the Computer Security Act of 1987 the Video Privacy Protection Act of 1988; and the privacy protections in the Communications Assistance for Law Enforcement Act of 1994. He has written in both scholarly and popular journals on privacy, free speech, and information access issues. Mr. Berman received his BA, MA, and LLB at the University of California, Berkeley. He graduated with honors, was elected to Phi Beta Kappa and served as an editor of the California Law Review at Boalt Law School. Return to the CDT Staff Index Page Return to the CDT Home PageWT02-B05-59IA095-001027-B012-109http://www.cdt.org:80/homes/djw.html 205.177.10.31 19970215012101 text/html 2405HTTP/1.0 200 OKDate: Sat, 15 Feb 1997 01:19:46 GMTServer: Apache/1.1.1Content-type: text/html CDT | Daniel Weitzner, Deputy Director Daniel Weitzner, Deputy Director djw@cdt.org Daniel Weitzner is Deputy Director of the Center for Democracy and Technology. His chief areas of responsibility include advocacy and research on the policies related to the Internet, the public telephone network, cable television and wireless services. He concentrates on civil liberties issues including: application of First Amendment free speech and free pressprotections to the Internet and other interactive communications media; structuring open access, open architecture regimes for advanced,communications networks, and; privacy concerns raised by new digital technologies. Mr. Weitzner was one of the principle drafters of amendments to the Electronic Communications Privacy Act that created expanded privacy protections for email transactional information. He regularly appears before state public utility commissions, state legislatures on multimedia policy issues and lectures widely on the impact of new media on law and democratic values. He is a participant in the American Bar Association Task Force on Electronic Surveillance Standards and the Public Policy Co-Chair of the Platform for Internet Content Selection, a cross-industry standards body coordinated by the World Wide Web Consortium at the Massachussets Institute of Technology. Before founding the Center, Mr. Weitzner was the Deputy Policy Director of the Electronic Frontier Foundation. Mr. Weitzner has a degree in law from Buffalo Law School, and a BA inPhilosophy from Swarthmore College. His publications on communications policy have appeared in the Yale LawReview, Global Networks, MIT Press, Computerworld, Electronic Networking:Research, Applications & Policy, and The Whole Earth Review. Return to the CDT Staff Index Page Return to the CDT Home Page Last updated September 30, 1996WT02-B05-60IA095-001027-B012-121http://www.cdt.org:80/homes/jdempsey.html 205.177.10.31 19970215012109 text/html 738HTTP/1.0 200 OKDate: Sat, 15 Feb 1997 01:19:53 GMTServer: Apache/1.1.1Content-type: text/html Jim Dempsey, CDT Senior Staff Counsel Jim Dempsey, Senior Staff Counsel jdempsey@cdt.org Biography to be updated soon. Please come back. Return to the Staff Index Page CDT Home Page Updated on January 31, 1997 || For more information, contact webmaster@cdt.orgWT02-B05-61IA095-001027-B012-136http://www.cdt.org:80/homes/deirdre.html 205.177.10.31 19970215012119 text/html 1772HTTP/1.0 200 OKDate: Sat, 15 Feb 1997 01:20:03 GMTServer: Apache/1.1.1Content-type: text/html Deirdre Mulligan, Staff Counsel Deirdre K. Mulligan, Staff Counsel deirdre@cdt.org Deirdre's work focuses on developing legal and technological means to increase individual control over personal information held by commercial and governmental parties. She works on a wide range of increasingly important topics, such as national ID card schemes, and the privacy of health care information. In addition, Deirdre is currently examining the privacy, confidentiality and security needs of automated health care information systems under development across the country. Prior to the formation of CDT Deirdre worked at the Electronic Frontier Foundation's Privacy & Technology project. While attending Georgetown University Law School, Deirdre worked part-time at the American Civil Liberties Union's Privacy & Technology Project. At the ACLU Deirdre worked with Janlori Goldman, a Deputy Director of CDT, on a variety of issues including caller ID, access to credit records and the FBI's National Crime Information Center. In addition, Deirdre worked at the Washington Lawyer's Committee for Civil Rights and the law firm of Miller & Chevalier. Prior to attending law school Deirdre worked for Arnold & Porter as a legal assistant, taught, and coached soccer. Deirdre graduated from Smith College in 1988, where she studied architecture and art history. She is an avid soccer player. Return to the CDT Staff Index Page Return to the CDT Home PageWT02-B05-62IA095-001027-B012-144http://www.cdt.org:80/homes/abd.html 205.177.10.31 19970215012128 text/html 1970HTTP/1.0 200 OKDate: Sat, 15 Feb 1997 01:20:12 GMTServer: Apache/1.1.1Content-type: text/html Alan Davidson, Staff Counsel Alan Davidson, Staff Counsel abd@cdt.org Alan joined CDT this past fall as Staff Counsel and is leading the Center's efforts to develop a more comprehensive approach to national encryption policy. He also works more broadly on issues relating to privacy and free speech on the Internet. Alan was a computer scientist in his previous incarnation before the law. His earliest hacker credentials came as the proud owner of a Commodore PET in the late 1970s. After graduating from MIT with a degree in Mathematics and Computer Science, Alan served as a consultant on the design of the computer systems for NASA's Space Station Freedom Project. Alan returned to MIT and received an M.S. in Technology and Policy. Alan went on to work on technology and policy issues at the U.S. Congress Office of Technology Assessment and for the White House Office of Policy Development Health Care Task Force. Alan attended law school at Yale, where he was Symposium Editor of the Yale Law Journal. His more enduring legacy is as a co-founder of "TechLaw," the Yale Law and Technology Association, and also as a co-founder and the first Business Manager of "Collateral Espresso," the Yale Law School student coffeehouse. Mr. Davidson remains active in MIT alumni affairs, and currently serves as a Trustee of the Massachussetts Institute of Technology Corporation. He also enjoys backpacking, skiing, and is currently attempting to learn to play the guitar. Return to the CDT Staff Index Page Return to the CDT Home Page Last Update 04/24/96 | For more information write webmaster@cdt.orgWT02-B05-63IA095-001027-B012-203http://www.cdt.org:80/homes/jseiger/ 205.177.10.31 19970215012205 text/html 6641HTTP/1.0 200 OKDate: Sat, 15 Feb 1997 01:20:45 GMTServer: Apache/1.1.1Content-type: text/html Jonah's Page Jonah Seiger, Policy Analyst jseiger@cdt.org The Daily Feed My Bio As Policy Analyst for the Center for Democracy and Technology, Mr. Seiger performs research and analysis on telecommunications infrastructure and communications privacy issues. Current issues include Congressional efforts to regulate content on the Internet (the Exon/Coats CDA and other proposals), cryptography policy, and the implementation of the 'Digital Telephony" legislation. Mr. Seiger also works with Congressional Staff and Industry representatives to develop alternative policies for the Internet which maximize freedom of expression and privacy. As CDT's online organizer, Mr. Seiger has pioneered the use of the Internet as a means of grass-roots organizing and public education. In June of 1996, Mr. Seiger worked with Senator Burns to put the first Congressional Hearing on the Internet. Mr. Seiger has played a key role in organizing several high profile online demonstrations, including an online petition which generated over 115,000 signatures in opposition to the Exon Communications Decency Act, and a "National Day of Protest" which generated over 20,000 phone calls, faxes and email messages to members of Congress on December 12, 1995, and the "Black Thursday Protest" in which over 2000 World Wide Web sites went black to protest the enactment of the CDA. Mr. Seiger also writes and edits CDT Policy Posts, the Center's online newsletter. Mr. Seiger's publications have appeared in Wired Magazine, Communications of the ACM, Security Management, and others. Prior to joining CDT, Mr. Seiger was Project Coordinator at the Electronic Frontier Foundation , and also worked with Representative Edward Markey at the House Telecommunications Subcommittee. Mr. Seiger is a native of Palo Alto California, and holds a B.A. in Psychology and Studies in Religion from the University of Michigan, Ann Arbor. And, in case you want to see what I look like (since you are all dying to...) A recent picture of me and my cousin Michael Zapruder Me (in my hairer days) and 2 of my friends Me w/Congressman Markey When I am not working (when is that again?) I spend a lot of my free time reading, playing the guitar, listening to music,and surfing the net. These are some of my more favorite destiniations: Music Sites The Phish.net Home Page A transcription of one of my favorite Phish tunes I wrote up a few years ago The Grateful Dead For you real Dead freaks, here's another GD page The Dave Matthews Band Page The God Street Wine Web The Ultimate Band List If you don't like my taste in music, you can find your favorite band here. Rate your favorite music and learn about new bands! Other Cool Places to Go: The Naked Dancing Llama Page Advice from the Great Sage Llama. As he says, "I am cheaper than psychotherapy. I also lick people's faces." An award I will NEVER win! My High School even has it's own website.Since it's in the heart of Silicon Valley, I guess it's fitting. EMILY's List The most effectivegrass roots political organization around (and workplace of my signifant other) Cool Site of the Day A great starting point for net surfing. CQ's American Voter Page. One of the better political sites on the Web. The story of Jonah and the Whale (I couldn't resist this ) The HotWired Netizen Page. Rants from my favorite Net-personality Brock Meeks on the 96 presidential campaign and anything else that comes to his mixed up mind. The Star Wars Homepage Good clean science fiction fun from the days of my youth. The Exon Amendment Fan Page The Amazing Fish Cam! The Bevis & Butthead Movie Page What can I say? They're funny. The Cyrano Server Compose a love letter to your love (its not quite as much fun now that they removed the send function, but worth a visit). The FBI Home Page They are watching you, might as well watch them back. Declassified US Government Satellite Photos See if you can find your house. Check out the recent article I co-wrote for Wired Magazine Last Update 12/12/96 Return to the CDT Staff Index Page Return to the CDT Home PageWT02-B05-64IA095-001027-B012-230http://www.cdt.org:80/homes/bobpal/ 205.177.10.31 19970215012220 text/html 3084HTTP/1.0 200 OKDate: Sat, 15 Feb 1997 01:21:02 GMTServer: Apache/1.1.1Content-type: text/html Bob Palacios, Online Organizer/Sysop Bob Palacios, Online Organizer/Sysop bobpal@cdt.org My Bio I joined CDT in February 1996 to help manage CDT's online presence, and maintain the Web and FTP servers. I will be cultivating new outlets for CDT on the net, as well as developing relationships with other friendly untapped online organizations and individuals. In addition, I will be writing and editing CDT Policy Posts, as well as managing and maintaining CDT's LAN and computers. I'll be working closely with Jonah Seiger as he focuses on the strategic and tactical issues of our net.campaigns. Previously, I have worked at People For the American Way and the Democratic Leadership Council. Currently I'm a student at the Graduate School of Political Management at The George Washington University. I'm a native of San Antonio, TX, and I have a B.A. in Government from The University of Texas at Austin. I'm looking forward to interacting with many of you who work on (or who are interested in working on) our issues. Bob's Fun Links When I'm not at CDT, my main interests are music, politics, and sports (not necessarily in that order. . .) San Antonio Spurs Home Court - my favorite pro sports team -- GO SPURS! Pet Shop Boys: Virtually - my favorite music group; one of several web sites focusing on the Boys. San Antonio Express-News - my hometown newspaper. ESPNET SportsZone - great sports news and a cool web site! A Political Internet Tour that I created in June 1996 for a class at the Graduate School of Political Management at the George Washington University. Return to the CDT Staff Index Page Return to the CDT Home Page Last Update 07/31/96 | For more information write bobpal@cdt.orgWT02-B05-65IA095-001027-B012-256http://www.cdt.org:80/homes/dkolb.html 205.177.10.31 19970215012330 text/html 790HTTP/1.0 200 OKDate: Sat, 15 Feb 1997 01:21:49 GMTServer: Apache/1.1.1Content-type: text/html Danielle Kolb, Office Administrator Danielle Kolb, Office Administrator dkolb@cdt.org Danielle is responsible for the day to day operations of the CDT office. She also assists staff members with their various activities. Danielle previously supervised Patient Registration at Wyoming Medical Center in Casper, Wyoming. Return to the CDT Staff Index Page Return to the CDT Home Page Last Update 02/29/96 | For more information write webmaster@cdt.orgWT02-B05-66IA095-001027-B012-271http://www.cdt.org:80/homes/ginny.html 205.177.10.31 19970215012338 text/html 1029HTTP/1.0 200 OKDate: Sat, 15 Feb 1997 01:22:22 GMTServer: Apache/1.1.1Content-type: text/html Virginia Green, Receptionist Virginia Green, Receptionist ginny@cdt.org Ginny is CDT's receptionist and is responsible for the daily communication of our staff and the outside world, and a variety of other tasks. She was born and raised in Washington, DC. She was previously employed with Temporary Resources, working at various sites in the DC area -- ADT Security, Xerox Corporation, George Washington Hospital, the Justice Department, and various law firms. She gives thanks everyday for working with a fantastic group of people. Return to the CDT Staff Index Page Return to the CDT Home Page Last Update 02/29/96 | For more information write webmaster@cdt.orgWT02-B05-67IA095-001027-B012-281http://www.cdt.org:80/homes/jlg.html 205.177.10.31 19970215012345 text/html 1591HTTP/1.0 200 OKDate: Sat, 15 Feb 1997 01:22:30 GMTServer: Apache/1.1.1Content-type: text/html Janlori Goldman, Deputy Director Janlori Goldman, Deputy Director jlg@cdt.org Janlori Goldman is Deputy Director and co-founder of the Center for Democracy and Technology (CDT), a not-for-profit, public interest organization in Washington, D.C. The Center's mission is to develop and advocate public policies that advance constitutional civil liberties and democratic values in new computer and communications technologies. Prior to founding the Center for Democracy and Technology, Ms. Goldman was at the Electronic Frontier Foundation, and from 1986 to 1994 she was Staff Counsel and Director of the Privacy and Technology Project of the American Civil Liberties Union. Ms. Goldman led a coalition to draft and enact the Video Privacy Protection Act of 1988. She worked to strengthen the federal Privacy Act through the passage of the Computer Matching and Privacy Protection Act. She has led efforts to strengthen privacy policies related to medical, credit and financial records. She has testified frequently before the U.S. Congress, served on numerous panels and advisory boards, and was recently a staff member to the Clinton Administration's National Information Infrastructure Advisory Council. Return to the Staff Index Page Return to the CDT Home PageWT02-B05-68IA095-001027-B012-304http://www.cdt.org:80/homes/tklancer.html 205.177.10.31 19970215012402 text/html 2985HTTP/1.0 200 OKDate: Sat, 15 Feb 1997 01:22:46 GMTServer: Apache/1.1.1Content-type: text/html Brought to you by the letter 'R-r-r-r' Tom Klancer, Intern Extraordinare My personal homepage is really a lot better and a lot more interesting, not to mention better designed and ... My Bio (The Boring Stuff) : I am a 19 year old Sophmore Computer Science major at the University of Maryland. Pink Floyd and Rush and The Freddy Jones Band (Check them out, they're really cool and don't get the adulation they deserve) are a few of my favorite bands. Lately I've been getting into soccer - the Metrostars and Major League Soccer. I'm from East Brunswick, NJ (hence the Metrostars interest) and went to EBHS. I'm a Mac geek and am Secretary of the new Mac User Group on campus, TerpMUG. But, this is all moot because you're going to check out my regular page, right? What I'm doing @ the CDT : My job as an intern is currently to find a good way for the CDT to analyze the effectiveness of their web presence. Basically it comes down to analyzing web logs :). I suspect that I shall be doing more shortly... Contacting me : You can contact me at : tklancer@wam.umd.edu Or tklancer@cdt.org Or tklancer@glue.umd.edu Anything you want to write, go right ahead... Back to the CDT page. Created 10/13/96 Last updated 10/13/96 9:55 PM WT02-B05-69IA095-001027-B012-314http://www.cdt.org:80/party.html 205.177.10.31 19970215012410 text/html 1682HTTP/1.0 200 OKDate: Sat, 15 Feb 1997 01:22:53 GMTServer: Apache/1.1.1Content-type: text/html Celebrating the Formation of CDT -- April 26, 1995 The Guests of Honor: -- Congressman Don Edwards (Ret.) (2nd from left) and Senator Patrick Leahy (middle), with CDT Deputy Director Daniel Weitzner, CDT Executive Director Jerry Berman, and CDT Deputy Director Janlori Goldman Celebrating the Formation of CDT The Center for Democracy and Technology was born over hot soup and dumplings at Eat First, a hole-in-the-wall chinese resturant in DC's Chinatown. When it came time to have a party to celebrate the formation of the organization, we couldn't think of a better place. So on April 26, 1995 CDT invited Senator Leahy, Congressman Don Edwards, and 100 of our closest friends and colleagues to eat, drink, and enjoy the place where we were born. Senator Patrick Leahy holding a CDT brochure Congressman Don Edwards and Senator Leahy CDT Executive Director Jerry Berman and Bruce Cohen enjoy a laugh CDT Policy Analyst Jonah Seiger loads up at the buffet CDT Staff Counsel Deirdre Mulligan works the room Return to the CDT Home Page Return to the CDT Staff IndexWT02-B05-70IA095-001027-B012-329http://www.cdt.org:80/crypto/index.html 205.177.10.31 19970215012420 text/html 7640HTTP/1.0 200 OKDate: Sat, 15 Feb 1997 01:23:03 GMTServer: Apache/1.1.1Content-type: text/html CDT | Cryptography Policy Issues Page CDT Cryptography Policy Issues Page Why Should I Care About The Cryptography Policy Debate? Cryptography products are the locks and keys of the Information Age, enabling individuals and businesses to protect sensitive information as it is transmitted over the Internet. The ability to protect and secure information is vital to the growth of electronic commerce and to the growth of the Internet itself. HEADLINES Rep. Goodlatte Reintroduces "SAFE" Crypto Bill [February 13, 1997] Senators Burns, Leahy, Wyden and Others to Re-Introduce Pro-CODE Crypto Bill [February 2, 1997] Circuit Court Hears Challenge to Crypto Regulations [January 9, 1997] New Commerce Department Crypto Rules Spell Trouble For Privacy [January 9, 1997] Leading Software Companies Frustrated with Administration Encryption Plan Court Decision Challenges Constitutionality of Crypto Export Controls [December 18, 1996] Join Jim Barksdale and Many Others in Signing the Petition to Protect Privacy and Security Online Legislative Efforts to Bring Privacy and Security to the Net 105th Congress: 1997 "Pro-CODE" Bill [Not formally introduced] H.R. 695, the "SAFE" Bill introduced by Rep. Goodlatte on February 12, 1997 104th Congress: 1995-96 S. 1726, the Burns/Leahy "Pro-CODE Bill" introduced on May 2, 1996 H.R. 3011, the "SAFE" Bill introduced by Reps. Goodlatte and Eshoo in March 1996 S.1587, introduced by Sens. Burns and Leahy in March 1996 Clinton Administration Policy Initiatives Clipper 3.1.1 (Administration Announcement - October 1, 1996) Clipper III (Administration draft report - May 21, 1996) NIST Private Key Escrow Encryption Initiative (Clipper II) The Clipper Chip Government Key Escrow Proposal Other Relevant Background Information Previous Headlines National Research Council Report on the State of U.S. Encryption Policy Encryption Experts Call For Much Longer Key Lengths CEO's Criticize Encryption Export Policies, Warn of Economic Harm Commerce Department Releases Study on Availability of Encryption Abroad State Department Publishes Personal Use Exemption for Encryption Exports Justice Department Drops Case Against Phil Zimmermann, PGP Author What You Can Do Join CDT's Policy Post List for news and information on this and otherInternet issues. To join the list, simply type your email address in the form below. Your E-mail address:   Join the fight for secure communications online Show your support for repealing exportcontrols The Internet Privacy Coalition Protecting Your Privacy - Tools for Internet Users Where to Get PGP Anonymous Remailers Links to Encryption Resources The Encryption Policy Resource Page The Internet Privacy Coalition Electronic Frontier Foundation's(EFF) Crypto Archive Electronic Privacy Information Center's(EPIC) Crypto Resources Voters Telecommunications Watch (VTW) RSA Cryptography FAQ - An excellent Net resource on the technical aspects of cryptography Background and Information about Key Escrow from the National Institute of Standards and Technology's [NIST] Computer Security Resource Clearinghouse Links to Other Useful Internet Resources A Cyber-Rights Now Rant by CDT Policy Analyst Jonah Seiger on the need to Reform US Encryption Policy from the June 1996 issue of Wired Magazine Visit the Audio/Photo Archives of the SAFE Forum Forum Transcripts also online!! CDT Home Page Last Updated 02/13/97 || For more information write webmaster@cdt.org WT02-B05-71IA095-001024-B011-220http://www.cdt.org:80/ciec/complaint.html 205.177.10.31 19970214235734 text/html 5123HTTP/1.0 200 OKDate: Fri, 14 Feb 1997 23:56:17 GMTServer: Apache/1.1.1Content-type: text/html Index to CIEC complaint Index to complaint filed by the Citizens Internet Empowerment Coalition Filed on February 26, 1996 The CIEC is coordinated by the Center For Democracy and Technology, American Library Association, America Online, and People for the American Way List of Plaintiffs and Defendants Preliminary Statement Jurisdiction and Venue Parties Facts Creation of the Internet and the Development of Cyberspace How Individuals Access the Internet Methods to Communicate over the Internet Content on the Internet The Statutory Language At Issue The Impact of the Act on the Internet Ineffectiveness of the Act and Effectiveness of Alternative Means Speech of the Plaintiffs and the Impact of the Act Causes of Action List of Plaintiffs and CIEC member organizations Other Ways to Access This Document View/Save the entire document (Large File, 115K) Download a compressed file of the complaint: DOS/Windows .exe file (self-extracting) Mac .hqx file (self-extracting .sea file) Join the Coalition!!!Named Plaintiffs in the CIEC Challenge to the Communications Decency Act American Library Association America Online, Inc. American Booksellers Association American Booksellers Foundation for Free Expression American Society of Newspaper Editors Apple Computer, Inc. Association of American Publishers Association of Publishers, Editors and Writers Citizens Internet Empowerment Coalition Commercial Internet eXchange Compuserve, Inc. Families Against Internet Censorship Freedom to Read Foundation HotWired Ventures Ltd. Interactive Digital Software Association Interactive Services Association Magazine Publishers of America, Inc. Microsoft Corporation Microsoft Network NETCOM On-Line Communications Services, Inc. Newspaper Association of America OpNet Prodigy, Inc. Society of Professional Journalists Wired Ventures Ltd. Members of the Citizens Internet Empowerment Coalition Association of American University Presses, Inc. Association of National Advertisers Association of Research Libraries Center for Democracy and Technology Coalition for Networked Information Media Access Project Media Institute Microsystems Software, Inc. National Assoc. of State Universities & Land Grant Colleges National Newspaper Association People for the American Way Recording Industry Association of America Software Publishers Association Special Libraries Association Surfwatch Software, Inc. University of California Santa Barbara Library Last Update March 1, 1996 | For More Information Write ciec@cdt.org Return to the CDT Home Page Return to the main CIEC page Return to CDT's Net-Censorship Issues PageWT02-B05-72IA095-001027-B013-97http://www.cdt.org:80/ciec/bulletins/ciec-update.14.html 205.177.10.31 19970215012549 text/html 13004HTTP/1.0 200 OKDate: Sat, 15 Feb 1997 01:24:31 GMTServer: Apache/1.1.1Content-type: text/html CIEC Bulletin No. 14 - Court Halts CDA!  -----------------------------------------------------------------------               __          __   __          __         _                \ \        / /   \ \        / /        | |                \ \  /\  / /__   \ \  /\  / /__  _ __ | |                 \ \/  \/ / _ \   \ \/  \/ / _ \| '_ \| |                  \  /\  /  __/    \  /\  / (_) | | | |_|                   \/  \/ \___|     \/  \/ \___/|_| |_(_)                                                Citizens Internet Empowerment Coalition Trial Update No. 14               Decision Update -- June 12 1996 1:00 pm EDT-----------------------------------------------------------------------                      http://www.cdt.org/ciec/                          ciec-info@cdt.org----------------------------------------------------------------------- CIEC UPDATES intended for members of the Citizens Internet Empowerment Coalition. CIEC Updates are written and edited by the Center for  Democracy and Technology (http://www.cdt.org). This document may be  reposted as long as it remains in total.  This document is best viewed  in COURIER font.----------------------------------------------------------------------          ** 45,000 Netizens Vs. U.S. Department of Justice. **                 * The Fight To Save Free Speech Online *IN THIS ISSUE:  o COURT GRANTS INJUNCTION ON CDA! Unanimous Decision is a Major     Victory for Free Speech on the Internet!  o Join CIEC organizers and lead attorney LIVE online TOMORROW (6/13)    at 5:30pm EDT  o Text of CIEC Press Release regarding the Court Ruling  o How To Remove Yourself from this list  o More Information on CIEC and the Center for Democracy and Technology----------------------------------------------------------------------(1) COURT GRANTS INJUNCTION ON CDA; UNANIMOUS DECISION IS A MAJOR VICTORY    FOR FREE SPEECH ON THE INTERNET!At 9:00 am this morning (6/12), a three-judge panel of federal judgesin Philadelphia, PA granted CIEC's request for a preliminary injunctionagainst the Communications Decency Act (CDA).   In a unanimous decision, the judges ruled that the CDA would unconstitutionally restrict speech onthe Internet.This is a major victory for Netizens!  The ruling today soundly rejectsCongressional attempts to censor the Internet.  However, the government will most certainly appeal this case to the Supreme Court, so the battleagainst the CDA is not over yet.  All Internet users are encouraged to join the fight against the CDA as the case moves to the Supreme Court.Excerpts from the decision:     "As the most participatory form of mass speech yet developed, the      Internet deserves the highest protection from government intrusion."     "Just as the strength of the Internet is chaos, so the strength of       our liberty depends upon the chaos and cacophony of the unfettered      speech the First Amendment protects."The full text of the decision, including a compressed downloadable version,as well as information on how to join the CIEC, is available at the CIEC webpage:     http://www.cdt.org/ciec/ More information about the decision, including analysis of the 175-page opinion, will be posted over the next few days.          ***************** SPECIAL EVENT! *****************          JOIN CIEC ORGANIZERS AND LEAD ATTORNEY LIVE ONLINE          TOMORROW (6/13) TO DISCUSS THE OUTCOME OF THE CASETomorrow at 5:30pm EDT, HotWired will host a live online briefing withCitizens Internet Empowerment Coalition (CIEC) organizers and the lead CIEC attorney who argued the case before the federal judges in Philadelphia.  They will discuss the implications of the court's ruling,the next steps in the legal battle, and answer questions from netizens.Scheduled to participate in the online briefing:  o Bruce Ennis, attorney with Jenner & Block and CIEC's lead counsel;  o Jerry Berman, CDT executive director;  o William Burrington, assistant general counsel for America Online; and  o Judith Krug, director of the Office For Intellectual Freedom, American    Library AssociationDon't miss this chance to interact with the CIEC leaders as they discussthis important victory and what it means to the future of the Internet!DETAILS ON THE EVENTWHERE:    HotWired's WiredSide Chat (http://www.hotwired.com/wiredside/)WHEN:     Thursday June 13          5:30 pm EDT (2:30 PDT)TO PARTICIPATE:  Visit http://www.hotwired.com/wiredside/ for                 instructions.                 You will need to be a member of HotWired (membership is                 FREE - visit http://www.hotwired.com/ for details), and                 a copy of RealAudio installed on your computer (visit                 http://www.realaudio.com/ for a FREE copy of Real                 Audio).HotWired's wiredside chat is an innovative new way to hold online events.It combines a live audio broadcast with an interactive chat forum, allowingusers to pose questions to the guest and talk about the session.Transcripts of the session will be available at the CIEC web page. Thisspecial event is co-sponsored by the Netizen and the Center for Democracyand Technology (CDT).------------------------------------------------------------------------(2) TEXT OF THE CIEC PRESS RELEASE REGARDING THE COURT RULINGCITIZENS INTERNET EMPOWERMENT COALITION1634 EYE STREET, N.W.WASHINGTON, D.C. 20006202/637-9800FOR IMMEDIATE RELEASE        For further information, contact:June 12, 1996                      Sydney Rubin, 202/828-8829DECISION IN INTERNET CHALLENGE HAILED AS VICTORY FOR PARENTS, CHILDRENAND AMERICAN TRADITION OF FREE SPEECH PHILADELPHIA, Pennsylvania -- Parents, librarians, online companies, publishers, newspaper reporters and others challenging government censorship of cyberspace today hailed an historic decision by a federal court enjoining the government from enforcing portions of anew law which violate constitutionally protected free speech.  But plaintiffs in the American Library Association v. U.S. Departmentof Justice suit warned that the battle against the Communications Decency Act may not be over if the government appeals today's decisionto the Supreme Court. "This is a victory for the Internet and for everyone who values freespeech," said Jerry Berman of the Center for Democracy and Technologyand a co-founder of the Citizens Internet Empowerment Coalition thatorganized the suit. In their 175-page decision, the three judge panel of the U.S. District Court for the Eastern District of Pennsylvnia found the law unconstitutional on grounds that it violated rights of free speech. Allthree judges -- Dolores K. Sloviter, chief judge of the U.S. Third Circuit Court of Appeals, and U.S. District Judges Ronald L. Buckwalterand Stewart Dalzell wrote individual opinions supporting the panel's unanimous decision to enforce an injunction against the government."Our findings of fact -- many of them undisputed -- express our understanding of the Internet.  These Findings lead to the conclusionthat Congress may not regulate indecency on the Internet at all," wroteJudge Dalzell, referring to the extensive study of the Internet.  The Judges concluded: the "plaintiffs have shown irreparable injury, noparty has any interest in the enforcement of an unconstitutional law, andtherefore the public interest will be served by granting a preliminaryinjunction."The 27 plaintiffs in the case, which was joined by the court with anothersuit filed by the American Civil Liberties Union, complained that the lawimposed criminal penalities on speech in cyberspace that is otherwise entirely lawful.  It was the first time in American history that criminalpenalities had been placed on the exercise of free speech. The result of the unconstitutional law was that books legal on library shelves could land a librarian in jail if posted on-line. The terms usedin the law were so vague that they encompassed vast amounts of material with literary, artistic, political, cultural and medical value, and threatened to penalize people who did not realize they were violating a law.The law was not aimed at curbing obscenity or child pornography on the Internet, which already are against the law. "We are ecstatic. Librarians can continue to provide ideas and informationto the public regardless of the format, without concern about fines or jailterms," said Judith Krug from the American Library Association. "This is victory for anyone who uses the public libraries."In addition, the law would fail in its goal of protecting children since large amounts of material on the Internet originate overseas, beyond the reach of U.S. law. During five days of hearings, plaintiffs showed the court the unique natureof the new medium and demonstrated software that allows parents to easilymonitor and control the material coming into homes and schools. Plaintiffsargued that such technology was more effective than any law, empowered usersto make their own judgements about what they wanted to see and protectedAmericans' First Amendment rights to free expression. "The court today did for children and adults what Congress did not -- Itdecided that parental control tools combined with user education andenforcement of existing laws is a more effective and constitutional way toprotect children and safeguard our freedoms," said Bill Burrington, AssistantGeneral Counsel of America Online.Other countries were watching the outcome of the case closely. Many nations,such as Germany, France and Japan, are just beginning to grapple withInternet issues. Other nations, such as China and Saudi Arabia, already haveimposed strict controls on the medium, which Judge Dalzell referred to duringthe hearings as "the most democratic medium yet devised by the imagination ofman." "This court is the first to fully grapple with and grasp the unique nature and potential of the Internet. The court's decision today to afford communications over the Internet heightened protections recognizes the valueof this new medium in a democracy," said Bruce J. Ennis, lead attorney in thecase. "This decision will help define the legal framework for future decisionrelated to the Internet."The plaintiffs in the case include: American Library Association, Inc.;America Online, Inc.; American Booksellers Association, Inc.; American Booksellers Foundation for Free Expression; American Society of NewspaperEditors; Apple Computer, Inc.; Association of American Publishers, Inc.;Association of Publishers, Editors and Writers; Commercial Internet eXchangeAssociation; CompuServe Incorporated; Families Against Internet Censorship;Freedom to Read Foundation, Inc.; Health Sciences Libraries Consortium;HotWired Ventures LLC; Interactive Digital Software Association; InteractiveServices Association; Magazine Publishers of America, Inc.; Microsoft Corporation; Microsoft Network; National Press Photographers Association; NETCOM On-Line Communication Services, Inc.; Newspaper Association of America;Opnet, Inc.; Prodigy Services Company; Wired Ventures, Ltd.; the Society ofProfessional Journalists; and the Citizens Internet Empowerment Coalition, representing more than 40,000 individual Internet users.                                         # # # # --------------------------------------------------------------------------(3) How to Remove Yourself From This ListAs CIEC members, you have been invited to join this list in order toreceive news updates and other information relevant to the CIEC challengeto the Communications Decency Act. To subscribe, visithttp://www.cdt.org/ciec and join the Coalition.If you ever want to remove yourself from this list, send email to   ciec-members-request@cdt.orgwith 'unsubscribe ciec-members' in the SUBJECT LINE (w/o the 'quotes').Leave the body of your message blank.-----------------------------------------------------------------------(4) For More InformationFor more information on the CIEC challenge, including the text of thecomplaint and other relevant materials:* World Wide Web                       --        http://www.cdt.org/ciec/* General Information about CIEC       --        ciec-info@cdt.org* Copy of the Complaint                --        ciec-docs@cdt.org* Specific Questions Regarding the  Coalition, including Press Inquiries --        ciec@cdt.org* General information about the  Center for Democracy and Technology  --        info@cdt.org--end ciec-update.146/12/96 Back to the Citizens Internet Empowerment Coalition Home Page WT02-B05-73IA095-001027-B013-107http://www.cdt.org:80/ciec/bulletins/ciec-update.13.html 205.177.10.31 19970215012600 text/html 6171HTTP/1.0 200 OKDate: Sat, 15 Feb 1997 01:24:43 GMTServer: Apache/1.1.1Content-type: text/html CIEC Bulletin No. 13 - Special Event  -----------------------------------------------------------------------       _______   _       _    ____        _ _      _   _      |__   __| (_)     | |  |  _ \      | | |    | | (_)         | |_ __ _  __ _| |  | |_) |_   _| | | ___| |_ _ _ __         | | '__| |/ _` | |  |  _ <| | | | | |/ _ \ __| | '_ \         | | |  | | (_| | |  | |_) | |_| | | |  __/ |_| | | | |         |_|_|  |_|\__,_|_|  |____/ \__,_|_|_|\___|\__|_|_| |_|      Citizens Internet Empowerment Coalition Trial Update No. 13              Special Update -- May 31 1996 5:30 pm ET-----------------------------------------------------------------------                      http://www.cdt.org/ciec/                          ciec-info@cdt.org----------------------------------------------------------------------- CIEC UPDATES intended for members of the Citizens Internet Empowerment Coalition. CIEC Updates are written and edited by the  Democracy and Technology (http://www.cdt.org). This document may be reposted as long as it remains in total.----------------------------------------------------------------------          ** 45,000 Netizens Vs. U.S. Department of Justice. **                 * The Fight To Save Free Speech Online *IN THIS ISSUE:  o SPECIAL EVENT ANNOUNCEMENT - Join CIEC lead Attorney Live Online!  o Decision Expected Soon, how to stay informed  o How To Remove Yourself from this list  o More Information on CIEC and the Center for Democracy and Technology----------------------------------------------------------------------(1) DECISION EXPECTED SOON - HOW TO STAY UP TO DATEA decision in the legal challenge to the CDA is expected soon, perhaps asearly as next week.  News of the decision (and the full text) will be postedto this list and at http://www.cdt.org/ciec as soon as it becomes available.          ***************** SPECIAL EVENT! ******************  JOIN CIEC LEAD ATTORNEY LIVE ONLINE TO DISCUSS THE OUTCOME OF THE CASE                 24 HOURS AFTER DECISION IS ANNOUNCEDWithin 24 hours of the ruling, Bruce Ennis, lead counsel for the CitizensInternet Empowerment Coalition (CIEC), along with organizers of the CIEC,will join netizens for a live online briefing to discuss the implicationsof the court's ruling, the next steps in the legal battle, and answerquestions.Win or lose, this promises to be an exciting event that all CIEC membersand everyone who cares about the future of free speech online should notmiss.DETAILS ON THE EVENTWHERE:    HotWired's WiredSide Chat (http://www.hotwired.com/wiredside/)WHEN:     Date and Time TBA - Details will be posted at the following          sites as soon as a decision is announced:           - http://www.cdt.org/ciec/           - http://www.hotwired.com/wiredside/TO PARTICIPATE:  Visit http://www.hotwired.com/wiredside/ for                 instructions.                 You will need to be a member of HotWired (membership is                 FREE - visit http://www.hotwired.com/ for details), and                 a copy of RealAudio installed on your computer (visit                 http://www.realaudio.com/ for a FREE copy of Real                 Audio).HotWired's wiredside chat is an innovative new way to hold online events.It combines a live audio broadcast with an interactive chat forum, allowingusers to pose questions to the guest and talk aboutthe session.Transcripts of the session will be available at the CIEC web page. Thisspecial event is co-sponsored by the Netizen and the Center for Democracyand Technology (CDT).------------------------------------------------------------------------(2) TEXT OF PRO-CDA AMICUS BRIEF NOW AVAILABLE ONLINEThe full text of an amicus brief filed by several conservative pro-familygroups in support of the Communications Decency Act is now availableonline.  The brief lays out the pro-CDA arguments in defense of theGovernment's position. It's worthwhile reading for anyone closely followingthe case.The full text of the pro-CDA brief, along with the CIEC response, isavailable at the CIEC web page:  http://www.cdt.org/ciec/The brief was filed by in the Philadelphia case by several groups who haveworked in support of the Communications Decency Act, including the NationalLaw Center for Children and Families, the Family Research Council, EnoughIs Enough!, National Coalition for the Protection of Children & Families,and Morality In Media.CDT would like to thank The National Law Center for Children and Familiesfor providing us with an electronic copy of the document.--------------------------------------------------------------------------(3) How to Remove Yourself From This ListAs CIEC members, you have been invited to join this list in order toreceive news updates and other information relevant to the CIEC challengeto the Communications Decency Act. To subscribe, visithttp://www.cdt.org/ciec and join the Coalition.If you ever want to remove yourself from this list, send email to   ciec-members-request@cdt.orgwith 'unsubscribe ciec-members' in the SUBJECT LINE (w/o the 'quotes').Leave the body of your message blank.-----------------------------------------------------------------------(4) For More InformationFor more information on the CIEC challenge, including the text of thecomplaint and other relevant materials:* World Wide Web                      --        http://www.cdt.org/ciec/* General Information about CIEC      --        ciec-info@cdt.org* Copy of the Complaint               --        ciec-docs@cdt.org* Specific Questions Regarding the  Coalition, incuding Press Inquiries --        ciec@cdt.org* General information about the  Center for Democracy and Technology --        info@cdt.org--end ciec-update.135/31/96 Back to the Citizens Internet Empowerment Coalition Home Page WT02-B05-74IA095-001027-B013-125http://www.cdt.org:80/ciec/bulletins/ciec-update.12.html 205.177.10.31 19970215012609 text/html 6816HTTP/1.0 200 OKDate: Sat, 15 Feb 1997 01:24:52 GMTServer: Apache/1.1.1Content-type: text/html CIEC Bulletin No. 12 - DOJ Court Order  -----------------------------------------------------------------       _______   _       _    ____        _ _      _   _      |__   __| (_)     | |  |  _ \      | | |    | | (_)         | |_ __ _  __ _| |  | |_) |_   _| | | ___| |_ _ _ __         | | '__| |/ _` | |  |  _ <| | | | | |/ _ \ __| | '_ \         | | |  | | (_| | |  | |_) | |_| | | |  __/ |_| | | | |         |_|_|  |_|\__,_|_|  |____/ \__,_|_|_|\___|\__|_|_| |_|    Citizens Internet Empowerment Coalition Trial Update No. 12                Special Update -- May 16 1996 5:56 pm ET  -----------------------------------------------------------------                     http://www.cdt.org/ciec/                        ciec-info@cdt.org  -----------------------------------------------------------------   CIEC UPDATES intended for members of the Citizens Internet   Empowerment Coalition. CIEC Updates are written and edited by the   Center for Democracy and Technology (http://www.cdt.org). This   document may be reposted as long as it remains in total.  ------------------------------------------------------------------          ** 40,000 Netizens Vs. U.S. Department of Justice. **                 * The Fight To Save Free Speech Online *  Contents:  o Court Orders DOJ to Halt "Reviews" Under the CDA  o Transcripts from All 6 days of Court Testimony Now Online  o How To Unsubscribe from this list  o More Information on CIEC and the Center for Democracy and Technology----------------------------------------------------------------------(1) Court Orders DOJ to Halt "Reviews" Under the CDAIn response to a complaint filed last week by the CIEC, a Federal Judge inPhiladelphia Wednesday ordered the Justice Department to stop all "reviews"of complaints under the Communications Decency Act until the three-judgepanel rules on the constitutionality of the law.   The order was issued byJudge Stewart Dalzell, one of the three judges presiding over the case.CIEC attorneys filed the compliant after several national newspapers reported last week that the FBI had opened an investigation of CompuServefor violations of the CDA.  The FBI has since denied that any investigation is or was underway, though the stories sparked a great deal of confusion and created a significant public relations problem for the commercial online service.In the order Judge Dalzell stated that "the government's conduct insubjecting a content provider to private and public scrutiny for displayingmaterial that is neither obscene nor child pornography clearly runs afoulof both this Court's orders and the government's promises."Closing arguments in the case concluded on Friday May 10, and a finaldecision on the constitutionality of the CDA is expected soon.  WhileWednesday's ruling by Judge Dalzell provides little insight into which waythe court will rule on the constitutionality of the CDA, the speed withwhich the order was issued does show that the court appreciates thetremendous free speech and commercial concerns riding on this case.The full text of the seven page order, tramscripts from Friday's oralarguments, and with other relevant information, is available at theCitizens Internet Empowerment Coalition web page:  http://www.cdt.org/ciecBACKGROUND ON THE JUSTICE DEPARTMENT/AFA FOLLIESAfter a Philadelphia federal judge granted a temporary restraining orderagainst the CDA in February, the government agreed not to prosecute orinvestigate anyone for violations of the CDA until the court challenge hadbeen completed.   However, recent events have called the government'scommitment to the February agreement into question.In early April, the conservative American Family Association (AFA) filed acomplaint with the Justice Department accusing Compuserve of violating theCDA for material in a forum called MacGlamour, despite the fact that thesite was labeled for adults only and Compuserve provides its users freesoftware to block access to unwanted material.Last week in response to pressure from the AFA, acting Chief of the DOJChild Exploitation and Obscenity Section Terry Lord sent a letter to AFAdirector Patrick Truman indicating that the Department "has referred [theAFA] letter and accompanying materials to the Federal Bureau ofInvestigation for further review."The FBI denied it was investigating, which would have been a violation ofthe February court agreement, but said it was "reviewing" the AFAcomplaint.  CIEC attorneys asked the court to clarify if such a "review"violated the government's promise not to investigate or prosecute under theCDA.In granting the motion for clarification, Judge Dalzell ordered AttorneyGeneral Reno, the Justice Department, and the FBI to stop all "reviews" ofonline indecency complaints pending a decision regarding theconstitutionality of the Communications Decency Act.-------------------------------------------------------------------------(2) Hearing Transcripts for All 6 Days of Testimony Now OnlineTranscripts for all 6 days of hearings, including last Friday's (5/10)closing arguments, are now available online at the CIEC web site:   http://www.cdt.org/ciec--------------------------------------------------------------------------(3) How to Unsubscribe From This ListAs CIEC members, you have been invited to join this list in order toreceive news updates and other information relevant to the CIEC challengeto the Communications Decency Act. To subscribe, visithttp://www.cdt.org/ciec and join the Coalition.If you ever want to remove yourself from this list, send email to   ciec-members-request@cdt.orgwith 'unsubscribe ciec-members' in the SUBJECT LINE (w/o the 'quotes').Leave the body of your message blank.-----------------------------------------------------------------------(4) For More InformationFor more information on the CIEC challenge, including the text of thecomplaint and other relevant materials:* World Wide Web                      --        http://www.cdt.org/ciec/* General Information about CIEC      --        ciec-info@cdt.org* Copy of the Complaint               --        ciec-docs@cdt.org* Specific Questions Regarding the  Coalition, incuding Press Inquiries --        ciec@cdt.org* General information about the  Center for Democracy and Technology --        info@cdt.org--end ciec-update.125/16/96 Back to the Citizens Internet Empowerment Coalition Home Page WT02-B05-75IA095-001027-B013-144http://www.cdt.org:80/ciec/bulletins/ciec-update.11.html 205.177.10.31 19970215012619 text/html 13380HTTP/1.0 200 OKDate: Sat, 15 Feb 1997 01:25:00 GMTServer: Apache/1.1.1Content-type: text/html CIEC UPDATE No. 11 - 5/10 Trial Bulletin  -----------------------------------------------------------------       _______   _       _    ____        _ _      _   _      |__   __| (_)     | |  |  _ \      | | |    | | (_)         | |_ __ _  __ _| |  | |_) |_   _| | | ___| |_ _ _ __         | | '__| |/ _` | |  |  _ <| | | | | |/ _ \ __| | '_ \         | | |  | | (_| | |  | |_) | |_| | | |  __/ |_| | | | |         |_|_|  |_|\__,_|_|  |____/ \__,_|_|_|\___|\__|_|_| |_|    Citizens Internet Empowerment Coalition Trial Update No. 11             Post-Hearing Update  -  May 12, 1996  -----------------------------------------------------------------                     http://www.cdt.org/ciec/                        ciec-info@cdt.org  -----------------------------------------------------------------   CIEC UPDATES intended for members of the Citizens Internet   Empowerment Coalition. CIEC Updates are written and edited by the   Center for Democracy and Technology (http://www.cdt.org). This   document may be reposted as long as it remains in total.  ------------------------------------------------------------------          ** 40,000 Netizens Vs. U.S. Department of Justice. **                 * The Fight To Save Free Speech Online *  Contents:  o Hearings Conclude in CDA Challenge - Decision Expected Soon    * A Newspaper Decency Act?  o How To Unsubscribe from this list  o More Information on CIEC and the Center for Democracy and Technology----------------------------------------------------------------------Quote of the Day: "You are asking us to re-write the statute, to put                   words in the statute that aren't there. We want you                   to tell us what words to put in"-- Judge Doloris Sloviter, to DOJ lead counsel Tony Coppolino during a   series of questions on the government's interpretation of the term    "indecency"HEARINGS CONCLUDE IN CDA CHALLENGE -- DECISION EXPECTED SOONHearings in the historic legal battle over the future of freedom of speechon the Internet concluded Friday (5/10) with both sides presenting finaloral arguments before a three judge panel in a Philadelphia Federal Court.A decision in the case is expected within the next month, after whicheither side can appeal directly to the Supreme Court.As expected, the Government lawyers argued that the court should read theCommunications Decency Act's (CDA)  prohibition of "indecent" and "patentlyoffensive" materials online to apply only to hard-core, sexually explicitmaterial.The Government asked the court to essentially create a new definition ofthe term "indecent", designed specifically for the Internet.  While DOJlead attorney Tony Coppolino stated that the government believes the term"indecent" in the CDA should have the same meaning  as used by the FCC ,and in the Pacifica and Sable cases, Coppolino also repeatedly argued thatthe term "indecent" under the CDA would not apply to serious works offiction, art, or other materials with social value.  This argument isinconsistent with every application of the "indecency" standard in pastcourt cases and regulatory proceedings before the FCC.The Government summed up its case by arguing  that the content regulationsimposed by the CDA, combined with parental control technologies, arenecessary in order to protect children from sexually explicit material onthe Internet.  The Government argued that technology alone will not protectchildren from sexually explicit material on the Internet. As DOJ lawyerJason Baron stated, the law must "put the burden on content providers to dosomething" to prevent minors from accessing objectionable material online.CIEC lead counsel Bruce Ennis urged the court to overturn theCommunications Decency Act on the grounds that the law is overly broad,unconstitutionally vague, and effectively restricts all speech on theInternet to that which is appropriate only for children.  Ennis furtherargued that the CDA's defenses to prosecution are not available to the vastmajority of speakers on the Net. While commercial content providers may beable to utilize credit card age verification schemes, non-commercialspeakers, who comprise the majority of speakers on the Internet, have noway of complying with the statue.Ennis argued that the CDA is "substantially overboard", meaning that inmost circumstances there is simply no way for Internet users to comply withthe law.   "Substantial over breadth", one of several standards the CIEChas asked the court to consider in evaluating the constitutionality of theCDA, requires that the court consider whether the law is overly broad in a"substantial number" of its applications.  In this case, Ennis argued thatthe CDA can only be considered constitutional in one application:commercial content providers who charge for their services.  In every otherapplication, including posts to Usenet Newsgroups, IRC or other online chatforums, electronic mail sent to public mailing lists, and non-commercialweb sites, the defenses to prosecution under the CDA are not available toInternet users. As a result, non-commercial speakers on the Internet onlyhave one way to avoid potential liability under the CDA - self censorship.As expected, the Judges adjourned the Hearing without reaching a decision,but promised that a decision would be forthcoming.  CDT will provide anupdate as soon as a decision is reached (check http://www.cdt.org/ciec/)for updates). A decision is expected before the end of May.RECENT FBI 'NON-INVESTIGATION' OF COMPUSERVE BECOMES A MAJOR ISSUEIn what is perhaps the most interesting twist yet in this case, the recentnewspaper reports that the FBI was considering an investigation ofCompuserve for potential violations of the CDA were raised by CIEC lawyersand Judge Dalzell. The reports were sparked by calls from the conservativeAmerican Family Association, though the FBI and Justice Department havesince clarified that no investigation is underway.During the presentation of Government attorney Jason Baron, Judge Dalzellasked numerous questions about a recent letter from Assistant AttorneyGeneral Keene to the Judge in a parallel CDA challenge in New York.  In theletter, Keene states that labeling content, registering a URL with a "URLregistry", and using content selection standards would be considered"substantial evidence" that a defendant has complied with the defensesunder the CDA.The Government's position that labeling content would only be considered"substantial evidence" and not  an outright defense to prosecution (as aliteral reading of the CDA suggests) raises serious questions about theability of any content provider to comply with the CDA, and adds furtherweight to the CIEC arguments that the CDA is overly broad andunconstitutionally restrictive.THE NEWSPAPER DECENCY ACT?In numerous, often pointed questions throughout the hearing, the Judgespressed the government on whether the Internet is, as the CIEC and ACLUcases argue, a unique communications technology distinct from traditionalbroadcast mass media.At one point Judge Dalzell, holding up a copy of the Philadelphia Inquirer,noted that the previous day's issue contained a graphic image of a manbeing shot on the front page above the fold.  Dalzell said that his 10 yearold son had seen this picture while looking for the scores from theprevious day's Philadelphia Phillies game, Dalzell was concerned that theImage was not appropriate for a young child to view.  Dalzell askedCoppolino if Congress were to pass a "Newspaper Decency Act" requiring thatNewspapers publish graphic images below the fold (so that minors do notinadvertently see them) would the law be unconstitutional.When Coppolino agreed that the hypothetical Newspaper Decency Act wouldindeed be unconstitutional, Dalzell asked if Congress similarly has thepower to control the Internet. Coppolino argued that the Internet is muchmore similar to broadcast mass media than print.  Coppolino further arguedthat the Internet is a pervasive medium, and that because the Internet candeliver text, graphics, video and sound, and that because of thisconvergence the Internet is much closer to the broadcasting model than itis to the print medium.The question of the nature of the Internet and its similarity to the printor broadcast medium is a critical issue in this case. If the Judges findthat the Internet is substantially different from broadcast mass media,they are more likely to rule that the broadcast-style content regulationsimposed by the CDA are unconstitutional.  Although Judge Dalzell revealedlittle about this position on this issue during the hearing, hishypothetical questions were none-the-less encouraging.WHAT IS INDECENT?While the judges asked pointed questions of both sides, the most piercingquestions were reserved or DOJ lead attorney Tony Coppolino on the meaningof the term "indecent".Before Coppolino had finished the first sentence of his opening statement,he was interrupted by Judge Doloris Sloviter, who asked, "What is theGovernment's position about what the statute covers?". Sloviter wasreferring to the Government's position on the meaing of the terms"indecent" and "patently offensive", which is a critical question in thecase.Coppolino responded that the government believes the terms refer tosexually explicit material which lacks any serious literary, artistic,social or scientific value.  Judge Solviter responded by asking whetherexcerpts from the Broadway play "Angles in America" (which deals withAIDS), might be considered indecent in some jurisdictions.  Coppolinoresponded that "it is possible that some material with value might beconsidered 'indecent'", and that "the application depends on thecommunication and its context".A skeptical Judge Stewart Dalzell wondered aloud whether the definition ofthe term would be left up to the 94 US attorneys throughout the UnitedStates, each with a potentially different interpretation, citing theexample of the controversial photographer Robert Maplethorp, whose exhibitwas celebrated in Philadelphia and subsequently picketed in Cincinnati Ohioseveral years ago.  Dalzell noted that a Web site at the University ofCalifornia Riverside has placed an explicit Maplethorp photograph online,and asked Coppolino what advice he would give the University if he weretheir lawyer.Coppolino responded that he would not necessarily advise the University oftake the materials off-line, and suggested that they could further protectthemselves from liability under the CDA by providing the ability forparents to block the site. Judge Sloviter appeared unconvinced withCoppolino's explanation, stating, "Isn't there a chill factor [here]?  Thisis a criminal statute.  People are entitled to know what they can beprosecuted for.  If people have to keep running to their lawyers, isn'tthat a problem?"NEXT STEPS, POINTERS TO OTHER INFORMATIONDue to the breadth of topics covered at Friday's hearing, only a smallportion of the issues raised are covered in this trial bulletin. The fulltranscript form the hearing will be available at the CDT/CIEC web site inthe next few days. Please continue to visit http://www.cdt.org/ciec.  Anannouncement of the Courts decision will also be posted to this list and onthe CIEC web site as soon as it is available.In addition to the text of the original CIEC complaint, transcripts of thefirst 5 days of hearings, and other background information, several newCIEC court filings, including our post trial brief, are available at theCIEC web site.-----------------------------------------------------------------------(2) How to Unsubscribe From This ListAs CIEC members, you have been invited to join this list in order toreceive news updates and other information relevant to the CIEC challengeto the Communications Decency Act. To subscribe, visithttp://www.cdt.org/ciec and join the Coalition.If you ever want to remove yourself from this list, send email to   ciec-members-request@cdt.orgwith 'unsubscribe ciec-members' in the SUBJECT LINE (w/o the 'quotes').Leave the body of your message blank.-----------------------------------------------------------------------(3) For More InformationFor more information on the CIEC challenge, including the text of thecomplaint and other relevant materials:* World Wide Web                      --        http://www.cdt.org/ciec/* General Information about CIEC      --        ciec-info@cdt.org* Copy of the Complaint               --        ciec-docs@cdt.org* Specific Questions Regarding the  Coalition, incuding Press Inquiries --        ciec@cdt.org* General information about the  Center for Democracy and Technology --        info@cdt.org--end ciec-update.115/12/96 Return to the Citizens Internet Empowerment Coalition Page Return to the CDT Home Page WT02-B05-76IA095-001027-B013-162http://www.cdt.org:80/ciec/bulletins/ciec-update.10.html 205.177.10.31 19970215012628 text/html 7167HTTP/1.0 200 OKDate: Sat, 15 Feb 1997 01:25:11 GMTServer: Apache/1.1.1Content-type: text/html CIEC UPDATE No. 10 - 4/15 Trial Bulletin  -----------------------------------------------------------------       _______   _       _    ____        _ _      _   _      |__   __| (_)     | |  |  _ \      | | |    | | (_)         | |_ __ _  __ _| |  | |_) |_   _| | | ___| |_ _ _ __         | | '__| |/ _` | |  |  _ <| | | | | |/ _ \ __| | '_ \         | | |  | | (_| | |  | |_) | |_| | | |  __/ |_| | | | |         |_|_|  |_|\__,_|_|  |____/ \__,_|_|_|\___|\__|_|_| |_|    Citizens Internet Empowerment Coalition Trial Update No. 10              Pre-Trial Update -  April 15, 1996 6:30 pm ET  -----------------------------------------------------------------                     http://www.cdt.org/ciec/                        ciec-info@cdt.org  -----------------------------------------------------------------   CIEC UPDATES intended for members of the Citizens Internet   Empowerment Coalition. CIEC Updates are written and edited by the   Center for Democracy and Technology (http://www.cdt.org). This   document may be reposted as long as it remains in total.  ------------------------------------------------------------------          ** 40,000 Netizens Vs. U.S. Department of Justice. **                 * The Fight To Save Free Speech Online *  Contents:  o Testimony Concludes in CDA Legal Challenge      * Government Only Calls Two Witnesses      * Closing Arguments Set for May 10  o How To Unsubscribe from this list  o More Information on CIEC and the Center for Democracy and Technology----------------------------------------------------------------------(1) TESTIMONY ENDS IN COURT BATTLE TO OVERTURN THE CDA - CLOSING ARGUMENTS SET    FOR MAY 10Hearings ended today in the constitutional challenge to the CommunicationsDecency Act with the cross-examination of government witness Dan Olsen. Thecourt also announced today that closing arguments in this landmark casewill be heard on May 10 (the hearing had originally been scheduled for June3).Dan Olsen, Chair of the Department of Computer Science Brigham YoungUniversity, testified on Friday April 12 about a scheme he developed twoweeks ago for rating sexually-explicit content on the Internet.  Olsen'sproposal would require content providers to label their sites with an"-L18" tag if the site contains sexually oriented material.  During crossexamination on Friday and again today, CIEC and ACLU lawyers criticizedOlsen's proposal as inflexible and extremely difficult to implement.All three judges presiding over the case -- Dolores Sloviter, chief judgeof the U.S. Third Circuit Court of Appeals, and the U.S. District JudgesStewart Dalzell and Ronald Buckwalter -- questioned Olsen for almost 45minutes about his proposal, and seemed unconvinced by his presentation.At one point, Judge Sloviter asked, "I am wondering if whether in essenceyour scheme requires some material to be blocked in advance, and if you canthink of any time in our history when we have blocked material in advancein an organized fashion?"Olsen replied that he believed newspaper editors did this routinely.  Inresponse to another question from Judge Sloviter, Olsen admitted his planwould "make it easier for the government to censor material" on theInternet if it one day chose to do so directly.GOVERNMENT RESTS ITS CASE AFTER CALLING ONLY TWO WITNESSESThe government rested its case today after calling only two witnesses indefense of the Communications Decency Act.  The CIEC and ACLU cases calleda total of 13 witnesses. Interestingly, over two days of hearings, neitherwitness offered testimony explicitly defending the CDA as written. Instead,the testimony appeared designed to convince the court that the CDA isnarrowly drawn and therefore satisfies the "least restrictive means" test.In short, the government witnesses testified:* That sexually explicit material is available to minors on the Internet  (a claim that neither the CIEC nor the ACLU challenges dispute).* Requiring content providers to label content will prevent minors from  accessing sexually explicit material on the Internet.CIEC and ACLU attorneys argue that the content labeling scheme proposed byOlsen is would not be a "good faith defense" under the CDA, and istherefore irrelevant, and that the Government has not proven that theCommunications Decency Act is the "least restrictive means" of protectingchildren from inappropriate material on the Internet.Speaking to reporters at the end of today's hearing, CIEC lead attorneyBruce Ennis summarized the last two days of testimony by saying, " ... inthe final analysis parents have the ability and the technology to controlwhat kids see ... without reducing all content on the Internet to the levelappropriate for an eight-year-old."  Ennis added, "This law isunconstitutional."CLOSING ARGUMENTS SET FOR MAY 10On May 10, the plaintiffs and the government will each present two hours ofclosing arguments.  A decision is expected from the three judge panel inmid-June. Any appeal of the ruling will be made directly to the SupremeCourt under expedited review provisions of the Telecommunications ReformAct.For more information, including the text of the transcripts from the first3 days of testimony (remaining tow days will be posted soon), the text ofthe complaint, and information on how you can join this historic legalbattle, visit the CIEC World Wide Web page at:  http://www.cdt.org/ciec/-----------------------------------------------------------------------(2) Subscription InformationAs CIEC members, you have been invited to join this list in order toreceive news updates and other information relevant to the CIEC challengeto the Communications Decency Act. To subscribe, visithttp://www.cdt.org/ciec and join the Coalition.If you ever want to remove yourself from this list, send email to   ciec-members-request@cdt.orgwith 'unsubscribe ciec-members' in the SUBJECT LINE (w/o the 'quotes').Leave the body of your message blank.-----------------------------------------------------------------------(3) For More InformationFor more information on the CIEC challenge, including the text of thecomplaint and other relevant materials:* World Wide Web                      --        http://www.cdt.org/ciec/* General Information about CIEC      --        ciec-info@cdt.org* Copy of the Complaint               --        ciec-docs@cdt.org* Specific Questions Regarding the  Coalition, incuding Press Inquiries --        ciec@cdt.org* General information about the  Center for Democracy and Technology --        info@cdt.org--end ciec-update.104/15/96 Return to the Citizens Internet Empowerment Coalition Page Return to the CDT Home Page WT02-B05-77IA095-001027-B013-173http://www.cdt.org:80/ciec/bulletins/ciec-update.9.html 205.177.10.31 19970215012637 text/html 13912HTTP/1.0 200 OKDate: Sat, 15 Feb 1997 01:25:20 GMTServer: Apache/1.1.1Content-type: text/html CIEC UPDATE No. 9 - 4/13 Trial Bulletin  -----------------------------------------------------------------       _______   _       _    ____        _ _      _   _      |__   __| (_)     | |  |  _ \      | | |    | | (_)         | |_ __ _  __ _| |  | |_) |_   _| | | ___| |_ _ _ __         | | '__| |/ _` | |  |  _ <| | | | | |/ _ \ __| | '_ \         | | |  | | (_| | |  | |_) | |_| | | |  __/ |_| | | | |         |_|_|  |_|\__,_|_|  |____/ \__,_|_|_|\___|\__|_|_| |_|    Citizens Internet Empowerment Coalition Trial Update No. 9              Pre-Trial Update -  April 13, 1996 5:30 pm ET  -----------------------------------------------------------------                     http://www.cdt.org/ciec/                        ciec-info@cdt.org  -----------------------------------------------------------------   CIEC UPDATES intended for members of the Citizens Internet   Empowerment Coalition. CIEC Updates are written and edited by the   Center for Democracy and Technology (http://www.cdt.org). This   document may be reposted as long as it remains in total.  ------------------------------------------------------------------          ** 40,000 Netizens Vs. U.S. Department of Justice. **                 * The Fight To Save Free Speech Online *  Contents:  o Government Argues CDA is Necessary and Not Overly Restrictive      * Government Witness Proposes Content Labeling Standard      * SurfWatch Blocks Government Expert  o How To Unsubscribe from this list  o More Information on CIEC and the Center for Democracy and Technology----------------------------------------------------------------------Quote of the Day: "Come on line with us, and your kids won't see                   what is in [DOJ lead attorney] Mr. Coppalino's book"                   of sexually explicit images found online.-- Judge Stewart Dalzell, suggesting how service providers might market   PICS compatible Internet services(1) GOVERNMENT ARGUES CDA IS NECESSARY AND NOT OVERLY RESTRICTIVEThe second phase of the legal challenge to the Communications Decency Actbegan on Friday as the Department of Justice presented its defense of thenew law before the three judge panel in Philadelphia. Although basicoutline of the government's defense has been known for some time, Fridaymarked the first time that the Government has presented witnesses indefense of the CDA.Based on Friday's testimony, the basis of the government's defense appearsto be that sexually explicit material is easily available to minors on theInternet, and that the CDA, combined with a system for labeling sexuallyexplicit material, is necessary to prevent minors from accessing sexuallyexplicit material online.Three witnesses testified at the Friday hearing:* Howard Schmidt, Special Agent, Director of the Air Force Office of  Special Investigations, Computer Crime Investigations, and* Dan Olsen, Chair of the Brigham Young University Computer Science  Department* Albert Vezza, of MIT and the World Wide Web Consortium. (Vezza was  called by the Citizens Internet Empowerment Coalition).DOJ EXPERT CLAIMS THAT SPEAKER-BASED LABELING IS AN EFFECTIVE SOLUTIONThe government also called Dan Olsen, form Brigham Young University, whotestified that a content labeling system he has developed can effectivelyprevent minors from accessing sexually explicit material online. Olsenproposed that content providers who offer sexually explicit material shouldinclude a "-L18" (for under 18) tag on their sites, and that World Wide Webbrowsers should be programmed to recognize this tag and prevent minors fromaccessing tagged sites.Despite Olsen's academic affiliation and research credentials, his standingas an expert on Internet standards setting is questionable at best. Olsendoes not sit on the Internet Engineering Task Force or any other bodycharged with developing protocols for the Internet, nor does he have anyother direct experience with the Internet standards process.  This fact waschallenged by CIEC attorney's, who initially objected to Olsen's testimony.The court overruled the objection, stating that they would hear Olsen'stestimony "for what it's worth".Olsen, who admitted he came up with the idea for a -L18 tag only since thegovernment asked him to testify in this case, suggested that the burden ofpreventing minors from accessing objectionable material online should fallprimarily on content providers, rather than the recipients of the material.During cross examination by CIEC attorney Bruce Ennis and ACLU attorneyChris Hansen, Olsen admitted that his proposal contains several criticalshortcomings.  Among these:* The standard for what material should receive a -L18 tag is difficult  to determine.* Relying on speakers to label their material requires that listeners  trust the judgment of the speaker, and limits the ability of listeners  to make decisions based on their own personal or family values.* The -L18 proposal contains no flexibility - it is either on or off.* It is basically impossible for a content provider to determine who is  an adult and to ensure that only adults have access to adult-oriented  materials.Ennis argued that, as a result, the only effective method to prevent minorsfrom accessing inappropriate material online is to rely on end users andparents to control what material comes into their homes using parentalcontrol technologies such as SurfWatch, CyberPatrol, AOL's Parental Controlfeatures, PICS, etc.Interestingly, although Olsen's proposal is conceptually similar toKidCode, a content labeling standards proposed by Nathaniel Borenstein lastsummer. Olsen stated he didn't know what KidCode was nor had he ever heardof it.Finally, Olsen testified that, because the government was involved in theinitial development of the Internet, he believes that the government has arole in determining appropriate technical standards for content labeling.This testimony was particularly striking because it in many ways representsthe worst nightmare of CDA opponents -- that the law will permit Governmentwill dictate technical protocols and standards for content on the Internet.Although this remains a significant concern, CIEC and ACLU attorneyseffectively demonstrated that Olsen's proposed solution is poorly conceivedand impractical.SURFWATCH FOILS GOVERNMENT EXPERTHoward Schmidt conducted a live demonstration of the Internet, taking thecourt on a tour of world wide web sites devoted to legal issues, a sitepromoting the City of Philadelphia, and several search engines. He thenshowed the court several usenet newsgroups and decoded pictures of ducksfrom the alt.binaries.pictures.animals newsgroup.  Schmidt then showed thecourt sites containing sexually explicit images, although no he did notactually display any sexually explicit materials.Schmidt's demonstration was intended to show how easily a child can accesssexually explicit materials online.  Throughout the course of the courtproceedings, the government has sought to show that minors caninadvertently stumble upon "indecent" or "patently offensive" material inthe normal course of using the Internet, particularly through searchengines, and that parental control software such as SurfWatch andCyberpatrol are not effective at preventing minors from accessing suchmaterial.While Schmidt claimed that minors can "inadvertently" stumble upon sexuallyexplicit material on the Internet, the Judges appeared unconvinced andasked several pointed questions. Judge Sloviter repeatedly asked "Can oneinadvertently come across this material?".Schmidt's claim that minors can inadvertently access sexually explicitmaterial on the Internet highlights a critical issue in this case. If thegovernment can demonstrate that minors can easily and inadvertently receiveindecent or patently offensive material on the Internet, the gvt. can arguethat the Internet is a "pervasive medium" similar to television and radio,and that broad content regulations like the CDA are the only way to protectminors.In his testimony, Schmidt cited examples of sexually explicit web siteswhich were not blocked by SurfWatch.  Schmidt testified that he had foundthese sites by searching for terms such as "sex" and "xxx" on popularInternet search engines. During cross examination by CIEC attorney AnnKappler however, Schmidt revealed that he had run his initial searchesWITHOUT SurfWatch running.  Kappler noted that SurfWatch prevents searchesfor terms like "sex" or "xxx", and that had Schmidt been running theprogram when he conducted his initial search, he would have been unable toaccess any of the sites he claimed SurfWatch didn't block.In response to relentless questioning by Kappler, Schmidt reluctantlyadmitted that "SurfWatch would not have allowed the [initial] search".PICS - AN EXAMPLE OF A LESS-RESTRICTIVE ALTERNATIVE TO THE CDAIn addition to the two government witnesses, the CIEC called Albert Vezzaof MIT and the World Wide Web Consortium to explain the Platform ForInternet Content Selection (PICS) to the court.PICS is a set of protocols which will permit voluntary multiple,independent third party rating systems to operate on the Internet andcommercial online services, as well as permit content providers to ratetheir own material.  The PICS standards are being developed at MIT throughthe World Wide Web Consortium with the support of most of the onlineindustry, including America Online, Prodigy, Netscape, Microsoft, Apple,and others.Vezza explained to the court that PICS, unlike Dan Olsen's "-L18" tag, willallow for tremendous flexibility in rating content, and that many ratingssystems are possible. And, because PICS would be controlled at the userlevel, parents and other users would have tremendous control over whatmaterial they access.Vezza also testified that PICS is far less restrictive and far moreeffective at preventing children from accessing inappropriate material thanthe Communications Decency Act. Vezza testified that because a substantialamount of sexually explicit material is available on sites outside theUnited states, and because PICS allows parents to utilize trustedthird-party rating systems, it is inherently more powerful and flexiblethan the broad restrictions imposed by the CDA.Vezza also pointed out that the PICS standards will allow parents to blockaccess to all unrated sites if they choose. As a result, Vezza said,"children could be protected without mandating any one rating system, fromforeign sites, and from sites with indecent or patently offensive materialthat has not been rated".The Judges appeared extremely interested in Vezza's testimony, and askednumerous questions. Judge Stewart Dalzell, who has taken a keen interest inthe case, stated for the second time since the trial began that the worldwide web has developed almost entirely because the government has stayedout of the way.  At one point, Dalzell stated "There must be powerfulmarket forces driving this process". Dalzell then stated rhetorically thathe could imagine a marketing advantage for implementing PICS standards andthat providers would sell their services by saying, "come on line with usand your kids won't see what is in Mr. Coppalino's book", referring to thebook of evidence containing sexually explicit images found online.TESTIMONY TO RESUME MONDAY APRIL 15Testimony will resume on Monday April 15 with Government witness Dan Olsen.The trial is proceeding more quickly than initially expected, and it ispossible that all testimony from both sides will be concluded on Monday.It is possible that the hearing originally scheduled for April 26 will becanceled, and that the closing arguments, scheduled for June 6, will bemoved to up to mid-May.  CDT will post an update as more informationbecomes available.FOR MORE INFORMATIONMore information on the case, including the text of the complaint,supporting documents, transcripts from the first three days of testimony,and back issues of CIEC Trial Bulletins can be found on the CitizensInternet Empowerment Coalition Web Site:  http://www.cdt.org/ciec-----------------------------------------------------------------------(2) Subscription InformationAs CIEC members, you have been invited to join this list in order toreceive news updates and other information relevant to the CIEC challengeto the Communications Decency Act. To subscribe, visithttp://www.cdt.org/ciec and join the Coalition.If you ever want to remove yourself from this list, send email to   ciec-members-request@cdt.orgwith 'unsubscribe ciec-members' in the SUBJECT LINE (w/o the 'quotes').Leave the body of your message blank.-----------------------------------------------------------------------(3) For More InformationFor more information on the CIEC challenge, including the text of thecomplaint and other relevant materials:* World Wide Web                      --        http://www.cdt.org/ciec/* General Information about CIEC      --        ciec-info@cdt.org* Copy of the Complaint               --        ciec-docs@cdt.org* Specific Questions Regarding the  Coalition, incuding Press Inquiries --        ciec@cdt.org* General information about the  Center for Democracy and Technology --        info@cdt.org--end ciec-update.94/13/96 Return to the Citizens Internet Empowerment Coalition Page Return to the CDT Home Page WT02-B05-78IA095-001027-B013-189http://www.cdt.org:80/ciec/bulletins/ciec-update.8.html 205.177.10.31 19970215012646 text/html 7387HTTP/1.0 200 OKDate: Sat, 15 Feb 1997 01:25:30 GMTServer: Apache/1.1.1Content-type: text/html CIEC UPDATE No. 8 - 4/11 Trial Bulletin  -----------------------------------------------------------------       _______   _       _    ____        _ _      _   _      |__   __| (_)     | |  |  _ \      | | |    | | (_)         | |_ __ _  __ _| |  | |_) |_   _| | | ___| |_ _ _ __         | | '__| |/ _` | |  |  _ <| | | | | |/ _ \ __| | '_ \         | | |  | | (_| | |  | |_) | |_| | | |  __/ |_| | | | |         |_|_|  |_|\__,_|_|  |____/ \__,_|_|_|\___|\__|_|_| |_|    Citizens Internet Empowerment Coalition Trial Update No. 8              Pre-Trial Update -  April 11, 1996 12:00 noon ET  -----------------------------------------------------------------                     http://www.cdt.org/ciec/                        ciec-info@cdt.org  -----------------------------------------------------------------   CIEC UPDATES intended for members of the Citizens Internet   Empowerment Coalition. CIEC Updates are written and edited by the   Center for Democracy and Technology (http://www.cdt.org). This   document may be reposted as long as it remains in total.  ------------------------------------------------------------------          ** 40,000 Netizens Vs. U.S. Department of Justice. **                 * The Fight To Save Free Speech Online *  Contents:  o Pre-Trial Update - Government To Present Its Defense of CDA    Beginning Friday April 12      * List of Government Witnesses Expected to Testify      * Schedule for Remainder of Trial  o Transcripts of the Frist Two Days of Testimony Now Online!  o Subscription Information  o More Information on CIEC and the Center for Democracy and Technology----------------------------------------------------------------------(1) GOVERNMENT TO BEGIN ITS DEFENSE OF CDA BEGINNING FRIDAY 4/12The fight to overturn the Communications Decency Act will enter its secondphase on Friday April 12 with testimony from witnesses called by theGovernment in defense of the CDA.  The government is expected to callseveral witnesses (listed below) who will argue that the CommunicationsDecency Act is necessary and is the "least restrictive means" of protectingchildren from "indecent" and "patently offensive" material on the Internet.Although the government has given some indication of its strategy fordefending the CDA during the first three days of testimony (see CIEC TrialBulletin No.7, 4/1/96), over the next two days we will learn a great dealmore about the government's position.  The government is also expected toconduct its own Internet demonstration, and is likely to try and show thecourt examples of sexually explicit material available on the Internet.Witnesses scheduled to testify on Friday April 12 and Monday April 15:* Howard Schmidt, Supervisory Special Agent, Director of Air Force  Office of Special Investigation, Computer Crime Investigations  (Government Witness)* Dan Olsen, Professor of Computer Science, Brigham Young University  (Government Witness)* Albert Vezza (Associate Director, MIT Laboratory for Computer Science and  Chairman of the World Wide Web  Consortium), on behalf of the Citizens  Internet Empowermnet Coalition. Vezza was unable to testify at the April  1 hearing due to scheduling conflicts.Government witnesses will be cross examined by CIEC and ACLU lawyers. CIECand ACLU lawyers will also have an opportunity to present rebuttaltestimony during a hearing scheduled for April 26, and again in closingarguments scheduled for June 3.OVERVIEW OF EXPECTED TESTIMONY FOR APRIL 12 AND 15Albert Vezza, the last witness to be called on behalf of the plaintiffs,will explain to the court how PICS works and why it offers parents theability to protect children from unwanted material in a less restrictivemeans than the CDA.Howard Schmidt is expected to conduct a live Internet Demonstration inwhich he will show the court some of the 'good' material on the Internet,as well as some of the sexually-explicit material available to minors.Dan Olsen is expected to testify that the PICS standards (which enablemultiple, third party labeling and content selection) are too cumbersomeand will not be effective.  Based on his declaration, Olsen will insteadpropose his own system under which content providers would tag materialwith a code (-L18) indicating that the material is not appropriate forthose under 18.The government is expected to argue that such a content labeling systemwould be an appropriate "good faith defense" to prosecution under the CDA.Interestingly, it is not clear from the language of the CDA that suchsystem would constitute a "good faith defense" to prosecution, or whatmaterial would require a tag. These issues will be raised by CIEC and ACLUattorneys during cross examination.SCHEDULE FOR REMAINDER OF THE TRIALApril 12 - 15   Government Witnesses (and final CIEC witness)April 26        Plaintiff's Rebuttal TestimonyMay   13        Post-hearing briefs and proposed findings of law and                fact from both sides will be filedJune 3          Closing Arguments (each side is given 2 hours)CDT will post a summary of Friday's testimony shortly after the testimonyconcludes for the day (and after we travel back down to Washington DC).Previous issues of CIEC Trial Bulletins are available on CDT's world wideweb page (http://www.cdt.org/)-----------------------------------------------------------------------(2) Transcripts of 3/21 and 3/22 Hearings Available OnlineTranscripts of the first two days of testimony are now available online.Transcripts of the 4/1 hearing will be posted soon.To view the transcripts, visit: http://www.cdt.org/ciec/transcripts/index.html-----------------------------------------------------------------------(3) Subscription InformationAs CIEC members, you have been invited to join this list in order toreceive news updates and other information relevant to the CIEC challengeto the Communications Decency Act. To subscribe, visithttp://www.cdt.org/ciec and join the Coalition.If you ever want to remove yourself from this list, send email to   ciec-members-request@cdt.orgwith 'unsubscribe ciec-members' in the SUBJECT LINE (w/o the 'quotes').Leave the body of your message blank.-----------------------------------------------------------------------(4) For More InformationFor more information on the CIEC challenge, including the text of thecomplaint and other relevant materials:* World Wide Web                      --        http://www.cdt.org/ciec/* General Information about CIEC      --        ciec-info@cdt.org* Copy of the Complaint               --        ciec-docs@cdt.org* Specific Questions Regarding the  Coalition, incuding Press Inquiries --        ciec@cdt.org* General information about the  Center for Democracy and Technology --        info@cdt.org--end ciec-update.84/11/96 Return to the Citizens Internet Empowerment Coalition Page Return to the CDT Home Page WT02-B05-79IA095-001027-B013-209http://www.cdt.org:80/ciec/bulletins/ciec-update.7.html 205.177.10.31 19970215012658 text/html 11217HTTP/1.0 200 OKDate: Sat, 15 Feb 1997 01:25:39 GMTServer: Apache/1.1.1Content-type: text/html CIEC UPDATE No. 7 - 4/1 Trial Bulletin  -----------------------------------------------------------------       _______   _       _    ____        _ _      _   _      |__   __| (_)     | |  |  _ \      | | |    | | (_)         | |_ __ _  __ _| |  | |_) |_   _| | | ___| |_ _ _ __         | | '__| |/ _` | |  |  _ <| | | | | |/ _ \ __| | '_ \         | | |  | | (_| | |  | |_) | |_| | | |  __/ |_| | | | |         |_|_|  |_|\__,_|_|  |____/ \__,_|_|_|\___|\__|_|_| |_|    Citizens Internet Empowerment Coalition Trial Update No. 7              Evening Update -  April 1, 1996 10:00 pm ET  -----------------------------------------------------------------                     http://www.cdt.org/ciec/                        ciec-info@cdt.org  -----------------------------------------------------------------   CIEC UPDATES intended for members of the Citizens Internet   Empowerment Coalition. CIEC Updates are written and edited by the   Center for Democracy and Technology (http://www.cdt.org). This   document may be reposted as long as it remains in total.  ------------------------------------------------------------------          ** 30,000 Netizens Vs. U.S. Department of Justice. **                 * The Fight To Save Free Speech Online *  Contents:  o Evening Update - Recap of Last Day of CIEC/ACLU Testimony      * How is the CIEC case fairing so far?      * Preview of DOJ defense - Don't worry, CDA's not too broad..      * Summary of today's testimony  o Subscription Information  o More Information on CIEC and the Center for Democracy and Technology----------------------------------------------------------------------(1) EVENING UPDATE - RECAP OF FINAL DAY OF CIEC/ACLU TESTIMONYTestimony in the battle to overturn the Communications Decency Act resumedMonday (4/1) before a three judge panel in the Philadelphia federal court.Witnesses for the Citizens Internet Empowerment Coalition and the ACLU gavethe court an overview of the availability of parental controls onCommercial Online Services and the further illustrated the concerns ofcommercial and non commercial content providers that the CDA threatens thefree flow of information and the free exchange of ideas online.Witnesses testifying today included:- Bill Burrington, Director of Public Policy for America Online (CIEC)- Andrew Anker, CEO of HotWired Ventures Ltd. (CIEC)- Barry Steinhardt, Associate Director, National ACLU (ACLU)- Howard Rheingold, Author (ACLU)- Stephen Donaldson, President of Stop Prisoner Rape (ACLU)A summary of the testimony is included below.Monday was the third and final day of testimony from Citizens InternetEmpowerment Coalition (CIEC) and ACLU witnesses. Testimony resumes on April12 and 15 when the Justice Department will call witnesses to defend theconstitutionality of the CDA. CIEC and ACLU lawyers will have anopportunity to rebut the DOJ testimony during a final session scheduled forApril 26.HOW IS THE CIEC CASE FAIRING?The first three days of testimony have established a solid record for thebasis of the legal challenge. The CIEC legal challenge to the CDA is basedon two arguments:* The Internet is a unique communications technology, different from  traditional broadcast mass-media, and* The content regulations imposed by the CDA are not the "least  restrictive means" of protecting children online, and is therefor  unconstitutional.The court has heard testimony from Internet businesses, access providers,and Libraries, and commercial and non commercial content providersdescribing the nature of the Internet and how it functions (including alive demonstration of the Net and parental control technologies), as wellas numerous examples of constitutionally protected materials which would beprohibited under the CDA.  The Judges, while giving little indication oftheir positions, are asking numerous questions and appear to have taken akeen interest in the Internet.DOJ: DON'T WORRY, THE BILL AINT THAT BAD...After 3 days of hearings and cross examination by Justice Departmentattorneys, a picture of the government's strategy for defending the CDA isbeginning to emerge. Although we will learn much more when testimonyresumes on April 12, the government appears to be arguing that CDA willrestrict only the most extreme sexually explicit material, and that thedefenses to prosecution are broad and do not place undue burdens on contentproviders. In other words, the terms "indecent" and "patently offensive"should be construed narrowly, and the defenses construed broadly.Under this argument, the government appears to be overlooking severalfundamental aspects of past indecency cases and the actual language of theCDA.  In past indecency cases, including the Pacifica case which theauthors of the CDA cite as precedent for the legislation, the term"indecent" has been read very broadly to prohibit material even if it hasredeeming social, literary, educational, or scientific value. In addition,during the debate on the CDA, Congress explicitly rejected the "harmful tominors" standard, which includes a test for redeeming value.The government also appears to be arguing for a broad interpretation of theCDA's defenses.  The defenses available under the CDA provide immunity forcontent provides who take "good faith, reasonable steps", including adultaccess codes or credit card verification, to restrict minors access to"indecent" material.  Throughout the course of the testimony, the DOJ hasasked questions of witnesses implying that implementing PICS standards orother HTML tags would be relatively easy for content providers, suggestingthat they believe content labeling would be a "good faith" defense underthe CDA.  Here again however, it is important to note that the House/SenateConference committee rejected parts of the White amendment which would havecreated a more explicit defense for content labeling.FOR MORE INFORMATIONCDT will continue to provide updates on the case when testimony resumes onApril 12.  In addition, transcripts of the first 3 days of testimony willbe available on CDT's web page later this week. Please continue to visithttp://www.cdt.org/ciec for more information.----------------------------------------------------------------------(2) SUMMARY OF TODAY'S TESTIMONYBill Burrington, Director of Public Policy for America Online, told theCourt that while AOL can and does exert some control over content on its onnetwork, it is impossible for service providers to control content on theglobal Internet.  Testifying both on behalf of AOL as well as the entirecommercial online services industry (including Compuserve, Prodigy,Microsoft Network, etc.), Burrington stated that while some online materialmay be inappropriate for children, "... effective protection of childrenfrom exposure to inappropriate material can only occur at the level ofindividual users".Burrington outlined the various parental control measures available oncommercial online services.  On America Online, parents have the ability torestrict their children's access to Usenet newsgroups, binary downloads,chat rooms, and other features of the service. He also argued that the"indecency" restrictions imposed by the CDA will effectively banconstitutionally protected speech for adults and reduce online-speech toinformation and discourse only appropriate for children.  Burrington arguedthat fear of criminal liability under the CDA could motivate AOL to removehealth related information, online forums, and other content from theservice.HotWired CEO Andrew Anker testified that some of the material available onHotWired, including a recent stories on the poet Allen Ginsburg and theatl.sex.bondage newsgroup could be considered "indecent", but that it wouldbe impossible and extremely expensive for the company to verify the age ofevery visitor to the site. In response to a question from the JusticeDepartment, Anker stated, "I don't understand what indecent and patentlyoffensive mean, or what community's standards apply".  As a result, Ankerstated, HotWired fears criminal liability under the Communications DecencyAct.Stephen Donaldson of Stop Prisoner Rape, a group dedicated to educating thepublic about prison rape and helping victims recover, testified thatbecause some of the content on his World Wide Web site uses sometimesexplicit images and "street language" to describe prison conditions, hefears criminal liability under the CDA.Similarly, Barry Steinhardt of the ACLU testified that some of the materialon the ACLU's web site, including the '7-dirty words' in the text of thePacifica Decision, and because the ACLU hosts chat sessions on AmericaOnline, the ACLU could face huge fines and prison terms unless it censorsitself and its members. When asked if he felt that the text of the bible orShakespeare's Hamlet could be considered "indecent" under the CDA,Steinhardt argued that community standards vary throughout the UnitedStates and that in some places, "That kind of material ... has been thesubject of censorship" in parts of the US, and "there are many people whoregard that material as Indecent."Howard Rheingold, author and expert on the subject of CyberspaceCommunities, described some of the many benefits the online world can bringto education and a sense of community.  Rheingold argued that, although itis technically possible to restrict minor's access to MUDs and MUSEs, it isdifficult to determine what material should be would be illegal under theCDA.-----------------------------------------------------------------------2. Subscription InformationAs CIEC members, you have been invited to join this list in order toreceive news updates and other information relevant to the CIEC challengeto the Communications Decency Act.If you ever want to remove yourself from this list, send email to   ciec-members-request@cdt.orgwith 'unsubscribe ciec-members' in the SUBJECT LINE (w/o the 'quotes').Leave the body of your message blank.-----------------------------------------------------------------------3. For More InformationFor more information on the CIEC challenge, including the text of thecomplaint and other relevant materials:* World Wide Web                      --        http://www.cdt.org/ciec/* General Information about CIEC      --        ciec-info@cdt.org* Copy of the Complaint               --        ciec-docs@cdt.org* Specific Questions Regarding the  Coalition, incuding Press Inquiries --        ciec@cdt.org* General information about the  Center for Democracy and Technology --        info@cdt.org--end ciec-update.74/1/96 Return to the Citizens Internet Empowerment Coalition Page Return to the CDT Home Page WT02-B05-80IA095-001027-B013-232http://www.cdt.org:80/ciec/bulletins/ciec-update.6.html 205.177.10.31 19970215012708 text/html 9073HTTP/1.0 200 OKDate: Sat, 15 Feb 1997 01:25:51 GMTServer: Apache/1.1.1Content-type: text/html CIEC UPDATE No. 6 - 3/21 Trial Bulletin  -----------------------------------------------------------------       _______   _       _    ____        _ _      _   _      |__   __| (_)     | |  |  _ \      | | |    | | (_)         | |_ __ _  __ _| |  | |_) |_   _| | | ___| |_ _ _ __         | | '__| |/ _` | |  |  _ <| | | | | |/ _ \ __| | '_ \         | | |  | | (_| | |  | |_) | |_| | | |  __/ |_| | | | |         |_|_|  |_|\__,_|_|  |____/ \__,_|_|_|\___|\__|_|_| |_|    Citizens Internet Empowerment Coalition Trial Update No. 6              Afternoon Update -  March 22, 1996 1:00 pm ET  -----------------------------------------------------------------                     http://www.cdt.org/ciec/                        ciec-info@cdt.org  -----------------------------------------------------------------   CIEC UPDATES intended for members of the Citizens Internet   Empowerment Coalition. CIEC Updates are written and edited by the   Center for Democracy and Technology (http://www.cdt.org). This   document may be reposted as long as it remains in total.  ------------------------------------------------------------------          ** 30,000 Netizens Vs. U.S. Department of Justice. **                 * The Fight To Save Free Speech Online *  Contents:  o Afternoon Update, Day 2 - Overview of This Morning's Testimony      * Donna Hoffman      * Robert Croneberger  o Subscription Information  o More Information on CIEC and the Center for Democracy and Technology----------------------------------------------------------------------Live from the Courtroom in Philadelphia...MORE ON INTERNET BASICS, ABILITY TO CONTROL CONTENT, AND DIFFICULTIES OFCOMPLYING WITH THE COMMUNICATIONS DECENCY ACTThe Court began the second day of testimony in the hearing on theconstitutionality of the CDA with a presentation from Donna Hoffman ofVanderbilt University. Hoffman appeared as an expert on the use of theInternet for marketing and the nature of cyberspace. The Court also heardfrom Robert Croneberger, Director of the Carnegie Library in Pittsburgh PA.Hoffman described for the Court the vast amount of information availableonline and the difficulty of individual content providers to control whoaccesses particular materials. Hoffman also testified that although thereis adult oriented material available on the Internet, the actual amount ofsuch material as a percentage of what is available on the Net is extremelysmall.  In response to a question form Judge Dalzel, Hoffman described theInternet as the most democratic communications medium in the world, and themost important communications technology developed since the printingpress.Throughout their questioning of Hoffman, the Justice Department attorneysappeared to be arguing that the Internet, more than any othercommunications technology, provides children a unique ability to accesssexually explicit materials.  Justice Department attorneys showed anexample of a search conduced on "InfoSeek" (a popular web-directory) forthe book title "Little Women", which they hypothesized a minor mightconduct for a school project.  The DOJ attorney offered into evidence alist of links generated from a search for "Little Women", which included alink to a site titled "See Hot Pictures of Naked Women!"The Justice Department also pointed to a site known as "Bianca's SmutShack", which has placed a notice on the site warning minors not to enterand suggesting ways parents can block access to the site.  The DOJ wasapparently trying to illustrate that the CDA had resulted in the removal ofsome adult materials and has led others to take "good faith, reasonablesteps" to prevent minors from accessing the site.Hoffman emphasized that the only effective means of ensuring that minors donot access inappropriate material is to rely on end users and parents. In aresponse to a question posed by Chris Hansen, an ACLU attorney, Hoffmannoted that all three of the options suggested by the Bianca site eachrequire individual user control, and that the content provider cannotensure that no one under 18 accesses the site. This exchange will beimportant in showing that the only effective means of preventing childrenfrom accessing objectionable or inappropriate material online is to rely onindividual users and parents to make content decisions themselves.LIBRARIAN SAYS COMPLYING WITH CDA IS IMPOSSIBLEThe next witness to testify, called on behalf of the CIEC, was RobertCroneberger, Director of the Carnegie Library of Pittsburgh.  Cronebergertestified that the Carnegie Library maintains an extensive online cardcatalogue with over 2 million entries, as well as online archivescontaining he full texts of many magazines and journals.Croneberger stated that the scope of the indecency standard imposed by theCDA threatens the ability of Libraries to place a great deal of materialonline, including card catalogues and the texts of Shakespeare plays.Croneberger also stated that it is both technically and economicallyimpossible for his library to search through their entire catalogue toidentify and label particular entries in order to ensure that they are notaccessible to minors.For their part, the Justice Department attempted to show that searching theCarnegie Library's 2 million entry catalogue by keywords such as "sex"would narrow the search to a manageable level, and would thus be realisticto accomplish.  Croneberger responded by noting that the word "sex" mightappear in books ranging from a biography of President Lincoln, to biologytexts to travel guides. Croneberger stated that even if it were technicallypossible and economically reasonable to label the library's entire onlinecollection, it would be extremely difficult to do so because thedefinitions of "indecent" and "patently offensive" are can be interpretedso broadly.Croneberger stated that Libraries should not be responsible for labelingand blocking access to certain materials.  Such a requirement would beinconsistent with the mission of a library, Croneberger stated. However,Croneberger stressed the benefits of empowering parents to control theirchildren's access to material online, just as parents do in the real world.During one point of his testimony, Croneberger said, "If we as librariesare put in a position of making decisions for other people's children, wewould fail miserably."  He then went on to say that he wished his librarycould afford to provide copies of SurfWatch and other parental controlapplications to loan out to parents.JUDGES CONTINUE TO EXPRESS A GREAT DEAL OF INTEREST IN THE NETAs they did during yesterday's testimony and Internet demonstration,the three judges asked a number of questions of both witnesses thismorning.  All three appear extremely interested in the workings of theInternet, particularly the World Wide Web and the ability to easily jumpfrom one part of the world to another.  The judges also appear interestedin the questions raised about the definitions of the terms "indecent" and"patently offensive", although they have given no indication of how theywill come out on this question.Testimony resumes with Scott Bradner of Harvard and the IETF at 1:30 ET.Court is expected to adjourn at 3:30 ET today and resume at 9:30 am onMonday April 1.  Situation permitting we will provide an evening update onthe second part of today's proceedings.-----------------------------------------------------------------------2. Subscription InformationAs CIEC members, you have been invited to join this list in order toreceive news updates and other information relevant to the CIEC challengeto the Communications Decency Act.If you ever want to remove yourself from this list, send email to   ciec-members-request@cdt.orgwith 'unsubscribe ciec-members' in the SUBJECT LINE (w/o the 'quotes').Leave the body of your message blank.-----------------------------------------------------------------------3. For More InformationFor more information on the CIEC challenge, including the text of thecomplaint and other relevant materials:* World Wide Web                      --        http://www.cdt.org/ciec/* General Information about CIEC      --        ciec-info@cdt.org* Copy of the Complaint               --        ciec-docs@cdt.org* Specific Questions Regarding the  Coalition, incuding Press Inquiries --        ciec@cdt.org* General information about the  Center for Democracy and Technology --        info@cdt.org--end ciec-update.63/22/96 Return to the Citizens Internet Empowerment Coalition Page Return to the CDT Home Page WT02-B05-81IA095-001027-B013-252http://www.cdt.org:80/ciec/bulletins/ciec-update.5.html 205.177.10.31 19970215012720 text/html 7796HTTP/1.0 200 OKDate: Sat, 15 Feb 1997 01:26:04 GMTServer: Apache/1.1.1Content-type: text/html CIEC UPDATE No. 5 - 3/21 PM Trial Bulletin - Surfing in Court  -----------------------------------------------------------------       _______   _       _    ____        _ _      _   _      |__   __| (_)     | |  |  _ \      | | |    | | (_)         | |_ __ _  __ _| |  | |_) |_   _| | | ___| |_ _ _ __         | | '__| |/ _` | |  |  _ <| | | | | |/ _ \ __| | '_ \         | | |  | | (_| | |  | |_) | |_| | | |  __/ |_| | | | |         |_|_|  |_|\__,_|_|  |____/ \__,_|_|_|\___|\__|_|_| |_|    Citizens Internet Empowerment Coalition Trial Update No. 5              Evening Update -  March 21, 1996 7:00 pm ET  -----------------------------------------------------------------                     http://www.cdt.org/ciec/                        ciec-info@cdt.org  -----------------------------------------------------------------   CIEC UPDATES intended for members of the Citizens Internet   Empowerment Coalition. CIEC Updates are written and edited by the   Center for Democracy and Technology (http://www.cdt.org). This   document may be reposted as long as it remains in total.  ------------------------------------------------------------------          ** 30,000 Netizens Vs. U.S. Department of Justice. **                 * The Fight To Save Free Speech Online *  Contents:  o Evening Update - Recap of Afternoon Testimony      * Surfing the Net from the Federal Court      * The Impact of the CDA on Small, Independent Content Providers  o More Information on CIEC and the Center for Democracy and Technology----------------------------------------------------------------------(1) EVENING UPDATE - SURFING THE NET FROM THE COURTROOMThe Court has recessed for the day after a long day of education on thenature of the Internet, the effectiveness of parental control software, andtestimony on the potential impact of the Communications Decency Act onsmall, independent content providers.  Testimony resumes at 9:30 am ETFriday March 22.After hearing about the workings of the Internet from Scott Bradner of theIETF this morning (see CIEC Afternoon Edition 3/21), the Court was given avisual demonstration of the World Wide Web by SurfWatch's Ann Duvall. Afterbriefly describing the Internet and the basic steps one must take to getonline (including purchasing a computer and modem, and subscribing to anInternet Service Provider or Online Service), Duvall logged on and took theCourt on a trip around the Net. Duvall visited a site sponsored by the Cityof Philadelphia (the setting of the trial) and checked the schedule forupcoming Phillies games, then jumped to London for a quick tour of a Museumbefore returning to the United States for a demonstration of Yahoo's newsite for Kids (yahooligans). She also showed the court how her daughter hadfound information on Fragile X syndrome for a research paper.Duvall then illustrated the effectiveness of SurfWatch, and parentalcontrol technology generally, by attempting to access several adultoriented sites (including Penthouse Magazine) with SurfWatch engaged.  Shealso illustrated how SurfWatch blocks attempts to search for terms like"sexy" and "erotica" using common search engines. Each attempt was greatedwith a "blocked by SurfWatch" message.Despite expectations that the Justice Department might attempt to use theInternet demonstration to show that some sexually explicit Internet sitesmay not be blocked by SurfWatch, the DOJ attorneys did not do so, andoffered no examples of sexually explicit sites to the Court. Instead, theyconcentrated their efforts on the number of sites SurfWatch blocks(approximately 5000, plus key words like "sex") in an apparent attempt toshow that there is are a large number of such sites on the Net. They alsosuggested SurfWatch may not be effective because sites on the Internetchange frequently and new sites regularly come on line.The Judges appeared extremely interested in Duvall's testimony, and asked anumber of questions.  They seemed particularly taken with the demonstrationof the World Wide Web and the variety of information available. In animportant question wich may help to illustrate the potential weeknesses ofthe CDA, Judge Dalzel focused on Duvall's statement that approximately 30%of the sites SurfWatch blocks are outside the United States.SMALL, INDEPENDENT CONTENT PROVIDERS WILL SUFFER UNDER THE CDAThe Court next heard from Kiyoshi Kuromiya, Director of the Critical PathAIDS Project. Kuroimya, called by the ACLU attorneys, testified that hemaintains a World Wide Web site which contains information on how to avoidthe AIDS virus and other sexually transmitted diseases. Kuromiya statedthat some of the materials on his site use explicit terms which mayviolated the "indecency" and "patently offensive" provisions of the CDA.In response to a question from Judge Dalzel, Kuromiya stated that he wouldnot want to alter the materials he posts, or deny access to the site, inorder to avoid prosecution under the CDA.The Court also heard form Patricia Warren  an author and publisher whomaintains a Web site containing excerpts from her books, some of which dealwith Gay and Lesbian subject matter.  Warren stated that she fearsprosecution under the CDA because some in the United States consider thesubject matter she addresses to be 'indecent'.  During her testimony, oneof the Judges, apparently understanding the vast potential of the Internetto make every user a publisher, asked if it is easier to publish a magazineonline than in printed form. Warren responded by suggesting that becausedistribution and production costs are significantly lower on the Net,publishing online is an important outlet for small publishers with limitedresources.Neither Kuromiya or Warren were cross examined by the Justice Department.Testimony resumes tomorrow with Scott Bradner, who had to leave earlytoday. Witnesses expected to testify also include Donna Hoffman, ofVanderbeldt University.  Situation permitting, we will post a summary oftomorrow's testimony starting in the afternoon. Please continue to checkthe CIEC web page for updates (http://www.cdt.org/ciec/)-----------------------------------------------------------------------2. Subscrition InformationAs CIEC members, you have been invited to join this list in order toreceive news updates and other information relevant to the CIEC challengeto the Communications Decency Act.If you ever want to remove yourself from this list, send email to   ciec-members-request@cdt.orgwith 'unsubscribe ciec-members' in the SUBJECT LINE (w/o the 'quotes').Leave the body of your message blank.-----------------------------------------------------------------------3. For More InformationFor more information on the CIEC challenge, including the text of thecomplaint and other relevant materials:* World Wide Web                      --        http://www.cdt.org/ciec/* General Information about CIEC      --        ciec-info@cdt.org* Copy of the Complaint               --        ciec-docs@cdt.org* Specific Questions Regarding the  Coalition, incuding Press Inquiries --        ciec@cdt.org* General information about the  Center for Democracy and Technology --        info@cdt.org--end ciec-update.53/21/96 Return to the Citizens Internet Empowerment Coalition Page Return to the CDT Home Page WT02-B05-82IA095-001027-B014-6http://www.cdt.org:80/ciec/bulletins/ciec-update.4.html 205.177.10.31 19970215012735 text/html 5398HTTP/1.0 200 OKDate: Sat, 15 Feb 1997 01:26:19 GMTServer: Apache/1.1.1Content-type: text/html CIEC UPDATE No. 4 - 3/21 PM Trial Bulletin - INTERNET 101   -----------------------------------------------------------------       _______   _       _    ____        _ _      _   _      |__   __| (_)     | |  |  _ \      | | |    | | (_)         | |_ __ _  __ _| |  | |_) |_   _| | | ___| |_ _ _ __         | | '__| |/ _` | |  |  _ <| | | | | |/ _ \ __| | '_ \         | | |  | | (_| | |  | |_) | |_| | | |  __/ |_| | | | |         |_|_|  |_|\__,_|_|  |____/ \__,_|_|_|\___|\__|_|_| |_|    Citizens Internet Empowerment Coalition Trial Update No. 4              Afternoon Update -  March 21, 1996 1:00 pm ET  -----------------------------------------------------------------                     http://www.cdt.org/ciec/                        ciec-info@cdt.org  -----------------------------------------------------------------   CIEC UPDATES intended for members of the Citizens Internet   Empowerment Coalition. CIEC Updates are written and edited by the   Center for Democracy and Technology (http://www.cdt.org). This   document may be reposted as long as it remains in total.  ------------------------------------------------------------------          ** 30,000 Netizens Vs. U.S. Department of Justice. **                 * The Fight To Save Free Speech Online *  Contents:  o Afternoon Update - Live from the Courtroom in Philadelphia       INTERNET 101 - WHAT IS THE NET AND HOW DOES IT WORK?  o More Information on CIEC and the Center for Democracy and Technology----------------------------------------------------------------------Live from the courtroom in Philadelphia...INTERNET 101 -- WHAT IS THE NET AND HOW DOES IT WORK?The Court has just taken a recess for lunch. This morning, the Court heardtestimony from Scott Bradner (of Harvard University and the IETF), who wascalled on behalf of the Citizens Internet Empowerment Coalition. Bradner,who answered questions posed by the Justice Department, gave the court a 3hour overview of the nature of the Internet and how it functions.Bradner gave a detailed overview of the Internet standards settingprocesses, and then described the various functions available online,including the World Wide Web, Usenet Newsgroups, ftp, telnet, andelectronic mail. Throughout his testimony, Bradner illustrated to the courtthat the Internet is a vast, decentralized global network containinginformation on a huge variety of subjects, from Newsgroups on Formula Oneauto-racing to the catalogues of the Harvard Library.When outlining the various ways users can access information on theInternet, Bradner stressed that users have tremendous control over thematerial they access.  Bradner's testimony illustrated to the court that ifa user wants to access information on a particular subject, they must seekout that information and affirmatively request it before any information isprovided.  The Government did not attempt to refute this claim, nor didthey present any evidence to the contrary.The 3 judges were actively involved in this morning's testimony, and askedmany questions which indicated that, despite the flurry of acronyms andtechnical details Bradner presented, they understand the basic nature ofthe Internet as presented today.WHAT DOES THIS MEAN FOR THE CASE?While it is obviously still far too early to draw any conclusions about theoutcome of this case, this morning's testimony was an important first stepin showing the court that the Internet is a unique communicationstechnology distinct from mass media such as Radio and TV. As you know, thisargument is a critical piece of the CIEC challenge. Bradner's testimonyshowed that, while the Internet is ubiquitous network accessible fromvirtually anywhere, it is not, as the Justice Department seeks to show,"pervasive" in the same way as traditional mass media.Testimony will resume at 1:30 pm with Ann Duvall, President of SurfWatchSoftware (and another CIEC witness). Using the Net.connection installed inthe court, Ann will demonstrate the World Wide Web and illustrate howSurfWatch functions.  Scott Bradner will return tomorrow (Friday 3/22)morning for follow-up questions by CIEC attorneys.Situation permitting, we will post an update later today on the afternoontestimony.-----------------------------------------------------------------------2. For More InformationFor more information on the CIEC challenge, including the text of thecomplaint and other relevant materials:* World Wide Web                      --        http://www.cdt.org/ciec/* General Information about CIEC      --        ciec-info@cdt.org* Copy of the Complaint               --        ciec-docs@cdt.org* Specific Questions Regarding the  Coalition, incuding Press Inquiries --        ciec@cdt.org* General information about the  Center for Democracy and Technology --        info@cdt.org--end ciec-update.43/21/96 Return to the Citizens Internet Empowerment Coalition Page Return to the CDT Home Page WT02-B05-83IA095-001027-B014-21http://www.cdt.org:80/ciec/bulletins/ciec-update.3.html 205.177.10.31 19970215012756 text/html 14475HTTP/1.0 200 OKDate: Sat, 15 Feb 1997 01:26:28 GMTServer: Apache/1.1.1Content-type: text/html CIEC UPDATE No. 3 - Excerpts from Declarations of CIEC Witnesses   -----------------------------------------------------------------       _______   _       _   ____        _ _      _   _             |__   __| (_)     | | |  _ \      | | |    | | (_)               | |_ __ _  __ _| | | |_) |_   _| | | ___| |_ _ _ __           | | '__| |/ _` | | |  _ <| | | | | |/ _ \ __| | '_ \          | | |  | | (_| | | | |_) | |_| | | |  __/ |_| | | | |         |_|_|  |_|\__,_|_| |____/ \__,_|_|_|\___|\__|_|_| |_|    Citizens Internet Empowerment Coalition Update No. 3 -  3/21/96  -----------------------------------------------------------------                     http://www.cdt.org/ciec/                        ciec-info@cdt.org  -----------------------------------------------------------------   CIEC UPDATES intended for members of the Citizens Internet   Empowerment Coalition. CIEC Updates are written and edited by the   Center for Democracy and Technology (http://www.cdt.org). This   document may be reposted as long as it remains in total.  ------------------------------------------------------------------          ** 30,000 Netizens Vs. U.S. Department of Justice. **                 * The Fight To Save Free Speech Online *  Contents:  o Excerpts from Declarations of CIEC witnesses  o Subscription Information  o More Information on CIEC and the Center for Democracy and Technology----------------------------------------------------------------------This message is being posted directly from the courtroom in a PhiladelphiaFederal Court where, in just a few hours, a historic legal battle willbegin. Over the next several weeks, the court will consider theconstitutionality of the Communications Decency Act. In the process, thefate of the Internet and the future of freedom of expression in theInformation Age will be on trial.In order to keep you as informed as possible on the proceedings before thecourt, CDT will publish periodic updates. This, the first of those updates,outlines the testimony presented by CIEC witnesses in written declarationsfiled on March 1, 1996. Several of these witnesses will be appearing livebefore the court in the coming weeks.Later today, we will post a summary of today's court proceedings.--------------------------------------------------------------------------(1) Excerpts of Declarations from Citizens Internet Empowerment Coalition    WitnessesThe following are excerpts from declarations filed in the constitutionalchallenge to the Communications Decency Act.  These declarations, among atotal of 37 filed, represent the factual basis of the case against theCommunications Decency Act.INADEQUATE CONSIDERATION BY CONGRESS"I am a United States Senator representing the State of Vermont....  [I]have been personally involved in the congressional debate over thegovernment's role in controlling content on the Internet.  During the yearof consideration of the Communications Decency Act (CDA), there were nocongressional hearings held on the legislation and no congressionalfindings were made as to its necessity or the lack of less restrictivealternatives."  (Sen. Leahy (D-VT) Paragraph1,2)USE OF THE INTERNET IN SUPPORT OF DEMOCRACY"Periodically, I hold electronic town meetings in which a number ofVermonters at different sites in Vermont ask me questions and discussissues online.  Participants in these town meetings have included collegestudents and may have included, or will in the future include, minors.  Ihave no control over the language used by the participants to expressthemselves during these electronic town meetings than I would at a townmeeting where we were all physically present in one location."  (Sen. Leahy(D-VT) Paragraph5)WEBSITE OPERATORS CANNOT RESTRICT ACCESS BY MINORS"It is not technically or economically feasible for HotWired to pre-screensubscribers in order to determine whether they are minors.  Subscribersapply for membership to HotWired through the Internet by providing theirnames and e-mail addresses.  Accordingly, HotWired does not know theirages.  Even if subscribers were asked to state their ages, there is no wayto determine the truth of their assertions." (Wolf, HotWired OnlineMagazine, Paragraph6)NO CENTRALIZED CONTROL OF THE WEB"Running on tens of thousands of individual computers on the Internet, theWorld Wide Web is what is known as a distributed system.  The Web wasdesigned to that organizations with computers containing information canbecome part of the Web simply by attaching their computers to the Internetand running appropriate World Wide Web software.  No single organizationcontrols any membership in the Web, nor is there any centralized point fromwhich individual web sites or services can be blocked from the Web.  From auser's perspective, it may appear to be a single, integrated system, but inreality it has no centralized control point.  (Berners-Lee, World Wide WebConsortium, Paragraph11)NO MEANS TO CHECK AGE ON THE WEB"At present, I am not aware of any methods in the technical standards thatmake up the World Wide Web which would enable a Web site operator orpublisher to establish the age of a user attempting to access a Web site.Establishing age through credit card verification is burdensome for all Website operators and not practical for those Web sites which do not otherwisehave a commercial relationship with their users.  I believe thatnon-commercial Web sites would be forced to shut down if required to checkthe ages of their users through credit card verification. Even commercialsites will face significant burden if credit card verification is requiredbefore all user access. The cost of each verification by a credit cardclearinghouse is , I understand, between $1 and $2. Sites which areaccessed thousands or millions of times per day, will certainly facesignificant cost if such age verification is required. (Berners-Lee, WorldWide Web Consortium, Paragraph16)CONTROLING ACCESS TO CONTENT ONLY POSSIBLE BY USERS, NOT CONTENT PROVIDERS"...for many important methods of communication on the Internet, thesenders -- the content providers -- have no ability to ensure that theirmessages are only available to adults.  It is not possible for an Internetservice provider or large institutional provider of access to the Internet(such as a university) to screen out all or even most content that could bedeemed "indecent" or "patently offensive" (to the extent that those termscan be understood at all.) (Bradner, Internet Engineering Task Force,Paragraph10)SCREENING REQUIRED BY THE ACT IS IMPOSSIBLE FOR THE INTERNET SERVICE PROVIDERS"Individual posters of newsgroup postings have no way to monitor or controlwho views their postings....  Screening at the server level would requiremillions of individual check of messages each day.  Moreover, many of thesemillions of checks would require legally informed human inspection toassess whether a given message, particularly on containing a graphic image,was 'indecent' or 'patently offensive'.  Such a screening process would beenormously expensive, and if required would almost certainly reduce theviability and usefulness of newsgroups as a means of communication."(Collet, Commercial Internet Exchange, Paragraph10,11)MOST EFFECTIVE MEANS TO CONTROL CONTENT IS FROM THE USER END"Based on my experience and knowledge of the Internet, I believe that themost effective way to monitor, screen, or control the full range ofinformation transmitted over the Internet is to block undesired content atthe client end -- that is, by using software installed in the individualuser's computer." (Bradner, Internet Engineering Task Force, Paragraph11)ONLINE SERVICES ALLOW PARENTS TO CONTROL THEIR KIDS ACCESS TOINAPPROPRIATE MATERIAL"Parental controls [available on America Online] enable parents to restrictaccess to Internet newsgroups.  The parental control provided by AOL, whenactivated by a parent, can 1) block access to all newsgroups, 2) blockaccess to a specific newsgroups by entering a specific Internet address, 3)block access to all Internet newsgroups not listed in the AOL index, 4)block access to newsgroups that have binary downloads, name photographs andsound recordings, and 5) restrict access to newsgroups that contain aparticular string of characters, such as "sex" or "nudity" in theirInternet addresses." (Burke, America Online Paragraph12)AFFORDABLE SOFTWARE PROVIDES EFFECTIVE PROTECTION FOR KIDS ONLINE"SurfWatch allows parents and other concerned users to exercise meaningfulchoice and control over what material their children access on theInternet.  People choose to use our product because it is a realisticapproach to Internet content filtering at a personal level.  It is notpossible for anyone, including the government, to control content on aworldwide, decentralized communications network such as the Internet.  Theonly effective way to protect children from objectionable material on theInternet, while ensuring that adults can access material which isotherwise protected by the First Amendment, is to empower individual usersand parents with tools necessary to block objectionable materials.SurfWatch was developed to do just that."  (Duvall, SurfWatch SoftwareParagraph30)PICS STANDARDS PROMOTE USER CHOICE ON THE INTERNET"The mission of the PICS working group is to give individual users controlover the content that is accessible on the Internet to themselves and theirchildren.  PICS aims to allow families to open their homes to the Internetwhile still protecting their children from material that is inconsistentwith that family's values."  (Vezza, Platform for Internet ContentSelection, Paragraph5)"The flexibility of the PICS labeling process allows parents to give olderchildren access to more material than younger children."  (Vezza, Platformfor Internet Content Selection, Paragraph10)CDA RESTRICTS FREEDOM OF THE PRESS"Historically, the First Amendment guarantee of "freedom of the press" hasprotected newspapers from government-imposed content restrictions which,like those in the Communications Decency Act, prohibit and punish thedissemination of material considered "indecent" or "patently offensive asmeasured by contemporary community standards."  By its terms, however, theAct contains no exceptions for newspapers or the news media, and can beapplied to the print press in the same manner that it can be applied to anyother person, when a newspaper published in hardcopy is also publishedelectronically or online." (Ketter, American Society of Newspaper Editors(ASNE), Paragraph7)INFORMATION LEGALLY PUBLISHABLE IN PRINT IS ILLEGAL ONLINE"With such broad and imprecise terms of restriction, ASNE members believethat the risk of prosecution under the Act will compel editors to "play itsafe" by censoring the online editions of their daily newspapers in waysthat would be wholly unnecessary with respect to hardcopy paper editions.Editors faced with the prospect of personal criminal and/or civil liabilityfor the content of online editions of their newspapers will shy away fromexercising their historical prerogative under the First Amendment to fosterpublic awareness, interest and debate over many of the most piquant issuesof the day."  (Ketter, American Society of Newspaper Editors (ASNE),Paragraph10)CDA WILL HARM USERS OF ONLINE SERVICES"The Communications Decency Act of 1996 will have a direct and damagingimpact on AOL and all of its members.  It is likely that AOL will be forcedto reduce access of all users, including adults, to content currently madeavailable if the indecency provisions remains part of the Act.  Thus, theAct would effectively reduce online content to a level suitable for achild."  (Burke Paragraph6)CDA WILL LIMIT LIBRARY COLLECTIONS ON THE NET"Many librarians have their own World Wide Web sites on the Internet, wherelibrarians post their own material or offer patrons links to other WorldWide Web sites....  Patrons could thus access the Web sites of a libraryanywhere in the country.... Librarians have no clear understanding of whatmaterials would be considered "indecent" or "patently offensive" by somecommunities....  In the last ten years, members of some communities havesought to ban works such as the Bible and the American Heritage Dictionaryfrom library collections on the ground that those books contain materialinappropriate for children.  It is unclear whether libraries that post suchtexts or excerpts on their Web site would face criminal prosecution if aparticular community in some other part of the country found those texts tobe "indecent" or "patently offensive.""  (Krug, American LibraryAssociation, Paragraph5,6,7)-----------------------------------------------------------------------2. Subscription InformationAs CIEC members, you have been invited to join this list in order toreceive news updates and other information relevant to the CIEC challengeto the Communications Decency Act.If you ever want to remove yourself from this list, send email to   ciec-members-request@cdt.orgwith 'unsubscribe ciec-members' in the SUBJECT LINE (w/o the 'quotes').Leave the body of your message blank.-----------------------------------------------------------------------3. For More InformationFor more information on the CIEC challenge, including the text of thecomplaint and other relevant materials:* World Wide Web                      --        http://www.cdt.org/ciec/* General Information about CIEC      --        ciec-info@cdt.org* Copy of the Complaint               --        ciec-docs@cdt.org* Specific Questions Regarding the  Coalition, incuding Press Inquiries --        ciec@cdt.org* General information about the  Center for Democracy and Technology --        info@cdt.org--end ciec-update.33/21/96 Return to the Citizens Internet Empowerment Coalition Page Return to the CDT Home Page WT02-B05-84IA095-001027-B014-60http://www.cdt.org:80/ciec/transcripts/May_10_Plaintiffs.html 205.177.10.31 19970215012820 text/html 143485HTTP/1.0 200 OKDate: Sat, 15 Feb 1997 01:26:51 GMTServer: Apache/1.1.1Content-type: text/html Plaintiffs' Closing Arguments Plaintiffs' Closing Arguments May 10, 1996 Christopher Hansen representing the ACLU Bruce Ennis representing ALA/CIEC                               IN THE UNITED STATES DISTRICT COURT                            FOR THE EASTERN DISTRICT OF PENNSYLVANIA                                             - - -                 AMERICAN CIVIL LIBERTIES      :  CIVIL ACTION NO. 96-963-M                 UNION, et al                  :                                   Plaintiffs  :                                               :                             v.                :  Philadelphia, Pennsylvania                                               :  May 10, 1996                 JANET RENO, in her official   :  9:32 o'clock a.m.                   capacity as ATTORNEY GENERAL  :                 OF THE UNITED STATES,         :                                   Defendant   :                 . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .                 AMERICAN LIBRARY ASSOCIATION, :  CIVIL ACTION NO. 96-1458                 et al                         :                                    Plaintiffs :                                               :                               v.              :  Philadelphia, Pennsylvania                                               :  May 10, 1996                 DEPARTMENT OF JUSTICE, et al  :  9:32 o'clock a.m.                                    Defendants :                 . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .                                        HEARING BEFORE:                               THE HONORABLE DOLORES K. SLOVITER,                          CHIEF JUDGE, UNITED STATES COURT OF APPEALS                                     FOR THE THIRD CIRCUIT                               THE HONORABLE RONALD L. BUCKWALTER                                 THE HONORABLE STEWART DALZELL                                  UNITED STATES DISTRICT JUDGES                                             - - -                 APPEARANCES:                 For the Plaintiffs:  CHRISTOPHER A. HANSEN, ESQUIRE                                      MARJORIE HEINS, ESQUIRE                                      ANN BEESON, ESQUIRE                                      American Civil Liberties Union                                      132 West 43rd Street                                      New York, NY  10036                                             -and-                                      STEFAN PRESSER, ESQUIRE                                      American Civil Liberties Union                                      123 S. 9th Street, Suite 701                                      Philadelphia, PA  19107                                                                             2                 APPEARANCES:  (Continued)                 For the ALA          BRUCE J. ENNIS, JR., ESQUIRE                 Plaintiffs:          ANN M. KAPPLER, ESQUIRE                                      JOHN B. MORRIS, JR., ESQUIRE                                      Jenner and Block                                      601 13th Street, N.W.                                      Washington, DC  20005                                             -and-                                      MICHAEL TRAYNOR, ESQUIRE                                      Cooley Goddard Castro Huddleson & Tatum                                      One Maritime Plaza, 20th Floor                                      San Francisco, CA  94111-3580                 For the Defendant:   ANTHONY J. COPPOLINO, ESQUIRE                                      PATRICIA RUSSOTTO, ESQUIRE                                      JASON R. BARON, ESQUIRE                                      THEODORE C. HIRT, ESQUIRE                                      MARY KUSTEL, ESQUIRE                                      CRAIG M. BLACKWELL, ESQUIRE                                      Department of Justice                                      Federal Programs Branch                                      901 E. Street, N.W., Room 912                                      Washington, DC  20530                                             -and-                                      MARK KMETZ, ESQUIRE                                      U.S. Attorney's Office                                      615 Chestnut Street, Suite 1250                                      Philadelphia, PA  19106                                             - - -                 Also Present:         MICHAEL KUNZ                                       Clerk of the Court for the                                       Eastern District of Pennsylvania                                             - - -                 Deputy Clerks:        Thomas Clewley                                       Matthew J. Higgins                 Audio Operator:       Andrea L. Mack                 Transcribed by:       Geraldine C. Laws                                       Grace Williams                                       Tracey Williams                                       Laws Transcription Service                 (Proceedings recorded by electronic sound recording;                 transcript provided by computer-aided transcription service.)                                                                             3     1                    (Whereupon the following occurred in open court at     2           9:32 o'clock p.m.:)     3                    CLERK OF COURT KUNZ:  Oyez, oyez, oyez, all manner     4           of persons having any matter to present before the Honorable     5           Delores K. Sloviter, Chief Judge of the United States Court     6           of Appeals for the Third Circuit, the Honorable Ronald L.     7           Buckwalter and the Honorable Stewart Dalzell, Judges in the     8           United States District Court for the Eastern District of     9           Pennsylvania may at present appear and they shall be heard.    10                    God save the United States and this Honorable Court.     11           Court is now in session, please be seated.    12                    JUDGE SLOVITER:  Good morning.    13                    I think you should know the Court's view as to the    14           argument today.  We deem this as for maybe I speak from the    15           vantage point of an Appellate Judge, but we deem this for our    16           benefit rather than for yours in that you have set forth in    17           the comprehensive briefs and your proposed findings of fact    18           and conclusions of law your positions.      19                    While, of course, you will proceed, we will    20           interrupt you with -- I assume we will interrupt you with    21           numerous questions, at least I know I have numerous questions    22           after reading these.  And therefore, although we have given    23           you time limits, those are your time limits, the Court has no    24           time limits and therefore we, to the extent that we want    25           clarification, we will go over those time limits, it doesn't                                                                                                 4     1           reflect on either or any of the parties if we ask more     2           questions of one party than of another or if our extensions     3           come unequally for that purpose.     4                    We believe that you shouldn't make plans to go by     5           plane before lunch anywhere since it is possible that --     6           likely that we will go beyond the lunch period, give     7           everybody a break and then resume.  We tell you that at the     8           outset so that you can know.     9                    Anything else preliminarily?  Anything else    10           preliminarily?    11                    Okay, we will hear from counsel.    12                    MR. HANSEN:  Good morning, your Honors.  My name is    13           Christopher Hansen.  I'm one of the lawyers representing the    14           ACLU plaintiffs in this case.    15                    I'd like to begin by addressing two subjects that    16           are not in dispute in this case that are extremely important    17           to the plaintiff's analysis of this case.    18                    The first is that this is a criminal statute, it's    19           not a regulatory statute or an FCC regulation, it's a    20           criminal statute.  It carries the penalties of fines,    21           imprisonment and a criminal record.    22                    Second, it is a criminal statute aimed at speech    23           which all parties agree is constitutional and protected    24           speech, at least for adults.    25                    The rules of vagueness and overbreadth, which are                                                                                                 5     1           the primary subjects I'm going to be addressing this morning     2           are held to their strictest when either of these two criteria     3           apply, either when they say the statute is a criminal statute     4           or when it implicates First Amendment barriers, here we have     5           both.     6                    And thus the rules of vagueness and overbreadth in     7           this context must be applied with particular strictness.     8                    JUDGE SLOVITER:  On the other hand, this is a     9           preliminary injunction request and the Supreme Court has made    10           very clear that in preliminary injunctions the Court is not    11           to reach out and decide the issues that are not absolutely    12           essential at that time.  Is that not correct?    13                    MR. HANSEN:  Oh, that's certainly correct. We think,    14           however, it is going to be essential for you to not reach out    15           but have to decide the issues of vagueness and overbreadth as    16           they apply to this particular statute.    17                    There are a couple of other features about the fact    18           that this is a criminal statute that I would like to    19           highlight, in addition to the fact that it carries the    20           potential of imprisonment.     21                    The first is that it does require immediate    22           compliance upon penalty of imprisonment.  Now, I cross-    23           examined Mr. Olsen on my hypothetical, allow my clients to    24           comply with this statute by 6:15 in the afternoon and it    25           sounded extreme at the time because it is an incredibly tight                                                                                                 6     1           schedule within which to comply with the statute.      2                    But the statute doesn't contain a phasing period, it     3           doesn't contain a period of grace during which people can     4           speak without the necessity of going to jail.  Indeed if my     5           clients, if this Court were to uphold this statute at 6:00     6           o'clock this afternoon, my clients would be in jeopardy for     7           speech that they engaged in at 6:15, in jeopardy of     8           imprisonment.     9                    It  is also a very peculiar criminal statute in one    10           other respect.  The statute says that the defenses change as    11           technology changes.  Now, Mr. Ennis will primarily be    12           addressing the offenses, but I'd like to highlight this one    13           part of the defenses.    14                    It is surely an odd criminal statute that behavior I    15           engage in today is legal but tomorrow will be illegal because    16           technology has changed between today and tomorrow.  It    17           suggests that I have to keep track of all current technology,    18           make sure I'm on top of the latest technology to make sure    19           that I have defended myself against this statute.    20                    And I think that feature highlights what is an    21           important part --    22                    JUDGE SLOVITER:  What provision specifically are you    23           referring to in the statute when you say the statute says    24           that?    25                    MR. HANSEN:  Subsection E says it is a defense to                                                                                                 7     1           engage in reasonable and effective and so on measures in     2           order to preclude minors from having access to this, to the     3           material.  It says reasonable and effective measures under     4           current technology. And indeed both amici and the Government     5           make much of the notion that technology is rapidly changing     6           in this area and what is not possible today may become     7           possible in the future.  Indeed I expect Mr. Ennis will spend     8           considerable time talking about how the Government's     9           essentially conceding that the defenses are not really much    10           available today, instead the Government is relying on its    11           hope the defenses will be available in the future.    12                    But what this highlights, to me anyway, is the    13           nature of the medium that we're talking about because even if    14           we were talking about a criminal statute applicable to    15           constitutionally protected speech in the context of broadcast    16           or in other contexts, if we're -- if we're worrying about CBS    17           having to face those kinds of problems, CBS is -- and NBC,    18           there are a limited number of speakers in the context of    19           television and they have batteries of lawyers and they have    20           batteries of people who review programs before they go on the    21           air.    22                    In this case we're talking about the most democratic    23           means of speech yet devised.  It is an area of a medium where    24           all of us can be both speakers and listeners, where entry    25           into the marketplace of ideas is simple, is relatively                                                                                                 8     1           inexpensive and it makes all of us as powerful as CBS news.     2                    My Webpage can be seen by just as many people as CBS     3           News' Webpage.  In that context it is difficult -- we have to     4           remember we are then calling upon every single American to be     5           able to define the exact parameters of vague--of the statute     6           here, the exact parameters of indecency, the exact parameters     7           of patent defensiveness.     8                    Every single American may, as Mr. Olsen suggested,     9           have to hire their own lawyer to determine what the precise    10           contours of those phrases are.    11                    It is because of the evolving and democratic nature    12           of this medium that the use of the criminal statute in this    13           context is a particularly onerous method of dealing with the    14           problem here.    15                    JUDGE SLOVITER:  What is the problem?    16                    MR. HANSEN:  Well, Congress perceives the problem to    17           be that minors are obtaining access to material that are    18           inappropriate for minors to be obtaining access to.  In our    19           view, Congress has not made out evidence that that problem    20           does exist.  In the examples, for example, and Mr. Schmidt    21           provided us with a lot of examples of the kind of speech that    22           the Government asserts is at issue here.  Much of that    23           speech, in our view, would be encompassed within already    24           existing criminal prohibitions of either obscenity or child    25           pornography.  Indeed --                                                                                                 9     1                    JUDGE DALZELL:  Which I take it everybody agrees is     2           entitled to absolutely no protection, obscenity and child     3           pornography, that's established, correct?      4                    MR. HANSEN:  I think the Supreme Court has been     5           crystal clear that that is established,  that's correct.     6                    JUDGE DALZELL:  Okay.     7                    MR. HANSEN:  And indeed Senator Exon, the sponsor of     8           this statute, waved around, and indeed I think successfully     9           waved around on the floor of the Senate what he called the    10           Blue Book.  And the Blue Book consisted of pictures even more    11           extreme than those you saw in the Coppolino book during the    12           testimony stage, pictures that under any -- I think under    13           most people's definition would be considered obscene.    14                    But we're not talking about obscene speech here.     15           None of the plaintiffs is challenging prohibitions against    16           obscene speech or against child pornography, we're talking    17           about something that is outside the definition of what    18           obscene speech is.    19                    And the -- the issue of whether the two phrases,    20           indecency and patent offensiveness, are either vague or    21           overbroad.  It turns out after a careful reading of the    22           Government's brief and the amici in support of the Government    23           to be a fascinating case.    24                    JUDGE SLOVITER:  Do you understand the two phrases    25           to be different or the same?                                                                                                10     1                    MR. HANSEN:  I understand the Government to be     2           arguing that the two phrases are the same.  I don't think     3           that argument necessarily makes sense.  I mean we -- the     4           normal rule of statutory construction is that when  the     5           Congress uses two different clauses or words, it means to     6           convey two different concepts.     7                    JUDGE DALZELL:   Yeah, but when the conference     8           report specifically references Pacifica and Sable as the     9           source of meaning for those, doesn't the Government have the    10           better of the argument?  Well, I'm not deciding the    11           consequences of this but as a matter of statutory    12           construction that the terms "indecent" and "patently    13           offensive" are interchangeable?    14                    MR. HANSEN:  Well, there's no question that the FCC    15           has defined -- has defined indecency using some of the patent    16           offensiveness clause that is contained in the Communications    17           Decency Act.    18                    There are slightly different wrinkles.    19                    JUDGE DALZELL:  Right, and your point is that if    20           they'd had the better of the argument if that case was    21           applicable to this situation, I suppose.    22                    MR. HANSEN:  Well, that's -- that's absolutely true.    23           And they'd have the better of the argument if this medium    24           were identical to the broadcast medium.  The Government also    25           says that indecency and patent offensiveness mean different                                                                                                11     1           things in different media.  And so I'm not sure we can easily     2           borrow from the other media.     3                    JUDGE DALZELL:  But don't we run into trouble since     4           the patently offensive locution comes verbatim out of Supreme     5           Court cases, wouldn't it be a bit of a leap for the three of     6           us who at last report are not on the Supreme Court to say oh,     7           that's unconstitutionally vague?     8                    MR. HANSEN:  No, I don't think it would be a leap at     9           all.  I don't think the Supreme Court has ever found that    10           that phrase -- either of the two phrases at issue in this    11           case are not vague.  The closest the Supreme Court has come    12           to commenting, if you will, on the vagueness of the patent    13           offensiveness phrases is Pacifica, the seven dirty words    14           George Carlin monologue case.    15                    The Court in that case specifically does not reach    16           the vagueness question, instead all they say is that in the    17           context of this monologue, this monologue is punishable.  We    18           agree that it is legitimate for the FCC to regulate this    19           monologue, to make it go at three in the morning instead of    20           three in the afternoon.  They don't reach the question of    21           whether the FCC's definition of either indecency or patent    22           offensiveness was unconstitutionally vague.    23                    In addition to that, as I was suggesting a minute    24           ago, we have some evidence from the Government in this case    25           that the definition of indecency and patent offensiveness in                                                                                                12     1           the medium of cyberspace is different than its meaning in     2           broadcasting.  I don't -- I'm not sure I can understand --     3                    JUDGE DALZELL:  But that's not the Government.  What     4           we have to look at, I mean how Mr. Coppolino and his     5           colleagues interpret it is one thing, what we have to     6           interpret as a law that Congress adopted and with all     7           deference to Justice Scalia's views of statutory     8           construction, you know, if we look at the conference report,     9           et cetera, that's what we look at to find a meaning, not the    10           Government's brief, isn't it?    11                    MR. HANSEN:  Oh, I think that's -- I think that's    12           exact.  I think first, with deference to Justice Scalia, I    13           think you first look at the language of the statute, but I    14           think the conference report -- I agree with your Honor, the    15           conference report provides useful information in helping to    16           interpret the language of the statute.    17                    But I think there's one other thing that can be said    18           about the depth -- the vagueness or lack of vagueness of the    19           definition of indecency or patent offensiveness, either one,    20           and that is I think we've come a long way since the Pacifica    21           decision in terms of finding out whether we can accurately    22           define what indecency means.    23                    And this case, and the repeated citation to the FCC    24           definitions of indecency I think is the most vivid example    25           that whatever we were predicting in Pacifica we were going to                                                                                                13     1           be able to do, that is narrowly and tightly or precisely     2           define vagueness, we've now learned we can't do it.  And this     3           case provides any number of examples of why that's the case.     4                    For example, the -- as the Court is aware, the     5           obscenity test, the Miller test, includes patent     6           offensiveness as well, but it also includes the element that     7           the speech be prurient and it also includes the element that     8           the speech have no serious value.     9                    Well, in this case the Government hints at the    10           notion that those concepts are somehow embedded in our    11           definition of either indecency or patent offensiveness.  They    12           don't ever explicitly say that and in fact at some points    13           they seem to back away from it, but they certainly hint at    14           it.    15                    The FCC has found that prurience is not a necessary    16           part of either indecency or patent offensiveness.  Indeed the    17           George Carlin monologue itself, it's hard to see how anyone    18           could find it prurient.  You might find it humorous or you    19           might find it unhumorous, there are a lot of things you might    20           say about it, but it's hard to see how anyone would be turned    21           on by the George Carlin monologue.    22                    So if we're in fact looking to the FCC or looking to    23           prior cases as to what indecency  means, I think we have to    24           reject the Government's notion to suggest that somehow this    25           case is about prurience.  What --                                                                                                14     1                    JUDGE DALZELL:  But both sides have cited a lot of     2           FCC decisions, very helpfully.  One that I thought was rather     3           interesting that I take it neither your organization nor the     4           party involved thought to take to the Supreme Court was this     5           very interesting case, Merrill Hansen, spelled the same way     6           as your surname.  I don't know, any relation?     7                    MR. HANSEN:  No relation, no relation, your Honor.     8                    JUDGE DALZELL:  Okay.  Where the two -- where the     9           two disc-jockeys were talking about the Playboy article    10           involving the alleged rape by Jim Baker of Jessica Hahn and    11           even though the Commission agreed that it was newsworthy and    12           I must say, reading the transcript myself, it seemed to me    13           that the disc-jockeys who may have started out thinking they    14           were going to make a joke of it, and when they found out at    15           least in their view that Ms. Hahn really was raped.  And they    16           said hey, this is really serious, this is bad stuff.  Okay?    17                    Sounds to me like pretty constitutionally protected    18           discussion of a public figure and the Commission says,    19           acknowledging that it was newsworthy at the time, that the    20           merit of the work is simply one of many variables and held    21           that it was appropriate to fine them a forfeiture of $2,000    22           for that.    23                    Now, nobody said, nobody said a  constitutional boo    24           to that decision, did they?    25                    MR. HANSEN:  Well, somebody should have.  But as far                                                                                                15     1           as I know, no one did.     2                    JUDGE DALZELL:  But after Pacifica, could you say     3           boo?     4                    MR. HANSEN:  Oh, I think absolutely could.  I think     5           that is the -- that case is one of the most perfect examples     6           of how we have now learned that the effort we started, the     7           road we started down in Pacifica to define indecency isn't     8           working.  I mean, the Government in this case suggests that     9           there's some sort of serious value component to patent    10           offensiveness and indecency.  But then, as your Honor quite    11           properly suggests, the FCC rejects the notion that there's a    12           serious value component.    13                    And if we put back into indecency or patent    14           offensiveness prurience and serious value, we've recreated    15           the definition of obscenity.  We then no longer need the    16           concept of indecency.    17                    JUDGE DALZELL:  But if you're right, wouldn't we    18           have heard some echo in Sable, for example, some quibbling in    19           Sable?  I mean I agree with you that Pacifica has been    20           narrowed over time, but notably it hasn't been narrowed on    21           the indecency point.  Wouldn't you agree with that?    22                    MR. HANSEN:  No, I'm not sure I would agree.  I    23           think there has continued to be ferment in the --    24           particularly in the lower courts at least about the question    25           of whether these, these clauses can be properly defined and                                                                                                16     1           whether they are vague or overbroad.     2                    For example, in Alliance, which was argued recently,     3           one of the issues lurking in Alliance -- it may not be     4           reached by the Supreme Court because the Supreme Court's     5           dealing with --     6                    JUDGE DALZELL:  I know, we talked about that though     7           and I think we've all reviewed the transcript and the word     8           indecency didn't even come up.       9                    MR. HANSEN:  No, but --    10                    JUDGE DALZELL:  So we shouldn't hold our breath for    11           that decision, should we?    12                    MR. HANSEN:  No, and I don't think the Supreme    13           Court, I suspect the Supreme Court won't give us guidance on    14           that in that case, but my point is that the issue of whether    15           the concept of indecency or patent offensiveness is    16           unconstitutionally vague remains in ferment.  We in fact cite    17           some lower court cases that in some context have found that    18           those kinds of clauses are in fact unconstitutionally vague.    19                    It is fair to say that some, there are courts that    20           have said that given Pacifica we are going to say that that    21           issue is foreclosed, but we think it's by no means.    22                    JUDGE SLOVITER:  In a criminal context?    23                    MR. HANSEN:  No, and indeed --    24                    JUDGE SLOVITER:  Has there been any criminal case    25           that has sustained, that you know of, let's say any Federal                                                                                                17     1           criminal case that has sustained the use of indecency?     2                    MR. HANSEN:  No.  We looked very hard for it.  As     3           far as I can determine there is only one other place where     4           indecency or patent offensiveness, there are two, where     5           they're a crime as opposed to some sort of regulation,     6           broadcast and the Dial-A-Porn context, we looked very hard to     7           see if any in the last 20 or 50 years anyone had ever been     8           either charged or convicted of indecency in any of those     9           contexts.  We were unable to find a single example.    10                    We found a couple of cases in which people have been    11           prosecuted for a statute that said you may not engage in    12           obscene or indecent speech, the case seemed to go -- the case    13           explicitly went off purely on the obscenity issue, but we    14           found no example of a crime.    15                    And indeed in Pacifica the Court suggested that the    16           reason they were able to reach out and find the Carlin    17           monologue on acceptably -- acceptable to channel it to some    18           other part of the day, one of the reasons they were able to    19           do that was because it was a regulatory context and not a    20           criminal context.  They explicitly suggested that they might    21           have reached a different result.    22                    JUDGE SLOVITER:  Now, this is your vagueness    23           argument --    24                    MR. HANSEN:  Correct.    25                    JUDGE SLOVITER:  -- that you're in.  Okay.  You're                                                                                                18     1           going to get to your First Amendment -- I mean to your over-     2           breadth argument?     3                    MR. HANSEN:  Absolutely, although I think they --     4           yes, absolutely.  Although I think they are -- it's difficult     5           to pull them apart.  It's certainly analytically possible to     6           pull them apart.     7                    JUDGE DALZELL:  It's easy to do that, isn't it?     8                    MR. HANSEN:  Well, but --     9                    JUDGE SLOVITER:  You have different constitutional    10           provisions.    11                    JUDGE DALZELL:  Yes.    12                    MR. HANSEN:  But the facts that are sort of relevant    13           to them are identical.  For example, if you assume that    14           prurience is no longer part of the definitions here or -- and    15           if you assume that this act, these two phrases do include    16           material of serious value, then I think it presents you    17           right, flat out the issue of whether we now have an over-    18           breadth problem, that is whether we are now reaching speech    19           that is constitutionally protected for adults that has    20           serious value, that although it is about sex is not about    21           prurience.      22                    I think that -- I think we're flatly presented with    23           the question of whether the Congress can criminalize such    24           statutes.    25                    JUDGE DALZELL:  See, you may be right on the -- as                                                                                                19     1           an abstract question, if you were righting a law review     2           article about what the vagueness rule should be here, but my     3           two colleagues and I, because we're not the Supreme Court,     4           have got to, as best we can, limit existing Supreme Court     5           precedent and apply it here.      6                    And I have to tell you, Mr. Hansen, that I haven't     7           found a hint in the Supreme Court's jurisprudence.  You may     8           well be right that they will say criminal is different, but I     9           haven't seen it yet.  This may be the case where they do it,    10           but our problem is we have to apply the Supreme Court's    11           jurisprudence as it exists today on May 10th, 1996, not as it    12           may apply because of your successful advocacy in the Supreme    13           Court, wouldn't you agree?    14                    MR. HANSEN:  Oh, I certainly agree with that.  But I    15           think that in forming your decision you can say to the    16           Supreme Court, you can establish the factual record with the    17           Supreme Court that we've looked at this particular statute    18           and these particular phrases and what we have found is that    19           the people involved in trying to help us define what they    20           mean have not been able to define them for us.    21                    I mean let's talk about some of the testimony that's    22           come out.  The -- Mr. Schmidt who says that it would be    23           indecent or patently offensive, the Vanity Fair cover would    24           be indecent or patently offensive, Mr. Olsen who says that    25           Playboy is indecent or patently offensive and that all the                                                                                                20     1           dirty words are indecent or patently offensive, the FCC which     2           says the crude jokes are patently offensive.     3                    On the other hand, and morality in media, one of the     4           amici in this case which says that the discussion of gay     5           rights in some parts of cyberspace is patently offensive or     6           indecent.     7                    On the other hand we have the Government suggesting     8           that discussion of gay rights is not patently offensive, but     9           the facts in this case suggest --    10                    JUDGE DALZELL:  But doesn't that --    11                    MR. HANSEN:  -- we don't know how to define these    12           terms.    13                    JUDGE DALZELL:  But the problem with that is doesn't    14           your argument ultimately prove too much because the indecency    15           in patently offensive locutions, some of the patently    16           offensive locution comes right out of the Miller    17           jurisprudence.    18                    And, for example, you've spent a good deal of time    19           arguing with a good deal of force, I think, about the    20           different community problems because it's one thing to    21           broadcast in a local area, but cyberspace, once something is    22           on it, it's there world wide.  But if we take that argument    23           to its logical conclusion, we're going to read out the    24           obscenity definition of Miller, aren't we?    25                    MR. HANSEN:  No, I think because I think obscenity                                                                                                21     1           in Miller benefits from the interplay of all three factors.      2           I think if obscenity in Miller were just patent offensiveness     3           I think we would be having trouble.     4                    JUDGE DALZELL:  No, the community issue because--     5                    MR. HANSEN:  Oh.     6                    JUDGE DALZELL:  -- because the patent offensiveness     7           also has the limiting phrase by contemporary community     8           standards and that of course also comes from Miller.     9                    MR. HANSEN:  Well, that's one of the ways in which I    10           think the application of this -- that particular phrase to    11           this statute presents us with particular problems.  I mean in    12           Miller we know pretty much now that the community standards    13           applies to local community standards.  In this case we've got    14           a whole series of proposals about what community standards    15           means.  We don't know for sure whether it's national    16           community standards or local community standards.  The    17           Government's witness suggested it was local community    18           standards, the conference report suggests it's national    19           community standards.    20                    JUDGE SLOVITER:  Can we decide this case on the    21           preliminary injunction phase of it without reaching the    22           vagueness issue?    23                    MR. HANSEN:  Sure, yes, absolutely you can.    24                    JUDGE SLOVITER:  Because you haven't told us how    25           yet.                                                                                                22     1                    MR. HANSEN:  Well, I think there are two ways that     2           you can.  I think one is -- and one is the over-breadth which     3           you've now pushed me to a second time and I'll now go to --     4                    (Laughter.)     5                    JUDGE SLOVITER:  I don't even see a timer here.  Do     6           you have a timer?     7                    JUDGE DALZELL:  We have  the clock, Judge Sloviter.      8                    JUDGE SLOVITER:  Oh, well, I don't follow that.     9                    JUDGE DALZELL:  I've been watching it.    10                    JUDGE SLOVITER:  Yes, I'm used to yellow lights and    11           green lights.    12                    MR. HANSEN:  I may not have got it the first time,    13           your Honor, but I got it the second time.    14                    (Laughter.)    15                    MR. HANSEN:  And the other way I think you can,    16           before I go on to over-breadth, the other way I think you     17           can --     18                    (Laughter.)     19                    MR. HANSEN:  -- is what Mr. Ennis is going to talk    20           about and that is the whether it's technologically or    21           economically feasible to comply with the statute.    22                    If the statute is read to include material that is    23           valuable both for adults and for minors --    24                    JUDGE SLOVITER:  We have to read the -- we have to    25           read the statute the way it's written, don't we?  We'll talk                                                                                                23     1           to the Government about its effort to change the statutory     2           language but our problem right now is not what the Supreme     3           Court is going to do because the Supreme Court may surprise     4           us all and not take this case.  We have an obligation to     5           decide the case in front of us.     6                    Now, on what is the narrowest ground on which we can     7           decide this preliminary injunction issue?     8                    MR. HANSEN:  Well, I'm not sure I know what the     9           narrowest way is.    10                    JUDGE SLOVITER:  All right.    11                    MR. HANSEN:  But I think you can say that the act,    12           as written, reaches speech that is constitutionally protected    13           both for minors and for adults.  I think the first question    14           is whether it reaches speech that is constitutionally    15           protected for adults, I don't think there's really any    16           serious dispute about that.  I also don't think, as for the    17           reasons Mr. Ennis will be discussing, I don't think there's    18           that much serious dispute that an awful lot of adults are    19           going to be precluded from obtaining access to this kind of    20           speech as a result of this act.    21                    I mean just to take the most simple example, if we    22           accept the credit card screening mechanism that the    23           Government suggests, there are an awful lot of adults that    24           don't have credit cards and that won't be able to obtain    25           access to speech that is constitution-- they're                                                                                                24     1           constitutionally entitled to get simply because they don't     2           have a credit card.     3                    I mean it reminds me of one of the exhibits the     4           Government suggested in which they said that every 15 year     5           old in America is computer literate.  Well, there are 15 year     6           olds in America that aren't literate, much less computer     7           literate.  Similarly, there are adults that don't have credit     8           cards and under this scheme won't be able to obtain access to     9           this information.    10                    So the first issue and the issue where you can stop    11           if you reach this issue is whether this will prevent adults    12           from having access to information that they are    13           constitutionally entitled to.  It's the Butler argument, it's    14           the Sable argument.  That is that what we have done in this    15           context is we have, in the guise of protecting children,    16           we've prevented adult, we've required that all speech be    17           brought down to the level acceptable to the most vulnerable    18           minor.    19                    But if that, if you are unpersuaded by that part of    20           the argument, then I think you also have to go ahead and    21           reach the question of whether the speech in this case is    22           protected from minors as well as for adults.  It is clear    23           that minors do have rights to speech, it's clear that minors    24           do have rights to obtain access to speech.    25                    In this instance what we have is a huge volume of                                                                                                25     1           speech that the undisputed testimony shows is valuable for     2           minors.  And let me take a couple of the most obvious     3           examples.     4                    The safer sex information is probably the most     5           obvious example.  The exhibits in the record and the     6           testimony from the witnesses indicate that a great many     7           minors, particularly older minors, are in fact sexually     8           active.  Whether we like that or not is irrelevant, the fact     9           is that they are sexually active.  And in order to protect    10           themselves from diseases including the fatal disease of AIDS,    11           in order to protect themselves from pregnancy which is of    12           course a constitutional right for minors as well as for    13           adults, it is important, it's not merely -- it's vital that    14           they obtain access to the kinds of speech that my clients    15           engage in.    16                    JUDGE SLOVITER:  How do you answer the Government's    17           argument that the act couldn't possibly be read to apply to    18           information of that sort?    19                    MR. HANSEN:  Well, I think there are -- I think the    20           answer to it is embedded in the colloquy Judge Dalzell and I    21           were having, that is this act prohibits speech that has    22           serious value.  The Government's suggesting really that this    23           case is really just about pornography, it's just about    24           really, really sexually explicit stuff.  Well, it's not about    25           obscenity, it's not about that level pornography, it's not                                                                                                26     1           about prurience because prurience is not an element of this,     2           not a necessary element about this and it's not about serious     3           value because speech that has serious value is punishable     4           under this statute.     5                    Well, if that's the case, it seems to me safer sex     6           information is most certainly at jeopardy under this statute.     7                    JUDGE SLOVITER:  The Government suggests that we     8           read this in the context of a conference report, is that     9           correct?    10                    MR. HANSEN:  Correct, yes.    11                    JUDGE SLOVITER:  But didn't the conference report    12           specifically exclude a deletion of serious value?    13                    MR. HANSEN:  No, it's the other way around.  The--    14           one of the --    15                    JUDGE SLOVITER:  It excluded, didn't it exclude,    16           wasn't there an effort to put in an exclusion from the    17           statute for --    18                    MR. HANSEN:  Oh, yes.    19                    JUDGE SLOVITER:  -- I used my words -- I thought I    20           used my words carefully.    21                    MR. HANSEN:  Yes, I'm sorry.  The --    22                    JUDGE SLOVITER:  There was an effort to exclude from    23           the scope of the statute --    24                    MR. HANSEN:  Matters of serious value.  That is    25           there was an effort to make --                                                                                                27     1                    JUDGE SLOVITER:  If you haven't, I mean, isn't --     2                    MR. HANSEN:  Yes, your Honor.     3                    JUDGE SLOVITER:  -- that important?  And why don't     4           you stress that in the argument.     5                    MR. HANSEN:  Okay.     6                    (Laughter.)     7                    MR. HANSEN:  Yes, the one -- one member of Congress     8           proposed that the statute substitute, harmful minor statute     9           be substituted for the indecency and patent offensiveness.    10                    JUDGE SLOVITER:  That's a separate issue.      11                    MR. HANSEN:  Well, harmful to minors includes    12           prurience and includes value.  Congress explicitly rejected    13           that alternative and both for the reasons you suggested and    14           for the reason I'm now suggesting, Congress made, I think,    15           crystal clear that value is part of this statute.  And if you    16           engage in speech that is about sex, even if it has value, you    17           risk going to jail under this statute.    18                    JUDGE DALZELL:  I would like to know because --    19           well, you've got about ten minutes left on this.  Let's    20           assume we and/or the Supreme Court agree with you and the CDA    21           is held unconstitutional.  So Senator Coates and Senator Exon    22           come to you and say Mr. Hansen, you are obviously the right    23           person with Mr. Ennis to talk to, here's the pen, write me a    24           CDA.  Could you write a --    25                    MR. HANSEN:  Somehow I don't think that will happen.                                                                                                28     1                    JUDGE DALZELL:  Could you write a child a CDA that     2           passes constitutional muster?     3                    MR. HANSEN:  I'm not sure you could.  I mean     4           Ginsburg suggests that a harmful to minors statute might well     5           be constitutional.  The question then would be whether you     6           could apply that standard in the context of cyberspace and I     7           think the answer to that would, at least in large measure,     8           depend upon the ability to comply with the statute which is--     9           which is largely sort of the defenses issues that Mr. Ennis    10           is going to be addressing.  My view is no, you could not.    11                    JUDGE DALZELL:  So therefore the issue really is    12           medium specific is what your argument is?    13                    MR. HANSEN:  Oh, there's no question that the issue    14           is medium specific.  All the case law and the defendants    15           admit that whether -- that the rules are different from    16           medium to medium and that what may be, for example, indecent    17           in TV is not indecent here.  What may be an accept --    18           constitutionally acceptable rule in the area of broadcast is    19           not -- may not be a constitutionally acceptable rule here.    20                    JUDGE DALZELL:  So your position is then that you    21           would give the pen back to Senator Exon and Senator Coates    22           and just say I'm terribly sorry but for this medium we can't    23           do it?  Is that -- is that your position?    24                    MR. HANSEN:  Well, yes, I would say that and then I    25           would also say to Senators Exon and Coates: but I have a                                                                                                29     1           better solution for you to the problem that you're troubled     2           about and that solution is the whole constellation of PICs     3           and Surfwatch and the other mechanisms that empower parents     4           to be able to prevent their children from having access to     5           indecent material and yet don't infringe on constitutionally     6           protected rights, either for children or for adults.     7                    JUDGE DALZELL:  And they say to you that's okay,     8           that's great, how do we make sure this happens, they say, we     9           want to give you a law to make sure this happens.    10                    MR. HANSEN:  I think my first answer would be relax    11           for a second, it's happening.  I mean, you know, all of the--    12           we have considerable evidence that PICs is coming along, it's    13           going to be up very soon.  We have considerable evidence that    14           AOL is work-- and the other on-line services are working    15           rapidly to improve and tighten and strengthen their parental    16           control mechanisms.      17                    The attention that this act has gotten and that this    18           case has gotten has been enormous impetus toward people    19           finding those kinds of parental --    20                    JUDGE SLOVITER:  What level of scrutiny do we apply    21           to this statute?    22                    MR. HANSEN:  I don't think there's any question.  I    23           think the Government concedes that this is -- that you have    24           to find -- in order to uphold this statute you have to find,    25           you have to apply strict scrutiny and you have to find that                                                                                                30     1           there is no -- that it is narrowly tailored.  Both     2           requirements have to be found here before this statute can be     3           upheld.     4                    JUDGE SLOVITER:  Have you commented on the narrow     5           tailoring?     6                    MR. HANSEN:  No, the narrow tailoring largely goes,     7           I think, to the defenses which I think Mr. Ennis is going to     8           address although there isn't --     9                    JUDGE SLOVITER:  What do you mean the narrow    10           tailoring goes to the defenses?  Can't you have a free speech    11           case in which the statute doesn't have any written-in    12           defenses?    13                    MR. HANSEN:  Yes.    14                    JUDGE SLOVITER:  Isn't that part of the basic    15           concept of what we're supposed to do when we look at whether    16           something's protected under the first amendment?    17                    MR. HANSEN:  Yes, I think that -- I think that part    18           of the question is, is the definition of speech here    19           sufficiently narrowly tailored that it gets at the problem    20           that Congress was trying to get at and doesn't reach out and    21           get a -- and create other problems.  And I think for the    22           reasons, all the reasons we've been talking about this    23           morning, I think this speech clearly does reach out to speech    24           well beyond that which the Government's professed interest    25           covers.                                                                                                31     1                    JUDGE BUCKWALTER:  Mr. Hansen, I've been concerned     2           throughout this, my involvement in this, about the question     3           of this being media specific.  And if it is media specific,     4           what is your position is the media it's most analogous to and     5           what is the Government's position.     6                    But I don't want you to speak for the Government.     7                    (Laughter.)     8                    MR. HANSEN:  Our position certainly is that if we     9           are to draw an analogy, print would be the appropriate    10           analogy because in this -- but I think we would suggest to    11           you that this is a medium different than all other media in    12           the sense of its democratizing and many to many qualities.     13                    That is almost all the other media, with the    14           possible exception of telephone, is a relatively limited    15           number of speakers giving out information to a large number    16           of listeners.  One of the real marvels of this medium is it's    17           making us all speakers and listeners and thus we think it's    18           entitled the highest protection because it enable-- it    19           empowers the most number of speakers.    20                    JUDGE BUCKWALTER:  Thank you.    21                    JUDGE DALZELL:  I want to get back for a second    22           because it goes, I think, to your over-breadth argument here    23           where you argue about that some minors, older minors should    24           be entitled -- for example, sexually active minors.  But    25           doesn't that undermine -- you would agree that Congress                                                                                                32     1           surely has the power to define who a minor is.     2                    MR. HANSEN:  Yes.     3                    JUDGE DALZELL:  And any definition it comes up with     4           is by definition one size fits all because if you get back     5           from that don't you drive the courts to determine, for     6           example, is this -- is 12 mature or is this child     7           sufficiently mature, this one's sexually active, this one's     8           not?       9                    And so to avoid that kind of unedifying wildly    10           inefficient system, Congress as every legislature has the    11           inherent power to say who is a minor and who isn't.  Isn't    12           that right?    13                    MR. HANSEN:  Oh, I think that's right, but I think    14           their definition of the minor in the context of this statute    15           has to bear some relationship to a valid governmental    16           purpose.  That is, if they decided that a minor was 30, I    17           think we would all have little difficulty throwing that out    18           because we believe that there are 25 year olds who have, you    19           know, the sufficient maturity and sufficient need for the    20           kinds of speech we're talking about here that they ought to    21           be able to have access to it.    22                    Similarly, I think, we can say given the nature of    23           the speech involved here and given the realities of the world    24           that drawing the line at 18 in this context approaches the    25           same level of irrationality in the sense that there are                                                                                                33     1           certainly 17 year olds who have sufficient maturity and     2           sufficient --     3                    JUDGE DALZELL:  But isn't that an argument that you     4           should make to Congress and not to us?     5                    MR. HANSEN:  Well, I think it's --     6                    JUDGE DALZELL:  I mean could we say as a matter of     7           constitutional law that the -- that the drawing the line at     8           18 was so irrational as to violate, I assume, due process?     9                    MR. HANSEN:  Oh, I think you can.  I think you can--    10                    JUDGE SLOVITER:  You want us to say the statute    11           would be constitutional if it was to 14?    12                    MR. HANSEN:  No, I don't want you to say that, but I    13           do -- but I do think --    14                    JUDGE SLOVITER:  Well, then I don't understand what    15           this argument goes to.    16                    MR. HANSEN:  The question is whether this statute is    17           reaching out to a great deal of information that basically    18           everyone concedes is valuable, at least for a large number of    19           minors.  And if it is in fact speech that is valuable for a    20           large number of minors, not only not harmful but valuable,    21           then the statute is over-broad even as it applies to minors    22           and not just as it applies to adults.  And I think that's how    23           I would use the question.    24                    And I think --     25                    JUDGE SLOVITER:  Go ahead.                                                                                                34     1                    MR. HANSEN:  I think there is some notion to the     2           fact that the Government, the Congress can draw some lines in     3           this area but where the line sweeps in large numbers of     4           minors who are appropriately, who ought to be appropriately     5           able to see this kind of information --     6                    JUDGE DALZELL:  Based on your reading of the     7           jurisprudence, how substantial does the over-breadth have to     8           be for it to cross the line of impermissibility?     9                    MR. HANSEN:  I think if it -- if more than a small    10           number of applications are involved then I think you have    11           substantial over-breadth.  That is I think the over-breadth--    12                    JUDGE DALZELL:  What's your citation for that    13           proposition?    14                    MR. HANSEN:  I don't have one off the top of my head    15           but I'll have one by the time of rebuttal, if you'd like.    16                    (Laughter.)    17                    JUDGE DALZELL:  Fair enough.    18                    MR. HANSEN:  I think the case -- the non substantial    19           over-breadth cases, the cases that say we -- there's    20           substantial over-breadth here --    21                    JUDGE SLOVITER:  It was in your brief and in the    22           ALA's brief.    23                    MR. HANSEN:  They're in both briefs and they talked    24           about the question -- it is possible to hypothesize a small    25           number of applications that might be constitutionally                                                                                                35     1           protected and that's not what we're talking about in over-     2           breadth.  And that's the line of cases I am drawing on for     3           the answer.     4                    In our view the -- one of the crucial parts of this     5           case is that which we've just been discussing and that is the     6           nature of this medium here.  We have what is a new medium, is     7           an enormously exciting medium, it is a democratizing medium     8           and it is an enormously evolving medium.     9                    The testimony was undisputed that this medium is    10           changing on a daily basis and changing rapidly.  This statute    11           not only infringes constitutional rights in the ways we've    12           talked about this morning but it also has the potential for    13           stifling this new and exciting and dramatic medium and in our    14           view this Court should find the statute unconstitutional.    15                    JUDGE DALZELL:  Thank you.       16                    Shall we call Mr. Ennis?    17                    JUDGE SLOVITER:  Sure.    18                    JUDGE DALZELL:  Mr. Ennis?    19                    MR. ENNIS:  Good morning, your Honors.    20                    JUDGE DALZELL:  Good morning, Mr. Ennis.    21                    MR. ENNIS:  Bruce Ennis representing the ALA    22           plaintiffs.    23                    I'm going to speak primarily about the Subsection E    24           safe harbor defenses to Subsection D's criminal prohibition.     25           To put it in context, I think that it's fair to say that                                                                                                36     1           unless speakers can use the safe harbor defenses authorized     2           by Subsection E, then Subsection D standing alone would     3           constitute a flat ban on speech that is constitutionally     4           protected for adults.     5                    JUDGE SLOVITER:  Let me ask you a general     6           proposition, do you know of any criminal law that might have     7           been unconstitutional but for defenses that were put in?  I     8           mean this, the whole proposition that you can     9           constitutionalize a possible over-broad or vague criminal law    10           by defenses is a new one to me but there may be examples out    11           there.  Can you think of any?    12                    MR. ENNIS:  Well, Judge Sloviter, I think that's a    13           key question in our case.  I'm not aware of any.  There --    14                    JUDGE SLOVITER:  I guess it's a question for the    15           Government then, giving them advance notice.    16                    MR. ENNIS:   The closest I can think of that, your    17           Honor, are examples from broadcast and Dial-A-Porn but    18           they're not like this law.    19                    JUDGE SLOVITER:  But they're not criminal statutes,    20           are they?    21                    MR. ENNIS:  Well, both -- yes, they are both    22           criminal statutes.    23                    JUDGE SLOVITER:  Okay.    24                    MR. ENNIS:  Though the FCC has never sought or    25           obtained criminal sanctions in the broadcast area against                                                                                                37     1           indecent speech.  And --     2                    JUDGE DALZELL:  Well, although Pacific and Southern     3           Company, Incorporated, licensee of radio station KSD-FM, when     4           it got fined -- they called it a forfeiture of $2,000, smells     5           like a fine to me.     6                    MR. ENNIS:  Well, it certainly is and it's an     7           administrative fine, your Honor.  All I'm pointing out is     8           that the Supreme Court stressed in its Pacifica decision that     9           it was not dealing with a criminal sanction.    10                    JUDGE DALZELL:  Quite right, you're quite right.    11                    MR. ENNIS:  But let me return to your question    12           because it is an important question.  In every other medium    13           where Government attempts to regulate or criminalize    14           indecency, in every other medium speakers have a sure and    15           safe way of complying with the act, all speakers.    16                    For example, in broadcast, speakers know that if    17           they broadcast the indecent material only in the evening    18           hours that are specified by FCC as okay for indecent    19           material, they are at no risk whatsoever of any governmental    20           statute.    21                    In the dial-a-porn context which only regulates    22           commercial dial-a-porn, all commercial providers of dial-a-    23           porn can use a credit card which is a complete defense, all    24           speakers in the commercial dial-a-porn context have a sure    25           and safe and completely effective safe harbor.  That is                                                                                                38     1           emphatically not the case with respect to this act.     2                    So it does raise the question you've asked, is there     3           ever an example in which you can ban speech and then put the     4           affirmative burden on the speaker to show with evidence and     5           an affirmative defense to a prosecution that their speech     6           somehow comes within a safe harbor and the answer is no.     7                    JUDGE SLOVITER:  Okay.  And then in -- and of course     8           if the Government disagrees though we expect it will tell us,     9           but to whom is the safe harbor provision, the defense    10           provision available?  Is it available for all of the persons    11           who might, individuals who might be held liable under A and D    12           or only some of them?    13                    MR. ENNIS:  Your Honor, the defense on its face is    14           available and in fact must be raised as an affirmative    15           defense by all of the millions of speakers who use the    16           Internet.    17                    In reality, as I hope to show this morning, the    18           defense is not available to any speakers who use the Internet    19           except for commercial speakers who charge for access to their    20           speech.  With that sole exception, not one of the so-called    21           safe harbor defenses can with any reasonable --    22                    JUDGE DALZELL:  Well, apparently those defenses are    23           merely evidence, as I understand Mr. Keeney's letter to our    24           colleagues in New York, right?    25                    MR. ENNIS:  That's at most what they are.                                                                                                39     1                    JUDGE DALZELL:  At most evidence.     2                    MR. ENNIS:  Well, that's right, the Keeney letter--     3                    JUDGE DALZELL:  But it's still going to be up to a     4           jury to determine whether that carries today, right?     5                    MR. ENNIS:  That's correct, Judge Dalzell.  The     6           Keeney letter says that at most, if a defendant takes the     7           steps the Government suggests, a speaker takes the steps the     8           Government suggests, at most that would be, quote,     9           "substantial evidence" which that defendant in a criminal    10           prosecution could then argue to a jury would qualify for the    11           safe harbor defense.    12                    But it would be up to disparate juries throughout    13           the country.    14                    JUDGE BUCKWALTER:  But in a criminal setting the    15           burden would always be on the Government to prove that it was    16           not a good faith defense, it would never be upon the --    17                    MR. ENNIS:  You would think so, Judge Buckwalter,    18           but--     19                    JUDGE BUCKWALTER:  Or even in insanity.    20                    MR. ENNIS:  But that is not the way this statute is    21           set up, which was Judge Sloviter's question.  This statute,    22           Subsection -- let me try and break it out.    23                    JUDGE SLOVITER:  Go ahead.    24                    MR. ENNIS:  If you start with Subsection D,    25           Subsection D flatly prohibits the display of patently                                                                                                40     1           offensive speech in a manner that would be, quote, "available     2           to minors."     3                    JUDGE DALZELL:  Right.     4                    MR. ENNIS:  As we've shown in our proposed findings     5           of fact 855, we've collected all the evidence, there's no     6           dispute on it, you cannot display speech on the Internet in a     7           way that's broadly available to adults without that speech     8           necessarily also being broadly available to minors.     9                    So what that means is if you just look at Subsection    10           D by itself, Subsection D criminalizes the display of speech    11           on the Internet that would be broadly available to adults    12           because it necessarily would be broadly available to minors    13           as well.    14                    Thus unless the Subsection E safe harbor defenses    15           narrow the sweep of Subsection D, Subsection D would quite    16           clearly be unconstitutional under Bolger, under Sable and    17           under Butler, all of which unanimously hold that Government     18           cannot constitutionally ban speech to adults even for the    19           purpose of protecting minors.    20                    JUDGE DALZELL:  Sure.  And what did the trick in    21           Sable was the defense.    22                    MR. ENNIS:  It was the defense.    23                    JUDGE DALZELL:  And that's what Congress did, at    24           least what Congress thought they were doing.  Isn't it fair    25           to say what Congress thought they were doing in this statute                                                                                                41     1           was they reached into Pacifica and they reached into Sable     2           and they threw it in to the CDA and they said it's got to be     3           constitutional because the Supreme Court says so.     4                    MR. ENNIS:  Exactly right, Judge Dalzell.     5                    JUDGE DALZELL:  Isn't that a fair characterization?     6                    MR. ENNIS:  That is completely fair.  The     7           legislative history bears that out.  Congress thought --     8                    JUDGE SLOVITER:  What about the use of the word     9           "knowingly?"  Throughout this long proceeding I haven't heard    10           anybody focus on the fact that Subsection D to which you    11           refer specifically makes criminal only that which is    12           knowingly sent to persons under 18 and knowingly permits    13           under Subsection 2.  Wouldn't that be part of the    14           Government's required case in chief and what does it mean?    15                    MR. ENNIS:  I'm not sure, the Government would have    16           to tell you what that means. It's unclear to me what it    17           means.    18                    JUDGE SLOVITER:  But it's in there.    19                    MR. ENNIS:  It is in there and -- but and also is in    20           there for Subsection D, but for Subsection D --    21                    JUDGE SLOVITER:  It is D I'm talking about.    22                    MR. ENNIS:  On its face it would simply mean knowing    23           that you have displayed speech.  If --    24                    JUDGE SLOVITER:  Don't you have to also know that    25           it's a person under 18?                                                                                                42     1                    MR. ENNIS:  No, under D you only have to know that     2           you have displayed speech in a manner that is, quote,     3           "available" to a person under 18, whether anyone under 18     4           ever had access to the speech or not.     5                    JUDGE SLOVITER:  Well, then that's not A, you're not     6           talking about D(1)(A), you're talking about D(1)(B).  And one     7           says knowingly.  In other words, whoever in interstate or     8           foreign communications knowingly uses any interactive     9           computer service to display in a manner available to a person    10           under 18 is part of the Government's burden to show that you,    11           that the speaker or sender knew that there were people under    12           18 receiving it?    13                    MR. ENNIS:  I think that the fair inference from the    14           statute would be that that would be so, but I don't know what    15           the Government's position on that is.    16                    JUDGE SLOVITER:  Well, lots of times we have been    17           advised to construe a statute to construe the knowingly    18           language in such a way as to make the statute constitutional.     19           That's a construction that is consistent with the language of    20           the statute itself, we don't have to cut out any -- any    21           provision.    22                    MR. ENNIS:  Yes.     23                    JUDGE DALZELL:  Isn't your point that America On    24           Line, for example, or Compuserve has to know, they have to    25           know because they'd be stupid not to know that it is                                                                                                43     1           available to people under 18 because there's no way of not     2           making it available to people under 18?     3                    MR. ENNIS:  That is the whole point, Judge Dalzell.      4           And if you make the speech broadly available to adults on the     5           Internet, if you wish to speak to the world, this speech will     6           necessarily be available to minors as well and you will know     7           that it is available to minors as well and therefore --     8                    JUDGE DALZELL:  And you won't be heard to say I     9           didn't know.    10                    MR. ENNIS:  Right.    11                    JUDGE DALZELL:  Mr. Burrington could not appear in a    12           courtroom in the District of Ohio where he's from AOL,    13           whoever Compuserve is, and say oh, I didn't know there were    14           people under 18.  He'd be cut to shreds by Mr. Coppolino and    15           his friends on cross-examination, wouldn't he?    16                    MR. ENNIS:  That's correct.  That's why Subsection D    17           bans display of speech in a manner that's available to minors    18           on the Internet.  And your question was didn't Congress    19           simply think this is okay, we'll borrow the dial-a-porn    20           analogy?  Unfortunately, Congress did not hold hearings on    21           the nature of the Internet and it did not focus on this    22           question.  It thought that the dial-a-porn analogy would    23           work, it doesn't because the vast majority of speakers on the    24           Internet do not charge for access to their speech.    25                    There is a small subset of speakers on the Internet                                                                                                44     1           who do charge for access to their speech and those speakers     2           can, with the dial-a-porn analogy, require the presentation     3           of a credit card before they allow access to their speech.      4           It is a defense for that small subset of speakers.     5                    JUDGE DALZELL:  Therefore your argument goes     6           perversely the CDA if it were upheld, the people who could     7           easiest, who could comply with it the easiest are precisely     8           the pornographers.     9                    MR. ENNIS:  It's even more than that, your Honor.     10           That's correct but it's even more than that.  The    11           pornographers, the commercial pornographers who are charging    12           for access to their speech were requiring credit cards before    13           this act was passed.  They would continue to require credit    14           cards if this act were enjoined, they would continue to    15           require credit cards if the act were repealed.  This act does    16           nothing to protect minors from the commercial speech by    17           commercial purveyors of sexually explicit speech because they    18           already require credit cards.    19                    What the act does instead is to burden the huge    20           range of non-commercial speakers on the Internet and say to    21           them you cannot make your speech available for free to the    22           world unless you carry the affirmative burden of coming    23           within the safe harbors.    24                    There are only three possible  types of safe harbors    25           the Government has suggested and none of them can be used by                                                                                                45     1           non-commercial speakers.  The three categories I think can     2           usefully be thought of as falling into three groups.  One is     3           called charging, another would be called screening and a     4           third would be called warning.  I think that's a fair way to     5           think of these.     6                    We just talked a little bit about the charging.  You     7           can charge for your speech on the Internet but the evidence     8           is undisputed that the only speakers who can use, require a     9           credit card before giving access to their speech are    10           commercial speakers who are actually charging for their    11           speech.    12                    Credit card companies simply will not verify credit    13           cards for non-commercial transactions, they don't do it.     14           Therefore if I have a Webpage and I want to make my speech    15           available for free, I don't have the option of using the    16           verified credit card defense.  No credit card company will    17           verify it.  And that's true for the vast majority of speakers    18           on the Internet.    19                    So we can forget charging as a safe harbor defense    20           for most speakers.  That brings us to screening.  Screening    21           requires two things:  screening the content of the material    22           to decide which material would be inappropriate for minors    23           and therefore would have to be segregated into a different    24           area and then would require screening for age, so that when    25           people attempt to access the material that is the adults only                                                                                                46     1           material, you would be able to determine whether the person     2           attempting to access the adult material was an adult or a     3           minor.     4                    The evidence is quite clear on that that you cannot,     5           there's no technological way to screen for age based on     6           current available technology, it simply can't be done.  And     7           in huge areas of the Internet News Groups, IRC Chat, lists or     8           mail exploders, it is technologically impossible for the     9           speaker to get an adult ID number or a credit card number, it    10           can't be done.    11                    And I want to emphasize something here because we've    12           spent most of the time in this case talking about Webpages    13           and the World Wide Web because that's a popular way of    14           speaking on the Internet.  We haven't spent as much time    15           talking about  News Groups, Chat Rooms and mail exploders for    16           the very good reason that there's no dispute that the safe    17           harbor defenses can't be used in those areas, credit card and    18           adult access codes can't be used on those areas.     19                    But the important point is those are huge areas of t    20           he Internet.  There are hundreds of thousands of messages a    21           day that are posted to News Groups.  So we've concentrated a    22           lot on the World Wide Web, but when we realized that this law    23           bans speech in all those areas of the Internet, we're talking    24           about substantial number of applications.    25                    The third possible way of coming within a safe                                                                                                47     1           harbor is the Government has suggested there are really two     2           ways to --     3                    JUDGE SLOVITER:  Can you go back to the one before     4           for a minute?     5                    MR. ENNIS:  Sure.     6                    JUDGE SLOVITER:  You argue that screening becomes     7           ineffective or unusable because of the need for a common     8           gateway interface?  Could you -- I think you argued that in     9           your brief?    10                    MR. ENNIS:  Well --    11                    JUDGE SLOVITER:  Would you just bring us into that,    12           explain why that is?    13                    MR. ENNIS:  The reason that is in news groups, chat    14           rooms and list services is there is no simultaneous    15           communication between the speaker and the listener and the    16           listener has no way of communicating directly with the    17           speaker.  So it's not possible to transmit the adult ID code    18           or the credit card number in those mediums of communication.     19                    On Web sites it is possible, it is theoretically and    20           technologically possible for the speaker and the listener to    21           communicate interactively.    22                    JUDGE SLOVITER:  The big companies don't use comment    23           room except common gateway interface.  Am I misreading the    24           testimony?    25                    MR. ENNIS:  No, you're -- you're completely correct,                                                                                                48     1           Judge Sloviter.  I was just trying to explain that in Web     2           sites in general it is possible to have that kind of two-way     3           exchange of information to send adult ID codes and credit     4           card numbers back and forth, but for all of the Web sites     5           that are offered by the major on-line service providers,     6           those Web sites do not have the CGI common gateway     7           interference script capacity that is needed to have that     8           dialogue, so those Web sites can't do it.     9                    The only Web sites really that can do it are    10           separate commercial Web sites that are set up by commercial    11           providers of sexually explicit material.  And they do it and    12           they require credit card payment.    13                    JUDGE SLOVITER:  Okay, you were going to your third,    14           the warning.    15                    MR. ENNIS:  The third is give warning.  The    16           Government suggested there are basically two ways of coming    17           within this safe harbor defense and that is to tag your    18           speech, to self label your speech in some way as    19           inappropriate for minors or to register your speech with the    20           Internet Yellow Pages or with one or ten or fifty of the 200    21           and so additional directories of Internet listings.    22                    JUDGE DALZELL:  Are we to take that point seriously    23           in light of what's happened to Compuserve?  Because they did    24           take it and with that service that's in question that you    25           brought to us, to our attention, it is, it says it's adult,                                                                                                49     1           it's tagged.  But it didn't prevent the headlines to     2           Compuserve in the Ohio newspapers and I'm sure that ruined     3           their day, don't you think?     4                    MR. ENNIS:  I think it --     5                    (Laughter.)     6                    MR. ENNIS:  I think it -- I think it more than     7           ruined their day, your Honor.  If you're a commercial on-line     8           provider and there are headlines around the country saying     9           you're being investigated or reviewed or whatever the word is    10           for being a purveyor of pornography to children, you're not    11           going to sign up a whole lot of new subscribers that day or    12           for many days to come.  It more than ruined their day.    13                    The -- I think you're right.  We can't  take --    14                    JUDGE DALZELL:  I mean that suggests to me, and of    15           course I'm going to ask our friends on the other side about    16           this, are they really serious about these defenses?  Because    17           that material was tagged, it had a warning.     18                    MR. ENNIS:  It had a warning and it not only had a    19           warning, it was within the proprietary service and it said    20           you can click this button and that material is not available    21           to any minors in your household.    22                    So not only was it tagged, not only was it in a    23           separate directory, it also came packaged with a completely    24           effective parental control device.  Even so, that matter was    25           referred on to the FBI.                                                                                                50     1                    Now, the Government can't seriously argue that     2           tagging or putting your name in a registry would constitute a     3           safe harbor defense.  The most they've ever argued in their     4           brief is that it, quote, "might qualify."     5                    And the Keeney letter says at most it's substantial     6           evidence and it's only substantial evidence if the evidence     7           of tagging is coupled with, quote, "evidence that the     8           marketplace of browsers are actually screening for that     9           particular tag."    10                    There was testimony at trial that that is    11           technologically impossible today.  It is not technologically    12           impossible today for speakers to know, to have evidence    13           whether the marketplace of browsers are actually screening,    14           so it's an evidence that's totally impossible to provide.    15                    JUDGE SLOVITER:  Well, what -- I find both your    16           position and the Government's position somewhat inconsistent    17           internally.  You say you should, you have a better    18           alternative and that is to have parents do it via Surfwatch    19           and groups like that and yet you argue that the Government's     20           tagging system is not effective, nobody said it's really    21           working yet.  The Government says its tagging system is the    22           one that we should use but yours is not working and    23           effective.    24                    Now, either there is a potential tagging system for,    25           workable tagging system for both parties or there isn't.  The                                                                                                51     1           evidence shows that there was some success by Surfwatch but     2           minuscule really in the totality of the Internet.     3                    What is your position as to why your position is not     4           inconsistent?     5                    MR. ENNIS:  I understand your question, your Honor.      6           It is a complicated question, let me try to explain that.  In     7           order to explain it, I have to back up a half step.     8                    JUDGE SLOVITER:  Go ahead.     9                    MR. ENNIS:  And indicate that even if a speaker tags    10           or puts their -- registers with a registry, all it does is    11           warn listeners, give them notice of the nature of the speech    12           so that if they wanted to block the speech and had the    13           software capacity, they could do so.    14                    But the Government's experts agree that without the    15           cooperation of the end user with people down the    16           communication chain, merely tagging speech or registering it    17           in a registry does nothing whatsoever to prevent access to    18           that speech by minors.  In fact, using search engines minors    19           can more easily gain access to that speech.    20                    JUDGE SLOVITER:  Then why do you rely on Surfwatch    21           and groups like that to say that is a least restrictive    22           alternative?    23                    MR. ENNIS:  Well, let me explain that, your Honor.     24           What's wrong with the Government's tagging proposal is it is    25           completely dependent on end users, parental responsibility,                                                                                                52     1           or it won't shield a single minor from anything.       2                    JUDGE DALZELL:  But so is PICs.     3                    MR. ENNIS:  Yes, yes, it is, but there's a diff--     4           here's the difference, your Honor.  If the parent is going to     5           be a responsible parent and is going to take steps to protect     6           their children, with PICs, the parent can set the PICs     7           browser so that it will not allow access to any speech on the     8           Internet unless the speech has been rated as appropriate by a     9           third-party bureau the parent knows and trusts.    10                    That would completely protect minors from    11           inappropriate material without requiring speakers to self-    12           label or tag their speech at all.    13                    JUDGE BUCKWALTER:  And that's the essential    14           difference --    15                    MR. ENNIS:  And that's the essential --    16                    JUDGE BUCKWALTER:  -- in a nutshell.    17                    MR. ENNIS:  It is.    18                    JUDGE BUCKWALTER:  You don't want the speaker to    19           have to do anything and the Government wants the speaker to    20           have to make some judgment.    21                    MR. ENNIS:  That's the point, your Honor.     22                    JUDGE BUCKWALTER:  Okay.    23                    MR. ENNIS:  That is exactly the point because the    24           Government --     25                    JUDGE SLOVITER:  Are PICs currently working?                                                                                                53     1                    MR. ENNIS:  Actually, the press reports yesterday     2           indicated that two days ago the final PIC standards are out,     3           it will be working in July.     4                    JUDGE SLOVITER:  All right.  We don't have any, I     5           think we have to rely on the evidence that was before us.  We     6           don't have any evidence that PICs is currently working.      7                    JUDGE BUCKWALTER:  Well, we --     8                    JUDGE SLOVITER:  Well, wait a minute, could he     9           answer my question first?    10                    JUDGE BUCKWALTER:  Right.    11                    JUDGE SLOVITER:  You can -- go ahead.  And, yeah,    12           it's directed to him.    13                    MR. ENNIS:  Well, that's right and that's evidence,    14           what that means is that PICs isn't working to block the    15           Government's tags either, so that  there's no safe harbor    16           today, even if speakers use the Government's L-18 pack.    17                    JUDGE DALZELL:  But didn't Mr. Vesser who's from the    18           Worldwide Web consortium, didn't he tell us that PICs would    19           be operational in three to six months?    20                    MR. ENNIS:  Yes, it will be.    21                    JUDGE DALZELL:  But that is in the record.     22                    MR. ENNIS:  Yes.  Probably in June or July it will    23           be operational.  There are -- there are --    24                    JUDGE BUCKWALTER:  Mr. Ennis, let me get back to the    25           point here, at this point, and then -- it might be the right                                                                                                54     1           time to get back to it.  You gave a little bit of short     2           shrift and I'm sure not intentionally to my talking about     3           burden of proof here.  Burden of proof may not be important,     4           I'm not sure yet, but isn't the burden of proof always going     5           to be on the Government in a case like this to prove that the     6           defendant has not -- the burden's not going to be on the     7           defendant to prove his safe harbor is effective, it's going     8           to be on the Government to prove that it's not effective.      9                    MR. ENNIS:  I'm afraid not, your Honor.    10                    JUDGE BUCKWALTER:  Because it's like a defense of    11           insanity.  I mean you can arrange a defense of insanity but    12           the Government has to prove you were sane, you don't have to    13           prove you were insane.     14                    MR. ENNIS:  Well --    15                    JUDGE BUCKWALTER:  And isn't that the same analogy    16           here?    17                    MR. ENNIS:  It's been a long time since I looked at    18           the insanity defense but my recollection is the Government    19           has to prove you had the mental intent to commit the crime    20           but you bear the burden of establishing insanity defense.    21                    JUDGE BUCKWALTER:  No, no, well, I don't -- that's     22           a -- that isn't really what you and I have here.  I think the    23           same is true in a consensual defense to rape, for example.     24           You may raise that defense but the Government has the burden    25           of proving it was non-consensual.  You don't have any burden                                                                                                55     1           to --     2                    MR. ENNIS:  Well --                    3                    JUDGE BUCKWALTER:  -- to prove it was consensual.      4           So I mean in this, so in this --     5                    MR. ENNIS:  Your Honor --     6                    JUDGE BUCKWALTER:  -- context of criminal law --     7                    MR. ENNIS:  Let me say that --     8                    JUDGE SLOVITER:  Why don't you wait till the rest of     9           the question, the rest of Judge Buckwalter's question came    10           out.    11                    JUDGE BUCKWALTER:  Yeah, I was going to say in the    12           context of criminal law isn't the burden going to be on the    13           Government here?  Once the defendant raises the fact of well,    14           I tried to do this and this is what I did, he doesn't have to    15           prove that was effective, the Government has to prove that it    16           was not.    17                    MR. ENNIS:  Your Honor, I would hope so.  That's not    18           my understanding of the Government's position, but it doesn't    19           matter.    20                    JUDGE BUCKWALTER:  I'll talk to them about that.    21                    MR. ENNIS:  It doesn't matter because even if the    22           burden is on the Government, still the speaker can have no    23           assurance whatsoever that if they take the steps the    24           Government suggests they will surely and safely have a safe    25           harbor, even if the burden is on the Government to prove that                                                                                                56     1           the steps were not effective rather on them to prove that the     2           steps were effective, they are still at risk of losing that     3           battle in front of a jury.  And it could be any jury in any     4           community in America.     5                    Therefore, no prudent speaker --     6                    JUDGE BUCKWALTER:  Yeah, well, now I'm not exactly     7           sure I know where this burden of proof argument goes in this     8           whole scheme of things but I did want to discuss it.     9                    MR. ENNIS:  Well, I think it's a very important    10           point and the way I would say it is the statute is    11           unconstitutional, whether the burden is on the Government to    12           deal with the safe harbor defenses or the burden is on the    13           speaker.  The unconstitutionality is compounded if the burden    14           is on the speaker.    15                    But backing up to Judge Sloviter's question, there    16           are right now today through all of the major on-line service    17           providers ways to block access through Compuserve or Prodigy,    18           for example, to all speech on the Internet that the parents    19           don't want to come in or on America On Line to block access    20           to all areas of the Internet except the small areas that    21           America On Line has prescreened and put in their Kids Only    22           room as appropriate for children.    23                    So there are end user capacities for everyone who    24           uses the on-line service providers to block access to the    25           Internet today.                                                                                                57     1                    The point I'm trying to make with this -- the     2           difference between the Government's proposal and ours is the     3           act, tagging and registering cannot possibly protect minors     4           unless parents acquire software that will read the tags and     5           then turn it on and use it.     6                    If the parents do that, there is no need for the act     7           because they can block access to all inappropriate speech     8           even if no speaker ever self-labeled or rated their speech     9           and even if there had never been any act at all.    10                    JUDGE DALZELL:  Doesn't Dr. Olsen's proposal, the    11           minus L-18 proposal have at least one advantage over PICs, as    12           I understand the testimony?  And that is with his tagging    13           proposal you could tag the four-letter words in the    14           Canterbury Tales, let's say, and expurgate the Canterbury    15           Tales by tagging those words, whereas as I understand PICs,    16           the best you could do would be to give each page a URL and    17           delete the whole page that has a four-letter word on it.  Do    18           I understand the testimony correctly?    19                    MR. ENNIS:  The testimony was to my mind somewhat    20           confusing on that point but I think that may be an accurate    21           recollection of the testimony.  There are some advantages to    22           the L-18 over PICs and some -- and many advantages to PICs    23           over L-18.  The principal advantage of L-18 is it's typing in    24           four key strokes, that's it.  The principal disadvantage of    25           L-18 is it's a blockbuster, all-or-nothing approach.                                                                                                 58     1           Everything is either patently offensive or it's okay.     2                    Whereas with PICs you can say well, this has some     3           nudity but it's in the context of a serious piece of     4           literature or --     5                    JUDGE DALZELL:  Even under PICs, for example, we     6           heard from Mr. Kuromiya and his group.  When PICs becomes     7           operational doesn't Mr. Kuromiya have a tough call to make     8           about the critical path information?  Because as I understand     9           his testimony, he said we want to reach those sexually active    10           teenagers who are under 18.  So far from having a good faith    11           defense that I did what I could to prevent it, he's going to    12           come in and tell the jury:  I want to reach them.  In fact, I    13           want to pander and titillate them because I need to get their    14           attention to help save lives.    15                    So what's he going to do with PICs?    16                    MR. ENNIS:  I think that your question illustrates    17           another difference between PICs and the Government's proposal    18           which is quite important to understand.  PICs primarily    19           relies upon ratings by third parties that the parent can no    20           or trust.  In that example perhaps Planned Parenthood would    21           rate Web sites of material that's sexually explicit but    22           appropriate for minors.  The parent might trust Planned    23           Parenthood.  They go to Planned Parenthood and Planned    24           Parenthood says yes, you can let your child access Kuromiya's    25           Web site, that's okay, it's good, it's valuable information.                                                                                                59     1                    The Government's proposal, the parent would have to     2           know and trust each of the individual millions of speakers on     3           the Internet.  Why would a parent do that?  Why would a     4           parent have any reason whatsoever to trust that some     5           individual speaker they know nothing about is accurately and     6           appropriately labeling their speech or is inappropriately     7           labeling their speech?     8                    JUDGE SLOVITER:  Why would a parent trust anyone to     9           do that?  Isn't that a similar indictment of the Surf Watch    10           et al. argument?    11                    MR. ENNIS:  Well, a parent certainly could come to    12           rely upon third-party rating bureaus that the parent has some    13           knowledge of, for example, the Christian Coalition could have    14           a rating service that many parents might turn to, the ACLU    15           might have one, Planned Parenthood might have one.    16                    JUDGE SLOVITER:  How feasible are any of these in    17           light of the evidence in this case of the millions of    18           communications that go on all the time on the Internet?  And    19           that's both for the Government's proposal and your proposal.    20                    MR. ENNIS:  Well, what that comes down to, Judge    21           Sloviter, is the amount of risk that individual parents are    22           willing to tolerate with respect to their own children.    23                    And the advantage of PICs and Surf Watch Manager and    24           all of the other products we've talked about is they give    25           parents total control, all the way from zero access to the                                                                                                60     1           Internet to unrestricted access to the Internet or anything     2           in between, based upon the parents' judgment of the balance     3           that's appropriate for their children.     4                    That's why -- that's another reason why our proposal     5           is better than the Government's but the most important reason     6           why it's better, let me get right to that, is that the     7           Government's proposal, the Government's tagging and     8           registration proposal will be completely ineffective at     9           blocking or deterring any of the substantial amount of    10           sexually explicit speech that is posted abroad.    11                    By definition the criminal laws of this United --    12           United States are not going to deter the posting of indecent    13           or patently offensive material abroad.    14                    So the Government's tagging system won't work, it    15           just can't, can't work at all.    16                    There was testimony by Ann Duvall that at least 30    17           percent of the sites blocked by Surf Watch are foreign sites.     18           There was testimony by Donna Hoffman that at least 40 percent    19           of all the host computers connected to the Internet are    20           located abroad and that the percentage of foreign computers,    21           as a percentage of the total, is rapidly approaching 50    22           percent.    23                    There's no reason to think that there's any less    24           percentage of sexually explicit material posted on foreign    25           computers than on domestic computers, so it's probable that                                                                                                61     1           about 50 percent of the sexually explicit material available     2           on the Internet is posted abroad.     3                    JUDGE DALZELL:  Didn't Dr. Olsen or Mr. Schmidt, I     4           forget who, say well, that's all true, but if we have the     5           tagging we can concentrate all of our energy on the offshore     6           content and so we've reduced our problem by, to take your     7           figures, half.     8                    MR. ENNIS:  But it just doesn't, it makes no sense     9           at all.  If they have the tagging but parents are not using    10           the blocking software, the tagging does nothing.  If the    11           parents are using the blocking software you don't need the    12           tagging to keep all of that speech away from children. In    13           fact, it's only with the use of the end user software that    14           you can block access to the foreign material as well.    15                    JUDGE DALZELL:  But on the PICs proposal there was a    16           lot of discussion in the testimony and in your questions and    17           in the briefing about differing communities and differing    18           communities having different standards of indecency, let's    19           say.  I don't see how PICs deals with that because PICs is    20           still an all or -- or tagging for that matter, they're still    21           all or nothing.    22                    The example I gave of Brainerd, Minnesota versus New    23           York City, okay, which I think most people would agree are    24           rather different communities, PICs would either block both    25           places or not block both places, same thing with tagging,                                                                                                62     1           right?  So you don't deal with the community issue with PICs.     2                    MR. ENNIS:  That raises the fundamental question     3           with this law because the law makes it a crime to make speech     4           available in a way that's available to minors.  And if a     5           parent isn't using PICs  or Surf Watch, that speech will be     6           available in all those communities you talked about.  That's     7           the fundamental problem with the law.     8                    If Congress had thought about this, they might have     9           tried to come up with a much more sensible law that could    10           have done many things.  For example, it could have encouraged    11           the development of these end-user software products.      12                    One of the real problems with this law, in my    13           opinion, is that it gives the wrong signal to parents.  I    14           think it gives a signal to parents that the Federal    15           Government has stepped in and taken care of the problem of    16           inappropriate material on the Internet, so parents don't need    17           to worry.      18                    In fact, parents do need to worry.  Even with the    19           Government's tagging proposal, if parents don't go to the    20           trouble of acquiring and using parental software devices, all    21           of that material will be available to their children despite    22           this act.  That's one thing I hope can come out of the    23           publicity surrounding this case is that parents will learn    24           that they do have available to them very effective parental    25           control devices, but they have to use them.                                                                                                63     1                    This act has not taken care of the problem and if     2           the parents don't use those devices, all the sexually     3           explicit speech on the Internet will be available in every     4           home in America that's connected to the Internet, despite the     5           act.     6                    Let me briefly say, there were some questions about     7           facial challenge, in earlier briefs the Government seemed to     8           take the position that we could not bring a facial challenge.      9           But if you look at Pages 14 through 17 of the Government's    10           post hearing brief, the Government acknowledges that we can    11           bring a facial challenge in at least two ways.  We're    12           bringing a vagueness challenge and we're alleging that the    13           act is vague in all applications, so that's appropriate as a    14           facial challenge.    15                    More to this point, the Government now acknowledges    16           that we can bring a substantial over-breadth facial challenge    17           and we have standing to do that, all we have to show is that    18           the law is substantially over-broad.    19                    And in answer to the question from your Honors, the    20           two cases that discuss that are Shomburg and City of Houston,    21           both of which say that a law is over-broad if a substantial    22           number of its applications would be unconstitutional.    23                    What I think we have shown is that Subsection D is    24           substantially over-broad because in every one of its    25           applications except for commercial speakers, it bans speech                                                                                                64     1           that is constitutionally protected for adults.     2                    JUDGE SLOVITER:  Why do you keep ignoring Subsection     3           A which I think you also challenge?     4                    MR. ENNIS:  Well, we do challenge it, your Honor.      5           We're not ignoring it, it's just that the --     6                    JUDGE SLOVITER:  Well, you keep focusing on     7           Subsection D.     8                    MR. ENNIS:  That's right.  That's because Subsection     9           D is the section that will affect most Internet speakers,    10           those who want to make their speech broadly available to the    11           world.    12                    Subsection A is a more focused law about speakers    13           who want to make their speech available to a much more tiny    14           segment of the world.  We do challenge both, but the truly    15           draconian and sweeping provision of this law is Subsection D.    16                    JUDGE DALZELL:  If the Government though -- and I    17           intend to ask Mr. Coppolino about this -- the Government does    18           say in Footnote 46 of their brief, Page 37, I think, that    19           they have, quote, "concerns," close quote, about your    20           standing because they argue that your worries are so far    21           fetched, so hyperbolic as to raise these, quote, "concerns,"    22           close quote, about your standing.  Do you want to address    23           that?    24                    MR. ENNIS:  Well, first of all, I think the    25           Government is simply wrong about that, I think our concerns                                                                                                65     1           about our standing are not at all hyperbolic or far-fetched     2           as the Compuserve incident from just two days ago would make     3           painfully clear.     4                    This is a law which, if you look at the text and at     5           the conference report, makes clear it criminalizes the     6           display of patently offensive speech that is not obscene and     7           the law makes clear that that speech is criminalized even if     8           it has serious value.     9                    Therefore, all of our speakers who engage in speech    10           that does have serious value are at risk of prosecution under    11           this law.    12                    Also, under the over-breadth doctrine, pure over-    13           breadth doctrine, we would have standing under Fox to bring    14           this challenge on behalf of those speakers whose speech did    15           not have serious value.  So either way you look at it, I    16           think there's no standing issue in this case.    17                    JUDGE DALZELL:  Well, it's certainly true that the    18           Government has said consistently that -- and of course it    19           never filed a motion as to standing and it was assured to me    20           when we were talking about the stipulations that the    21           Government had no standing concerns, but that Footnote 46    22           raised my eyebrows a little bit and that's why I raised it    23           with you.    24                    MR. ENNIS:  Well, let me make a footnote point to    25           that is that not only have we brought an extraordinarily                                                                                                66     1           broad coalition of plaintiff groups representing truly     2           virtually all of the mainstream media publication and     3           computer entities in America.  Those groups have sued also on     4           behalf of their patrons, their subscribers and their users.      5           The librarians are also suing on behalf of their patrons and     6           members.  America On Line is suing on behalf of its     7           subscribers.     8                    So we're suing on behalf of millions of speakers on     9           the Internet.  Many of those speakers speak to news groups,    10           list serves, IRC chat rooms, and it's quite likely that some    11           of the speech they engage in would not have serious value    12           under the Government's definition.     13                    So we're also speaking on behalf, we're bringing    14           this suit on behalf of speech that does not have serious    15           value.  Accordingly, we have standing for that third reason    16           as well.    17                    I'd like, if I could, to make one final point and    18           then reserve the balance of my time for rebuttal.    19                    JUDGE SLOVITER:  I think you've used most of your    20           time, but go ahead.    21                    JUDGE DALZELL:  Yes, you've reserved 15 minutes for    22           rebuttal.     23                    JUDGE SLOVITER:  But we'll see -- we'll hear you on    24           rebuttal.    25                    JUDGE DALZELL:  And you ten, right.                                                                                                67     1                    MR. ENNIS:  Do I still have some time left?     2                    JUDGE DALZELL:  Yes, you have five minutes.     3                    MR. ENNIS:  Let me make one brief point.     4                    JUDGE SLOVITER:  And a substantial amount of your     5           initial time.     6                    MR. ENNIS:  Yes.  The Government suggests that the     7           act should not be struck down because the act in combination     8           with user blocking software would be more effective than     9           either alone.  There are several problems with that argument.     10           First, as I think we have shown, this act does nothing,    11           literally nothing or at most only a marginal amount to    12           protect children from inappropriate speech that would not    13           already be done as a result of market forces and end user    14           software even in the absence of the act.  And that marginal    15           benefit comes at the expense of suppressing constitutionally    16           protected speech for adults.  So the act violates --    17                    JUDGE SLOVITER:  That implicates a factual issue as    18           to how frequently one might -- well, a child is likely to    19           inadvertently find speech that was intended to be suppressed    20           by this statute.    21                    What is your understanding of, given all the    22           evidence that we saw here, of the frequency of what the facts    23           show as to the frequency of an inadvertent coming across    24           that--    25                    MR. ENNIS:  I think the evidence on that is clear                                                                                                68     1           and I think Congress agreed.  The Government's expert, Howard     2           Schmidt, testified in court that, quote, "The odds are slim     3           that someone would come across a sexually explicit site by     4           accident."     5                    Congress in fact found in the act in one of its     6           findings that the interactive computer services, as the name     7           suggests, the word interactive, "offer users a great deal of     8           control over the information that they receive as well as the     9           potential for even greater control in the future as    10           technology develops."    11                    JUDGE SLOVITER:  Well, now we saw a few examples    12           presented by the Government's witnesses where that was    13           likely.  What I have yet to see is somebody testify as to    14           how, beside the very slim, how frequently that could occur    15           because obviously it can occur.    16                    MR. ENNIS:  It obviously can occur and --    17                    JUDGE DALZELL:  We saw it in the Jasmine example.    18                    MR. ENNIS:  Yeah, it obviously can occur.  We don't    19           take the position that it is impossible to be surprised by    20           what comes up on your computer screen.    21                    We do take the position and have all testified to    22           this effect, Bill Burrington testified to this effect, that    23           in interactive computer services, unlike broadcast TV or    24           radio, the speaker, I mean the listener makes an affirmative    25           choice of where they are going to go and they have to select                                                                                                69     1           where they're going to go.     2                    You don't turn on your computer and sexually     3           explicit images pop on your screen.  You turn on your     4           computer and you have to select where you want to go to get     5           there.     6                    JUDGE SLOVITER:  Is the Government entitled to     7           prevent a child who wants to go into sexually active material     8           from being able to do so?     9                    MR. ENNIS:  Regardless of the parents' wishes?    10                    JUDGE SLOVITER:  Mm-hmm.    11                    MR. ENNIS:  I think that's a very difficult    12           question, your Honor.  I think as a constitutional matter if    13           Congress wanted to have as an interest and to exercise a    14           parents' patri interest in protecting child-- minors from    15           access to material, even if their parents thought it was    16           appropriate for their children, it could conceivably have    17           such an interest.  It would raise very serious constitutional    18           questions in my mind, some of which are noted in the fabulous    19           opinion by your Honor.    20                    But the important point here is, is that Congress    21           has given us no reason whatsoever to think that that is the    22           interest underlying this act.  To the contrary, in this act    23           Congress found as a fact that its objective in the text of    24           the act was, quote, "To empower parents to restrict their    25           children's access to objectionable or inappropriate on-line                                                                                                70     1           material" and the conference report is even clearer.     2                    The conference report confirms, quote, "The     3           important Federal policy of empowering parents to determine     4           the content of communications their children receive."     5                    JUDGE SLOVITER:  Isn't there evidence on the record     6           that there are a great number of possibilities for people     7           under 18 to access the Internet outside of the home?  There     8           are lots -- there's lots of evidence --     9                    JUDGE DALZELL:  Internet cafes.    10                    JUDGE SLOVITER:  Well, but even if little children    11           don't go to cafes --    12                    JUDGE DALZELL:  Libraries.    13                    JUDGE SLOVITER:  -- at libraries, et cetera,    14           schools.    15                    MR. ENNIS:  Schools.    16                    JUDGE SLOVITER:  Yeah, and where -- and you also    17           assume in your argument and in your brief very knowledgeable    18           parents, parents who know how to, assuming they have a    19           computer in the house, who will know how to contact the    20           entities that will be able to help them in putting things    21           like Surfwatch on.      22                    And I'm not sure how realistic that is in today's    23           world.  I mean we have children who don't know about birth    24           control, who aren't told by their parents about AIDS, because    25           we have a whole substrata of our society in which parents are                                                                                                71     1           unwilling or unable to give this information.  So how can you     2           make the assumption that we can rely on parents for this kind     3           of protection?     4                    MR. ENNIS:  Well --     5                    JUDGE SLOVITER:  And do we have to?     6                    MR. ENNIS:  Two responses, your Honor.  Your final     7           question is yes, we do have to.  If parents do not act     8           responsibly, if parents don't do what they can do, nothing in     9           this act will protect children from inappropriate material,    10           nothing.    11                    But the two answers I'd like to give are first, I    12           respectfully disagree with your Honor.  I think the testimony    13           by Ann Duvall, the testimony by Bill Burrington was clear    14           that it is very easy for parents to use the parental control    15           devices like Surfwatch, Surfwatch Manager, the America On    16           Line Compuserve Project Parental Control devices, it's really    17           quite easy.  Any parent that has a computer can almost    18           certainly use those devices.    19                    Second, if parents can't figure out how to use those    20           devices then that is a problem for the Government as well    21           because the Government's whole idea about tagging or    22           registering speech can't work unless the parents have the    23           capacity to use that end-user software.  So if it's a    24           problem, it's a problem for the act, not a problem for our    25           case.                                                                                                72     1                    JUDGE DALZELL:  Last question, the same question I     2           asked Mr. Hansen.  Senator Exon and Senator Coates give you     3           the pen to write child of CDA, do you give it back to them or     4           do you write something?     5                    MR. ENNIS:  Well, my first answer would be exactly     6           what Mr. Hansen answered, wait a decent interval, let the     7           marketplace work, especially since Congress made findings of     8           fact that it wanted to preserve a vibrant, free market in the     9           Internet, quote, "unfettered by Government regulation."  Let    10           the market work for a while and see if you even need any    11           governmental intervention of this nature whatsoever.    12                    But if I were pushed to try to come up with a    13           different law I think there are many things Congress could    14           have considered that would have narrowed the scope of the    15           law, in answer to Judge Sloviter's question, without even    16           thinking about the affirmative safe harbor defenses.    17                    If Congress was truly concerned about commercial    18           pornography it could have written a much narrower law that    19           only criminalized the display to minors of truly sexually    20           explicit material.     21                    JUDGE DALZELL:  But those laws already exist.    22                    MR. ENNIS:  Well, for obscenity it does, but they    23           could have gone down one notch and tried that.  They could    24           have made clear that speech with serious value is not    25           criminalized, they could have done that.                                                                                                73     1                    JUDGE DALZELL:  So you disagree with what Mr. Hansen     2           said about the medium specific aspect here?     3                    MR. ENNIS:  Oh, no, no, no, not at all.  The reason     4           that this very broad coalition of plaintiff groups is before     5           the Court today is precisely to emphasize the point that this     6           medium of communication truly is unlike any other that has     7           ever gone before it and that the appropriate First Amendment     8           standards of review that this Court must develop to govern     9           regulation of this new medium of communication have to take    10           those characteristics into consideration.    11                    One of the principal characteristics is it is a    12           truly global medium, which Congress forgot about it.  It is    13           not as if patently offensive speech that's posted abroad has    14           to come through a Customs Office checkpoint before it reaches    15           American homes where it can be physically screened by Customs    16           officers.  Everything that's posted abroad is instantly    17           available in every home in America, this is a global    18           communications medium.    19                    I can suggest a few other ways of narrowing the    20           statute that Congress could have considered.  For example,    21           the Government has made much in its evidence about the so-    22           called teaser ads by commercial providers of sexually    23           explicit speech who have teaser ads and then charge with    24           credit cards to actually get into their Web sites.    25                    If that was really Congress' concern, Congress could                                                                                                74     1           have crafted a much different statute designed to regulate     2           advertising.  Now, in my opinion there would be very, very     3           serious constitutional problems with regulation of     4           advertising on the Internet, but they would be of a different     5           order of magnitude because they would be judged under the     6           intermediate standard of review, not under strict scrutiny     7           because commercial speech is judged on an intermediate     8           standard of review.  That's another narrower thing Congress     9           could have done.    10                    There are many ways Congress could have narrowed    11           this law, the most important of which would be to take out    12           the word speech available to minors.  That basically bans all    13           speech.  Congress could have said, passed a law that said    14           before you engage in patently offensive speech on the    15           Internet you should give fair warning that your speech is    16           patently offensive.  Then all these tagging defenses would    17           make some sense because you would be giving fair warning.     18           That's a different scheme that Congress, I think probably    19           would be an unconstitutional scheme, but it would certainly    20           be a narrower scheme than the one Congress adopted.    21                    JUDGE SLOVITER:  It doesn't help to suggest what you    22           think is unconstitutional now, does it?    23                    (Laughter.)    24                    MR. ENNIS:  I was just trying to respond to Judge    25           Dalzell's question.  If I were --                                                                                                75     1                    JUDGE SLOVITER:  The answer may be -- I mean if you     2           really think it -- that there's nothing that Congress could     3           have done constitutionally.     4                    JUDGE DALZELL:  It's okay to say that, Mr. Ennis.     5                    JUDGE SLOVITER:  I mean I'm not sure that's right --     6                    (Laughter.)     7                    JUDGE SLOVITER:  -- but I can't see how it helps us     8           to suggest statutes that you would later challenge.     9                    JUDGE DALZELL:  Because for sure you wouldn't want    10           to repeat what's happened with dial-a-porn, would you?  That    11           is to say where you have ten years of litigation over the    12           subject?    13                    MR. ENNIS:  No, I think that's right and I think    14           that's precisely why Congress specifically authorized a    15           facial challenge in this case because there's allegedly    16           history makes clear that Congress did not want to wait for    17           ten years to find out whether they've got a valid law or not.    18                    And if it's limited to an as-applied challenge, then    19           you're into years of litigation about the constitutional    20           scope of the law.  That's why I think Congress invited a    21           broad facial challenge to this law.    22                    Let me finish the point I said was the final point I    23           was going to make about this combination.  The Government's    24           argument that the less drastic alternative of end-user    25           software coupled with the act would be more effective than                                                                                                76     1           either alone.  That argument is flatly inconsistent with     2           current law and would basically wipe out the less restrictive     3           alternative requirement of strict scrutiny because it is     4           almost always the case that a combination of the Government     5           prohibition and the less restrictive alternative together     6           would be more effective than either alone.     7                    In the Bolger case, for example, the combination of     8           the Government prohibition on unsolicited mailings when     9           combined with the less drastic alternative of parental    10           supervision of incoming mails would surely be more effective    11           than either alone, but the Supreme Court struck down that    12           governmental prohibition and relied exclusively and solely on    13           parental supervision of what their children would receive in    14           the mail.  That's the appropriate response for this case as    15           well.    16                    Thank you.    17                    JUDGE DALZELL:  All right, we will -- go ahead.    18                    JUDGE SLOVITER:  We will recess for 15 minutes,    19           please.    20                    (Court in recess; 11:07 to 11:28 o'clock a.m.) Back to Hearing Transcripts index Back to Citizens Internet Empowerment Coalition Page WT02-B05-85IA095-001027-B014-127http://www.cdt.org:80/ciec/transcripts/May_10_Defendants.html 205.177.10.31 19970215012853 text/html 210793HTTP/1.0 200 OKDate: Sat, 15 Feb 1997 01:27:13 GMTServer: Apache/1.1.1Content-type: text/html Defendants' Closing Arguments Defendants' Closing Arguments May 10, 1996 Anthony Coppolino and Jason Baron representing Janet Reno and the Department of Justice     21                    THE COURT CLERK:  Court is now in session, please be    22           seated.    23                    MR. COPPOLINO:  Good morning, your Honors.    24                    JUDGE DALZELL:  Good morning, Mr. Coppolino.    25                    MR. COPPOLINO:  Your Honors, just first by way of a                                                                                                77     1           couple of procedural points, whatever the Court's wishes are     2           in terms of our having rebuttal time, if you would permit us     3           I would reserve ten minutes if you could --     4                    JUDGE SLOVITER:  Why would you have rebuttal time?     5                    MR. COPPOLINO:  Well, that's -- if you want them to     6           have  the last word then that's fine with me.     7                    JUDGE SLOVITER:  No, that's not the question as to     8           whether we want them to have the last word, you didn't call     9           it, this is not an appeal, you didn't cross-appeal.    10                    MR. COPPOLINO:  I understand.    11                    JUDGE SLOVITER:  And I didn't understand the whole    12           thing about surrebuttal.    13                    JUDGE DALZELL:  There's no counterclaim, at least    14           that I've seen.    15                    MR. COPPOLINO:  Okay, then forget that then.  I    16           think --     17                    JUDGE SLOVITER:  Good try.    18                    (Laughter.)    19                    MR. COPPOLINO:   I had to try.    20                    That being the case, Mr. Baron and I will divide the    21           argument essentially along the lines that Mr. Hansen and Mr.    22           Ennis divided it.  I do expect that I will cross over a bit    23           into Mr. Ennis' area to talk about the safe harbor defense    24           concerning credit cards and access codes and the parental    25           control software is the least restrictive alternative with                                                                                                78     1           respect to that.     2                    Given the amount of time we have, you know, I would     3           expect to go for about an hour on my time and then Mr. Baron     4           would have about an hour thereafter.     5                    JUDGE SLOVITER:  You will forgive us if we don't     6           keep in our minds what the break of the -- of you both is and     7           if we ask you questions that -- I'd rather you not say well,     8           Mr. Baron's going to handle that.  It's the frustration of     9           having two arguers rather than having one that you can do    10           unless it's something that really Mr. Baron promises to get    11           to.    12                    MR. COPPOLINO:  Yes.  Well, the only area, I think    13           it's a very discrete area having to do with the defenses for    14           the non-commercial providers concerning tagging, labeling--    15                    JUDGE SLOVITER:  Yes.    16                    MR. COPPOLINO:  -- registering, Dr. Olsen's areas,    17           there's some crossover.  And I'll, if I feel like he could    18           have the better handle on it, I'll just --    19                    JUDGE SLOVITER:  Okay.    20                    MR. COPPOLINO:  -- so indicate.    21                    JUDGE SLOVITER:  Are you finished the procedure?    22                    MR. COPPOLINO:  Yes, I am, your Honor.    23                    JUDGE SLOVITER:  Good.  Mr. Coppolino, I would like    24           to know because I'm not satisfied that I fully understand at    25           this point what is the Government's position as to what the                                                                                                79     1           statute, A and D, let's leave aside C, what the statute     2           covers.     3                    MR. COPPOLINO:  I take it by your question, your     4           Honor, you are specifically asking about the indecency     5           standard, what types of speech it covers.     6                    JUDGE SLOVITER:  No, I'm asking about -- that's my     7           second question which is whether they really are the same     8           thing, but what do you understand -- I read your brief very     9           carefully, I even indexed it all myself, no law clerks, what    10           do you --    11                    (Laughter.)    12                    JUDGE SLOVITER:  -- what is your position as to what    13           is covered by the statute?    14                    MR. COPPOLINO:  The statute, I -- I would say on its    15           face covers indecent, that is patently offensive    16           communications over a telecommunications device in 223(A) and    17           an interactive computer service in 223(D).  And therefore it    18           could cover communications across various media, Web sites,    19           Usenet groups and so on that might be within that standard of    20           patently offensive.  So --    21                    JUDGE SLOVITER:  And is that the way we have to read    22           the statute?    23                    MR. COPPOLINO:   I don't think that's the way you    24           necessarily have to construe it and I think as you may    25           discern from our brief an important point we would make to                                                                                                80     1           the Court, principally in connection with the substantial     2           over-breadth argument is that if there are some applications     3           that give the cause concern that the Court would have to look     4           to whether the plainly legitimate sweep of the statute is     5           substantial or whether the applications that you consider     6           might be unconstitutional are substantial in comparison to     7           the plainly legitimate sweep.     8                    I'm jumping ahead a bit, but --     9                    JUDGE SLOVITER:  No, well, but I think we have to    10           get, because everything else will follow, I assume everything    11           else follows from what you claim is covered.    12                    Now, do you claim -- I'm going to ask you a series    13           of questions if my colleagues will permit because -- do you    14           claim that A and D, the patently offensive and the indecent    15           provisions are the same?    16                    MR. COPPOLINO:  Yes, I do, your Honor.    17                    JUDGE SLOVITER:  Now, then I want to know if that's    18           so, I mean how can you do that in light of the language?  For    19           example, D talks in terms of communications that describe    20           sexual or excretory activities or organs.  Is that anywhere    21           in A?    22                    MR. COPPOLINO:  It is not specifically defined in A.     23           Here is my position on that --    24                    JUDGE SLOVITER:  Yes.    25                    MR. COPPOLINO:  -- point, your Honor.  Our position                                                                                                81     1           is that as the courts have construed the term indecent or     2           indecency, that the meaning for that term, the standard, if     3           you will, has been communications which in context describe     4           sexual or excretory activities or organs in a patently     5           offensive way.     6                    In Pacifica case, for example, the standard, the     7           statute at issue specifically  used the word "indecent."      8           That's all that it had.  And the FCC interpreted the standard     9           to mean patently offensive communications of sexual or    10           excretory activities in every other case that has interpreted    11           the decency standard has interpreted it to mean that.  So    12           that's our position.    13                    JUDGE SLOVITER:  Yeah, but --    14                    JUDGE BUCKWALTER:  Okay, you have the same -- I know    15           you have  the same question, I guess.    16                    JUDGE SLOVITER:  Go ahead, you go ahead.    17                    JUDGE BUCKWALTER:  There's -- there's no other act    18           though quite like this one, is there, where you have in the    19           one section the indecent and in another totally different    20           section dealing with a totally different subject because    21           you're not dealing with telecommunications in D, you're    22           dealing with interactive computer.  You have a totally    23           different prohibition, okay?  So there's nothing quite like    24           this before, has there?    25                    MR. COPPOLINO:  No, there's nothing quite like this                                                                                                82     1           statute before, no, your Honor.     2                    There is -- there is --     3                    JUDGE BUCKWALTER:  I guess that's a --     4                    MR. COPPOLINO:  I don't think it's totally different     5           though, Judge.  I would say that, as we had a separate brief     6           on this issue of what is the difference between     7           telecommunica-- telecommunications device and interactive     8           computer service and I --     9                    JUDGE BUCKWALTER:  But the statute itself says    10           something, doesn't it, or did I misread that, that the    11           interactive computer is not telecommunications?    12                    MR. COPPOLINO:  It's not, it's not    13           telecommunications device, but the point I was going to make    14           is that a transmission of a communication all through the use    15           of a modem, say, over a computer system would be covered by    16           A, and therefore we don't think it's that different.    17                    I recognize there are some -- there are some    18           legislative craftsmanship problem here in that they didn't,    19           didn't have a separate section which says definition indecent    20           or so on, but I think there is so much case law --    21                    JUDGE BUCKWALTER:  You might not even have to have    22           that if you didn't have two different, plain different words    23           there.    24                    JUDGE DALZELL:  But doesn't the conference report    25           make it clear that they do have the same meaning?                                                                                                83     1                    MR. COPPOLINO:  I think so, your Honor.  I think--     2                    JUDGE DALZELL:  Because the conference report makes     3           it absolutely clear that these terms are taken from Pacifica     4           and Sable, doesn't it?     5                    MR. COPPOLINO:  Well, I think it does, it referred     6           to the definition of indecency as its been con-- as its been     7           construed in Pacifica and Sable.     8                    JUDGE SLOVITER:  Well, I want the Government's     9           position.  I mean we'll get each other's, yeah, afterward.    10                    MR. COPPOLINO:  That is our position.  That is our    11           position, that when we are talking about the indecency    12           standard in 223(A), the word "indecent" or the patently    13           offensive provision in 223(D), we are talking about the    14           indecency standard as it has been construed and understood by    15           the Courts from Pacifica, Sable, the Dial-A-Porn cases and so    16           on.    17                    JUDGE SLOVITER:  So you want us to write into A the    18           words describing sexual or excretory activities or organs?    19                    MR. COPPOLINO:  Well, yes, your Honor.    20                    THE COURT:  But they're not in there.    21                    MR. COPPOLINO:  Yeah, I -- I don't think that is an    22           enormous task of statutory construction based on our    23           representation as well as the legislative history but yes --    24                    JUDGE SLOVITER:  Well --    25                    MR. COPPOLINO:  -- I think you should interpret                                                                                                84     1           indecent in A as patently offensive descriptions of sexual or     2           excretory activities.  I don't know how else it would be --     3                    JUDGE SLOVITER:  Does that give notice to the     4           required notice in a criminal statute to all the people who     5           may be subject to this?     6                    MR. COPPOLINO:  I think it -- I think it certainly     7           would give substantial notice because obviously as part of     8           the process we have a legislative process and we have a     9           process whereby the Federal Courts undertake a constitutional    10           interpretation of it and I think that that interpretation    11           just on that point would be fully consistent with a broad    12           array of case law discussing the indecency standard and what    13           that standard specifically means, particularly where I don't    14           think there's any disagreement between the parties and I    15           don't think that there is any case law to suggest that there    16           would be some different meaning to the word indecent in    17           isolation.    18                    JUDGE SLOVITER:  Okay.  And you want us also, as I    19           read your brief, to read the statute to have a built-in    20           exception for works of value.  Let me -- that's a sort of a    21           paraphrase of what your brief says.  Is that correct?    22                    MR. COPPOLINO:  I'm sorry, I can't really agree with    23           that characterization, your Honor, it's too broad an issue.     24           And if I could just try to explain it, I would --    25                    JUDGE SLOVITER:  Sure, I would certainly like to                                                                                                85     1           hear that -- keep to that in light of the legislative     2           history--      3                    MR. COPPOLINO:  Yes, I will do that.     4                    JUDGE SLOVITER:  -- which says we won't accept such     5           a exemption.     6                    MR. COPPOLINO:  Yes, I understand, I understand your     7           question and let me try to get to it as directly as I can.  I     8           think that obviously the first major line of attacks by the     9           plaintiffs in trying to demonstrate that the statute    10           effectively bans speech is not only that it's over-broad    11           across applications but the indecency standard covers a broad    12           array of speech.    13                    And while arguing at the same time that we are    14           trying to narrowly construe it, that we have equated it to    15           pornography, that is really not what we have attempted to do.     16           We are asking the Court to construe that standard in the    17           context in which it's been applied by Congress and upheld by    18           the courts.    19                    For example, it has been applied by Congress in    20           regulating Dial-A-Porn, it has been applied by Congress in    21           regulating cable and leased access television to materials    22           that clearly constitute the type of sexually explicit    23           materials that one could characterize as pornography.    24                    And our point is that it's not simply anything about    25           sex or anything with an expletive, the parameters are fairly                                                                                                86     1           specific.  It has to first concern sexual or excretory     2           activities, not just any kind but patently or obviously     3           offensive material.  Now, that can include pornography.  It     4           can also include what we would consider to be shocking,     5           offensive or vulgar textual discussions such as were at issue     6           in the Pacifica case and we're not suggesting otherwise.     7                    Certainly the language on a number of the cites that     8           we provided to you have that type of language, but I --     9                    JUDGE DALZELL:  Let's put some flesh on it because    10           it, in terms of what the Government's position is because I    11           share Chief Judge Sloviter's befuddlement on this point.    12                    JUDGE SLOVITER:  I'm not sure I would describe    13           myself --     14                    JUDGE DALZELL:  Well, all right, then I will    15           describe it for myself as that.    16                    (Laughter.)    17                    JUDGE DALZELL:  I asked counsel on the other side    18           about the Merrill Hansen decision, okay?  If the Merrill    19           Hansen dialogue between those two disc-jockeys about Jim    20           Baker's alleged rape of Jessica Hahn, if that had taken place    21           on the Internet, okay, would that be indecent under the CDA    22           and therefore subject those two gentlemen plus the station to    23           criminal sanctions?    24                    MR. COPPOLINO:  I think if you -- I re-read the case    25           after you had referenced it and I think that is probably the                                                                                                87     1           hardest case, I've read all of the FCC materials that you had     2           talked about because it was obviously a very explicit     3           description, but then they stopped and said hey, this is     4           serious, this woman was being raped.     5                    And I would say to the Court that in the broadcast     6           context, as I think we've made clear, the standard is much     7           less tolerant.  Judge Sloviter explained this in a fabulous     8           case, in that context you're going to get away with an awful     9           lot less and your First Amendment freedoms are more limited.    10                    So I don't think I can say that that discussion    11           would necessarily be indecent, although prior to the point    12           where they got to, hey, wait a minute, maybe we shouldn't be    13           making jokes about this, this is a serious situation, it was    14           a fairly explicit discussion.    15                    But I'd like to make this point to the Court in    16           respect to the FCC adjudication because I think that is    17           helpful in trying to understand the standard.  Even in the    18           area of broadcast where First Amendment freedoms are most    19           limited and where there is the least tolerance, I think that    20           the FCC decisions reflect a very serious intent to limit the    21           indecency standard to patently offensive and shocking    22           materials that are taken, for example, out of context.    23                    JUDGE DALZELL:  But that's why I'm concerned about    24           the Hansen case.  We have 94 U.S. Attorneys, I think, at    25           least 94 cause there's 94 districts, okay, that at least one                                                                                                88     1           of them or one of your colleagues in Washington such as the     2           gentleman who was in recent contact with Compuserve will look     3           at Hansen or the language of this and say let's convene a     4           Grand Jury.     5                    Now, you know, if a party hears the words Grand Jury     6           convened about me, it will really ruin their day, wouldn't     7           you agree?     8                    MR. COPPOLINO:  Yes, I --     9                    JUDGE DALZELL:  So that the fact that a jury later    10           on, that a jury later on will say oh, acquitted, that's not a    11           lot of comfort, is it?    12                    MR. COPPOLINO:  Your Honor, I think that we cannot    13           provide assurance that there might not be a prosecutor that's    14           going to take the most absurd case or very extreme case and I    15           think that in assessing --    16                    JUDGE DALZELL:  Is this an absurd case?    17                    MR. COPPOLINO:  No.    18                    JUDGE DALZELL:  Hansen, I mean, this is the Federal    19           Communications Commission did this.  Did they do an absurd    20           thing?    21                    MR. COPPOLINO:  I indicated just a moment ago that I    22           felt that the standard would be tighter in the broadcast    23           context and that in many other cases that they have decided    24           in the broadcast context it is very clear that they are    25           focusing on patently offensive stuff taken out of context.                                                                                                89     1                    But to answer your question, in the context of the     2           facial challenge I think the Court has to construe the     3           indecency standard in a manner consistent with how it's been     4           applied by the Congress and the courts.  That's not to say     5           that there aren't going to be hard cases.  Those hard cases     6           should not take the whole statute down, they should simply be     7           left for admittedly a difficult as applied challenge.     8                    But we can show, I believe it's fair to say, that     9           the indecency standard as it has been applied and construed    10           covers a fairly narrow category of speech.    11                    JUDGE SLOVITER:  I still don't understand whether    12           that narrow category of speech covers work that some people    13           would consider to be of value.  Take, for example, the play    14           that was in two parts on Broadway about AIDS.    15                    JUDGE DALZELL:  Lost in America?    16                    JUDGE SLOVITER:  The two --    17                    JUDGE DALZELL:  Angels in America.    18                    JUDGE SLOVITER:  Angels in America.  Now, a lot of    19           people might be offended by that -- leave aside Shakespeare    20           and leave aside Chaucer which we know from the book content    21           and leave aside "Catcher In The Rye" which we know from the    22           print media are considered offensive in some media and go to    23           a more contemporary type of literature that some people would    24           think is serious and some people would think is    25           objectionable.                                                                                                90     1                    If that were printed in, you know, print on the     2           Internet, Mr. -- Pittsburgh Library --     3                    JUDGE DALZELL:  Dunninberger (ph.).     4                    JUDGE SLOVITER:  Yeah, would that be covered or     5           would there be a built-in non-specified defense that says     6           this is a serious work?     7                    MR. COPPOLINO:  Two points, your Honor.     8                    JUDGE SLOVITER:  Yes.     9                    MR. COPPOLINO:  Our point is that yes, material that    10           might be found indecent might also be considered to have    11           serious value.  The plaintiff's position seems to be is that    12           indecency covers all works that have serious value and that's    13           where really we are disagreeing.  We -- because I don't    14           believe that's necessarily the case as you parse the    15           standards in the obscenity and indecency area that you have    16           to conclude, as they have, that indecency necessarily    17           includes serious material and necessarily excludes material    18           that has prurient appeal.  That's where our disagreement is.    19                    The answer to your question is yes, it's possible    20           that something that is serious in some way could be indecent.     21           Our point with respect to the --    22                    JUDGE SLOVITER:  And it certainly deals with sexual,    23           I saw half of it, sexual or excretory activities or organs.    24                    MR. COPPOLINO:  Yes, but our point with respect to    25           plaintiff's materials, first of all, is that what they have                                                                                                91     1           presented in context in its full context is -- is serious     2           material that ought not to be found and should not be found     3           indecent.  And I have to say to your Honor that if you're     4           just going to talk about a play on AIDS, the whole play in     5           context, it has serious value.     6                    If you're going to talk about, as in one of the FCC     7           cases, taking specific stuff out and putting that out there     8           and making it available, then the context is completely     9           changed.  So it's very difficult to answer the question well,    10           is all serious -- is all serious work covered by the    11           indecency standard.    12                    JUDGE SLOVITER:  But that's not the question.  That    13           may be their question, but that's not my question.  My    14           question is does the -- and we're not bound by anything that    15           the plaintiffs say, that may also be extreme.    16                    My question is simply as a matter of notifica-- one    17           is a matter of the First Amendment and two is a matter of    18           notification because it's a criminal statute.  To the world    19           out there what does this statute read or reasonably read  to    20           those people so that if somebody wants to send somebody else    21           a paragraph or a scene from a contemporary play, is that    22           person and the other person is 17, is that covered by the    23           statute?  And I still don't have a yes or a no from you.    24                    MR. COPPOLINO:  Well, the problem is I don't know    25           that I can say yes or no to a categorical question that is                                                                                                92     1           serious material covered because the application of the     2           indecency standard depends on the specific communication and     3           its context.     4                    I got in -- we kind of got into this thicket for two     5           reasons: one is they're coming in saying that anything having     6           to do with sex, whether it's a reference in Bible, the Bible     7           or Shakespeare, breast cancer, breast feeding, so on--     8                    JUDGE SLOVITER:  Leave them out of it and just --     9                    MR. COPPOLINO:  Fine, okay.    10                    JUDGE SLOVITER:  -- talk to the three of us at this    11           point.      12                    MR. COPPOLINO:  I think the material --    13                    JUDGE SLOVITER:  And the three of us want to -- I    14           think the three of us want to know how broadly this statute    15           reads.    16                    MR. COPPOLINO:  Then our position would be  that the    17           statute should apply to non-obscene patently offensive    18           material, sexual -- concerning sexual and excretory    19           activities of the nature that Congress has indicated that it    20           is targeting, namely the sexually explicit sites on the    21           Internet and of the nature that Congress has targeted and the    22           courts have recognized in other cases such as Dial-A-Porn and    23           the Act Two -- the Act Three in the Alliance case, materials    24           of that nature.      25                    Clearly, your Honor, I think it's fair to say that                                                                                                93     1           the target of the indecency standard has been materials with     2           very little value, with significantly little, with     3           significant or --     4                    JUDGE DALZELL:  But who determines that, the 94 U.S.     5           Attorneys?     6                    MR. COPPOLINO:  I think it starts in the first     7           instance and in the face of a vagueness challenge here with     8           the Court construing the standard as it has been applied by     9           Congress and as it has been reasonably applied by the Courts    10           who have considered similar cases.    11                    JUDGE SLOVITER:  But they're not criminal, by and    12           large.    13                    MR. COPPOLINO:  Well, by and large.  The Dial-A-Porn    14           statute is a criminal statute with a regulatory overlay but,    15           yes, they are predominately not criminal.  But I think that    16           again I would start with the point that this is not a    17           completely open-ended standard, there are parameters here.     18           First of all, you have to have sexual or excretory activities    19           or organs.  That's minimum that has to be in the    20           communication.    21                    JUDGE SLOVITER:  Even though A doesn't so state?    22                    MR. COPPOLINO:  Well, yes, I understand.  Well, I    23           understand that, your Honor, but there's nothing --    24                    JUDGE SLOVITER:  I mean you're asking us to be the    25           activist Judges that Congress ex-- that some members of                                                                                                94     1           Congress excoriate because you're asking us really, Mr.     2           Coppolino, to rewrite the statute.     3                    MR. COPPOLINO:  Well, I --     4                    JUDGE SLOVITER:  To put words into the statute that     5           aren't there.  And at least I want to know clearly what words     6           you think we ought to put in and your brief suggests, for     7           example, we should put in prurient, you know, that --     8           commercial, the kind of -- that it's really intended to hit     9           what already is being hit.  And what I'm trying to find out    10           is what more is in this statute than in, already in 18 USC.    11                    MR. COPPOLINO:  Right, your Honor, I --    12                    JUDGE SLOVITER:  And I know your position is    13           difficult, especially when I come at you like -- when all    14           three of us come at you like that, but -- but we really want    15           to understand.    16                    MR. COPPOLINO:  And I understand and I'm not --    17                    JUDGE SLOVITER:  And we know it comes like you say    18           with the overlay of constitutionality and Congress has sorted    19           out, we know all that.  And you know it's very rare that we    20           declare a statute unconstitutional.    21                    MR. COPPOLINO:  You don't have to rewrite the    22           statute, you don't have to be activist Federal Judges    23           legislating and I'm not asking you to do that.  With respect    24           to the indecency standard, I think that's a fairly simple    25           task of statutory construction to say that the word indecent                                                                                                95     1           means what every court that has considered an indecency     2           challenge has understood it to mean.  That's our view, at     3           least, that it's fairly simple to do that.     4                    With respect to the over-breadth issue, the over-     5           breadth issue goes to whether or not the statute, the     6           statute's potentially unconstitutional applications are     7           substantial in comparison to its plainly legitimate sweep.     8                    Our point on that is that it's plainly legitimate     9           sweep --     10                    JUDGE SLOVITER:  Is what?    11                    MR. COPPOLINO:  Is enormous and is very substantial    12           and substantially outweighs what might be considered to be    13           potential problem areas, due to potential problem areas.  And    14           let me --    15                    JUDGE SLOVITER:  What is its plainly legitimate    16           sweep that is not already covered by the two provisions in 18    17           USC?    18                    MR. COPPOLINO:  Your Honor, the plainly legitimate    19           sweep is --    20                    JUDGE SLOVITER:  That is not already covered.    21                    MR. COPPOLINO:  Yes.  18 USC does not cover indecent    22           materials, it covers obscenity and child pornography.  And    23           this statute extends that to materials that would fall within    24           the indecency standard.    25                    JUDGE SLOVITER:  And what is indecent?                                                                                                96     1                    MR. COPPOLINO:  Well, your Honor, let me go back to     2           the point and try to explain it this way because --     3                    JUDGE SLOVITER:  And not only what is indecent,     4           where does it have to be viewed as indecent, in other words,     5           in what community?  Would you take those two questions --     6                    MR. COPPOLINO:  Yeah, I think I can deal with that     7           one first.  There's no in-- I mean I think that the indecency     8           standard is a standard that will be judged on a community     9           basis and I think that that --    10                    JUDGE SLOVITER:  What community, you mean local    11           community?    12                    MR. COPPOLINO:  Well, yeah, where the communication    13           is at issue.    14                    JUDGE DALZELL:  Where the communication what?    15                    MR. COPPOLINO:  Is at issue.    16                    JUDGE SLOVITER:  Now, is that not a problem when    17           you're dealing with something that comes across the entire    18           United States?  Leave aside the rest of the world, I    19           understand your position that you can only deal with what's    20           here and, you know, let's not worry about what's there, you    21           know, that's true, I don't have to worry about what they're    22           singing in Paris.    23                    But the United States is so diverse, what goes in    24           Philadelphia, as cosmopolitan as Philadelphia is, may not     25           go-- where are you from?  -- Lancaster.                                                                                                97     1                    JUDGE DALZELL:  Lancaster.     2                    JUDGE SLOVITER:  May not go --     3                    (Laughter.)     4                    JUDGE BUCKWALTER:  For the record, that's spelled      5           L-a-n-c-a-s-t-e-r.     6                    JUDGE SLOVITER:  Well, seriously, so what -- and are     7           we on the same -- and we're all in the same district, in the     8           same Eastern District no less.  What -- and Lancaster is     9           where the Amish are?    10                    JUDGE BUCKWALTER:  Right.    11                    JUDGE SLOVITER:  And "Witness" and --    12                    JUDGE BUCKWALTER:  And Mennonites.    13                    JUDGE SLOVITER:  Mennonites.  What -- and I know    14           we're taking your time, we're going to give you time to    15           answer.    16                    MR. COPPOLINO:  No, that's fine, I want to answer    17           your questions.    18                    JUDGE SLOVITER:  What community is it when somebody    19           sends something over the Chat News that I could access,    20           assuming I knew how, and that he could access?    21                    MR. COPPOLINO:  The answer, I think, to the question    22           is, it is a problem if you construe the indecency standards    23           as the way plaintiffs have, that someone might be offended,    24           for example, by a serious discussion of prison rape or safe    25           sex.                                                                                                98     1                    But if the indecency standard is properly understood     2           to be applicable to the types of materials Congress has     3           intended to cover, then the disagreements between communities     4           are going to be at the margins.  Some communities like New     5           York, for example, will consider the movie, "Deep Throat,"     6           not to be obscene but merely indecent.  Philadelphia or     7           Lancaster may have a different view of that.     8                    JUDGE SLOVITER:  No, Philadelphia would be with New     9           York but Lancaster would --    10                    JUDGE BUCKWALTER:  Would not.    11                    JUDGE SLOVITER:  -- might be somewhere else.    12                    MR. COPPOLINO:  I recognize that, your Honor, but    13           first of all we're in the ballpark of that kind of material    14           in --    15                    JUDGE DALZELL:  Well, wait a minute now.  You just    16           say we're in the ballpark.  One of the amici put before us a    17           Web site of the University of California that has an exhibit    18           of the University of California that has an exhibit of Edward    19           Weston and Robert Maplethorpe photographs and it has two    20           examples of those photographs.  The Maplethorpe photograph is    21           the depiction of a man with an erect penis, okay, and that's    22           the subject of that photograph, quite obvious.    23                    Now, we don't have to speculate.  We know in    24           Philadelphia, because that's where the show started, the    25           Maplethorpe show was a big hit at the Institute for                                                                                                99     1           Contemporary Art but when it went to Cincinnati, in that     2           community people were very upset by it.     3                    Now, is the University of California at Riverside, I     4           think it was, who has that on its site, is the University of     5           California at Riverside subject to prosecution under the CDA     6           in Cincinnati?     7                    JUDGE BUCKWALTER:  There's no indication, your     8           Honor, that the standard is simply going to be that you're     9           subject to prosecution where your site is.  So I'd like to be    10           able to tell you that they're not exposed to liability where    11           that material can be downloaded, but what I want to come back    12           to you though and in connection with the Maplethorpe example    13           is that again you have -- you have steered me to now two very    14           tough cases which I would suggest to the Court not be the    15           cases which bring the statute down on a facial basis.    16                    It is conceivable that that Maplethorpe picture of a    17           man with an erect penis might in some communities, in    18           Lancaster or in other communities it might be considered more    19           conservative, might be a problem because it is certainly a    20           depiction of a sexual organ, we can agree to that.    21                    JUDGE DALZELL:  It fits the literal definition, we    22           don't have to speculate.  We know in Cincinnati that in that    23           community they find that a patently offensive depiction of a    24           sexual organ, so it is verbatim in D.  So the U.S. Attorney    25           for the Southern District of Ohio indicts the University of                                                                                               100     1           California at Riverside?     2                    MR. COPPOLINO:  Well, big, big leap there, your     3           Honor.  I mean this is the statute which just doesn't say if     4           you have this communication or this image on your -- on your     5           Internet you have no -- you have no defenses.     6                    The point I would make is that --     7                    JUDGE BUCKWALTER:  No, no, no, no, but he's saying,     8           he didn't say it about defenses though, but do they indict?     9           That's what he was saying.    10                    MR. COPPOLINO:  The point I was going to make --    11                    JUDGE BUCKWALTER:  And isn't the answer yes?    12                    MR. COPPOLINO:  No, no, I don't think the answer's    13           yes.  I think the point is that if you're going to have an    14           image like that in your site, and we're getting closest to    15           the line perhaps without going across the line to materials    16           that aren't serious or do appeal to the prurient interest,    17           but if you're going to have an image like that on your site    18           and there is some risk, then there are steps that are    19           available to you to ensure that there may not be access by    20           minors because of the fact that there is possibility that    21           that might be found to be indecent.    22                    But this is the hardest case and I again would    23           suggest that --    24                    JUDGE SLOVITER:  But we could give you, I mean I    25           would imagine we could give you lots of hard cases.  In other                                                                                               101     1           words, we picked two but we don't have all day to stay here.      2           I asked a witness, if you recall, what about the Indian     3           statues, statues of, you know, copulating, loads of different     4           methods of copulation.  And we didn't have a chance to ask     5           you --              6                    MR. COPPOLINO:  Sure.     7                    JUDGE SLOVITER:  -- in those contexts.     8                    MR. COPPOLINO:  But that is where, that is I think     9           where we suggest to the Court that a fair, reasonable and    10           appropriate and narrow, if you will, construction that does    11           not involve being activists or re-writing the legislation is    12           to -- is to recognize that the indecency standard as Congress    13           has intended to apply it in this case, if properly applied to    14           the types of materials that are, that have been described in    15           the Congressional record and that we have put forward with    16           Mr. Schmidt's materials because I think it's very clear to    17           say, I think it's very fair to say that those are the    18           materials that Congress had in mind.    19                    Now --    20                    JUDGE SLOVITER:  Mr. Schmidt's materials are, I    21           would think, almost exclusively materials that are    22           pornographic.    23                    MR. COPPOLINO:  I wouldn't disagree with that.    24                    JUDGE SLOVITER:  Or obscene.    25                    JUDGE DALZELL:  Obscene.                                                                                               102     1                    JUDGE SLOVITER:  Obscene.     2                    MR. COPPOLINO:  I do disagree with that, but I agree     3           they're pornographic, I don't --     4                    JUDGE SLOVITER:  Well, I would think they were     5           obscene.     6                    MR. COPPOLINO:  Can I address that?     7                    JUDGE DALZELL:  Well, some were obscene for certain.     8                    I mean I know it when I see it, just like Justice     9           Stewart.    10                    (Laughter.)    11                    MR. COPPOLINO:  I did that, I -- but can I just    12           address this point?  I certainly wanted to provide you    13           examples of a range of materials that are out there and we by    14           no means went to the far reaches of the extreme of what's    15           easily available to you on the Internet, but we did provide    16           somewhat of a range precisely because in some communities    17           they may not be obscene and I wanted the Court to see    18           examples of what those might be, given the fact --    19                    JUDGE SLOVITER:  I can't imagine that community.    20                    JUDGE DALZELL:  But, Mr. Coppolino, the point is in    21           a case where you have an over-breadth challenge to a statute,    22           it seems to me that to come back to my Maplethorpe example --    23           the reason I keep coming back to Maplethorpe is we don't have    24           to hypothesize anything about Maplethorpe.  We know for a    25           fact how Mr. Maplethorpe's photographs are received in                                                                                               103     1           different communities, okay?     2                    And you're the lawyer for the University of     3           California.  Does the University of California at Riverside's     4           gallery have to come to you and get an opinion and say Tony,     5           we've got these photographs of Weston and Maplethorpe and we     6           happen to think they're great, but are we going to get     7           prosecuted in Cincinnati if we put this on here?  What would     8           you tell him?     9                    MR. COPPOLINO:  Am I the Justice Department or their    10           lawyer?    11                    JUDGE DALZELL:  No, you're the lawyer for the    12           University of California at Riverside.  What would you tell    13           them?    14                    MR. COPPOLINO:   I would tell them you shouldn't    15           because as the --    16                    JUDGE DALZELL:  You should not put that on there?    17                    MR. COPPOLINO:  No, you should not be prosecuted    18           under the indecency standard because Congress has construed    19           that, has applied and construed that standard in a fairly    20           specific way.    21                    However, if you are concerned there are things that    22           you can do to protect access by  minors to that site.     23                    JUDGE DALZELL:  How?    24                    MR. COPPOLINO:  Well --     25                    JUDGE DALZELL:  Because we were told that those                                                                                               104     1           images -- we were -- you know, but we were told by your     2           expert that images that he knew of no technology to block     3           images.  He could block words, but not images.  And that's     4           why I keep coming back to the Maplethorpe example because     5           they're images.     6                    MR. COPPOLINO:  Well, your Honor, you can block --     7           you can block a file, certainly, you can block a site, we've     8           seen that.  You can block a file and you can have the image     9           attached to the file and if the file is blocked, I believe    10           the image would be blocked as well.    11                    I don't think it's correct to say that images can't    12           be, if images couldn't be blocked, America On Line's Parental    13           Controls would not work and they specifically attempt to    14           block down binary downloads.    15                    JUDGE SLOVITER:  Isn't the issue though one of    16           chill?  In other words, if you're dealing with a First    17           Amendment challenge and the university says oh, who wants to    18           bother, who wants a lawsuit, who wants to have to come up    19           with a defense, it's not worth it.  We're not making money    20           out of this, this is something that we're doing.  And isn't    21           that a concern when we're dealing with a criminal statute?  I    22           keep coming back to the criminal statute because people are    23           supposed to know, at least I was taught in law school and 17    24           years on this court I've been taking the position that people    25           are entitled to know what it is they may be prosecuted for.                                                                                               105     1                    And if these not insubstantial number of cases are     2           at the edge and they have to keep running to their lawyers     3           and saying where do you think this falls in a statute that     4           doesn't say specifically the things that Mr. Coppolino who's     5           nice but he now works for the university making more money,     6           and so I don't know who's going to construe the statute,     7           doesn't that present a problem and how do we deal with it?     8                    MR. COPPOLINO:  The answer is, your Honor, again     9           that there are parameters to the standard and this Court    10           certainly can go a long way towards reducing the potential    11           chill by construing the statute in a manner in which Congress    12           has intended it to apply and in a manner in which the Courts    13           have recognized that it has been applied.    14                    Again, it is sexual and excretory activities that    15           are patently offensive.  Now, we recognize with the --    16                    JUDGE SLOVITER:  We don't know where, either,    17           patently offensive.    18                    MR. COPPOLINO:  We recognize that there's always the    19           potential risk in some cases in a criminal statute with some    20           hypothetical, but there has to be an expectation that the    21           Government is going to apply the standard in the manner in    22           which it is clearly intended to be applied and in a manner in    23           which the courts have said can constitutionally be applied    24           and we certainly are not asking the Court to re-write it, but    25           to take this standard as it has been intended.                                                                                               106     1                    And there is one point I would like to make about     2           this because I think my argument is not complete unless I     3           make it.  The point that I've tried to make is that the     4           plaintiffs construe what we have submitted as pornography,     5           which I think is a fair characterization, but what I disagree     6           with is that because that material appeals to the prurient     7           interest and arguably has no serious value, it is necessarily     8           obscene.  That is a legal determination and I think that that     9           analysis is simply wrong.    10                    To be obscene under the Miller test, you have to    11           satisfy all three standards or obscenity.  And therefore it's    12           conceivable that something could appeal to the prurient    13           interest as these materials do but not be considered patently    14           offensive or in some communities might have serious literary    15           or artistic value and therefore would not be indecent, would    16           not be obscene.    17                    And the reason that this is important is that    18           material that is obscene, as you know, is not legal, it can    19           be banned entirely.  It is a very -- and therefore it is a    20           very narrow category of speech and I think that Justice    21           Scalia's observation in Sable is that the more narrow that    22           category of speech of obscenity is, the more Congress needs    23           to sweep into this, into the indecency standard this type of    24           stuff, the kind of stuff in the Schmidt notebook.    25                    Because if it just simply said let's limit the                                                                                               107     1           statute to obscenity, well, then a lot of that material is     2           not going to be obscene in many communities and it would be     3           freely available and the protection of minors, which is the     4           Government's compelling interest, would not be served.     5                    And this is clearly the case in a number of statutes     6           in which Congress has tried to use the indecency standard     7           successfully.     8                    JUDGE SLOVITER:  Well, you're distinguishing between     9           pornographic and obscenity, are you making a distinction    10           there?    11                    MR. COPPOLINO:  Well, yes.    12                    JUDGE SLOVITER:  They're not challenging, as I    13           understand it they're not challenging the application of the    14           statute to that which is obscene, everybody agrees to that,    15           or that which is pornographic.  I thought I saw that.    16                    MR. COPPOLINO:  No, I'm afraid  that with    17           pornographic, your Honor, we get into a subjective term, as    18           Mr. Hansen -- as Mr. Hansen nicely lectured me at the TRO    19           hearing, as you can -- as you might remember, your Honor --    20           pornography is not a legal term.    21                    Now, I can accept the colloquial characterization of    22           pornography is appealing to the prurient interest and lacking    23           serious value, but I do not accept the conclusion that that    24           is necessarily obscene.    25                    I think a Playboy centerfold appeals to the prurient                                                                                               108     1           interest, might have some artistic value to some, clearly it     2           appeals to the prurient interest.  I doubt it's --I doubt     3           it's obscene.  And I think that our laws clearly reflect that     4           understanding, that common sense understanding of where a     5           line is between obscenity and indecency.     6                    Obscenity is the hardcore and what is hardcore is     7           going to vary in communities and at least one Circuit Court     8           in the Second Circuit thought "Deep Throat" wasn't hard core     9           enough to render an obscenity characterization.  And that is    10           enough for Congress to say in order to effectively protect    11           minors, to serve our compelling interests, we'd better use    12           this indecency standard or a lot of bad stuff is going to get    13           through.    14                    But it doesn't mean that safe sex information which    15           they have presented which is in context, very serious and    16           important information, is indecent.  It doesn't mean that    17           ACLU's briefs on the Pacifica case or the Cohen case are    18           indecent because they discuss an area having to do with a    19           dirty word.    20                    JUDGE SLOVITER:  What about the statutory history of    21           the statute, what were the exceptions that Congress, the    22           conference committee or Congress rejected?    23                    MR. COPPOLINO:  The harm to minors, I think, is what    24           the Court is referring to.    25                    JUDGE SLOVITER:  Was that Representative Berman's                                                                                               109     1           or...     2                    MR. COPPOLINO:  Well, harm to minors, your Honor, is     3           a separate standard and the plaintiff's argument seems to be     4           that Congress, if it wanted to regulate pornography, should     5           have used a harm to minors standard because that's been used     6           by the states to set up display while --     7                    JUDGE DALZELL:  No, it's more than that because     8           Congress specifically rejected that, that therefore it's a --     9           there is the breadth is necessarily wider since Congress was    10           given the opportunity to take it and elected not to,    11           specifically elected not to.    12                    MR. COPPOLINO:  In harm to minors, and harm to    13           minors is a variable obscenity standard.  It is -- it is    14           material that is not obscene as to adults but obscene as to    15           minors, which means it has to satisfy the three standards of    16           Miller as to minors.  It must be -- appeal to the prurient    17           interest of minors, must be patently offensive depictions    18           about sexual or excretory activities, it must have no serious    19           literary value, as to minors it is, I concede, a narrower    20           standard but a Congress -- but that does not mean by reverse    21           implication that the indecency standard therefore doesn't    22           include anything that is -- that -- anything that appeals     23           to --    24                    JUDGE DALZELL:  Yeah, but don't you think that that    25           precludes, to get at what Chief Judge Sloviter has been                                                                                               110     1           trying to get at for 40 minutes now --     2                    JUDGE SLOVITER:  Have I been?     3                    JUDGE DALZELL:  -- doesn't that -- doesn't that rule     4           out for us, unless we be accused of being activist Federal     5           Judges, that how could we engraft a harmful to minors test     6           when Congress specifically rejected it?     7                    MR. COPPOLINO:  I am not asking you to engraft a     8           harmful to minors test and I can tell you the way that I     9           think you can do it.    10                    JUDGE DALZELL:  Okay, you're not.    11                    JUDGE BUCKWALTER:  No, mm-hmm.    12                    MR. COPPOLINO:  I think you can, you can, first of    13           all, cite the authority to which Congress has applied the    14           indecency standard and recognize that that standard has been    15           applied to materials that are comparable to the types of    16           materials that we believe are primarily at issue in this    17           case.  And I refer you to, for example, the materials at    18           issue in Dial-A-Porn which I think very few would    19           characterize as --    20                    JUDGE DALZELL:  Yeah, but you know in the Sable case    21           Professor Tribe (ph.) was representing Sable and he argued to    22           the Court, well, you know, this is a community standard and,    23           you know, how in the -- the telephone, we have to go    24           community to community and the Supreme Court said well, you    25           know, that's your burden, okay?  And it's okay to say to a                                                                                               111     1           commercial provider whose only business is Dial-A-Porn,     2           that's your burden.     3                    Isn't it quite another matter to say to the     4           University of California at Riverside or to Mr. Kuromiya     5           sitting over there that they all have to go running to First     6           Amendment lawyers to determine whether what they're putting     7           on the Internet passes community standards from Brainerd,     8           Minnesota to Cincinnati to Philadelphia to San Francisco?     9                    MR. COPPOLINO:  I think it's a fair question, your    10           Honor, but I think the question goes to something other than    11           the indecency standard.  I would suggest it goes more to the    12           issue of the least restrictive means or the over-breadth of    13           the statute as opposed to the standard because I think that    14           however -- wherever you apply a standard to, you have to have    15           a standard.  You have to try to define what it is you're    16           trying to target.  And my point to the Court is that you can    17           recognize that the indecency standard applies to a very    18           narrow category of speech.    19                    The second inquiry would be does the act as a whole    20           sweep too broadly in its reach to commercial versus non-    21           commercial sites, Web sites versus USNet versus Chat Rooms.     22           But I would regard those as separate issues.  I think if you    23           struck down the statute simply on the basis that the    24           indecency standard was too vague and no court that has had a    25           vagueness challenge has found it to be vague.  And they                                                                                               112     1           haven't really, really specified this point about commercial,     2           non-commercial, they simply said we think this is -- this is     3           clear enough for what has been applied to here by Congress.       4                    If it sweeps too broadly, I think those are issues     5           more of least restrictive alternative and over-breadth which     6           I'd be willing, I'd like to address and --     7                    JUDGE DALZELL:  But the Dial-A-Porn --     8                    JUDGE SLOVITER:  You can -- no, go ahead, go ahead.     9                    JUDGE DALZELL:  The Dial-A-Porn cases, and we all    10           agree that Congress reached into Pacifica, reached into Sable    11           and begot the CDA.  We all agree also, do we not, that Dial-    12           A-Porn is all porn because that's what they call it.  That's    13           the only content on Dial-A-Porn is porn.  Now, whether it's    14           obscene or not is another matter.  There's only one type of    15           content.    16                    What our friends over here represent are 46 players,    17           by my count, representing God knows how many individuals    18           within their organizations and I'm sure you would agree with    19           me, Mr. Coppolino, that not one of those plaintiffs is in the    20           pornography business.    21                    MR. COPPOLINO:  Not one of them is in the    22           pornography and therefore in our view not one of them falls    23           within the plainly legitimate sweep of this statute and I    24           think you can find that.     25                    Now, whether or not the indecency standard can be                                                                                               113     1           construed to apply to all of their serious, political or     2           scientific or educational speech, ACLU, human rights watch,     3           safe sex and so on, I don't think you have to.  And my     4           authority for that is to direct the Court's attention, number     5           one, to what Congress has intended to apply the statute to     6           and, number two, to authority applying the indecency     7           standard.     8                    You're absolutely correct, the indecency standard     9           was applied to Dial-A-Porn, which is Exhibit No. 1, to show    10           that indecency can be applied to porn, to materials that    11           appeal to the prurient interest.  It doesn't have to be-- it    12           doesn't have to be obscene and that I think is a very    13           important conclusion because the Court can therefore say    14           okay, I can -- the indecency standard can survive a vagueness    15           challenge that the plaintiffs are making that this has to be    16           cabined into the obscenity area for the reasons that Judge    17           Scalia said in Sable.  If you throw it into the obscenity    18           area, an awful lot of this patently offensive, sexually    19           explicit material is going to fall out, it's not going to be    20           obscene, it's not going to be completely illegal and    21           therefore it's going to be available to minors without any    22           restrictions.    23                    But I think your question does go more to the over-    24           breadth and the least restrictive means and let me deal with    25           the over-breadth because I think it can be dealt with fairly                                                                                               114     1           discretely.     2                    There are two facial challenges.  One is it has to     3           be invalid in every application and I think we show that's     4           clearly not the case.     5                    JUDGE SLOVITER:  Well, a substantial number?     6                    MR. COPPOLINO:  No, there's two, there's two tests     7           really.  One is, is it invalid in every application, answer     8           no, I think you can -- you don't have to pause on that one.     9                    JUDGE DALZELL:  And the other is substantial over-    10           breadth.    11                    MR. COPPOLINO:  Substantial over-breadth again goes    12           to the question of whether or not the potentially    13           unconstitutional impermissible applications are substantial    14           in comparison to the statute's plainly legitimate sweep.  And    15           they first, I think, bootstrap back in their indecency    16           argument, that if indecency covers so much, it's over-broad,    17           separate argument.    18                    The second point they make is, which is really the    19           over-breadth point, is that the statute regulates more    20           broadly than Web sites and more broadly than commercial Web    21           sites and it goes to non-commercial speech and other types of    22           speech.  Therefore, it's substantially over-broad.    23                    But I don't think you can reach that conclusion that    24           it's substantially over-broad that easily and I don't think     25           you can reach it at all.  The first point we would make to                                                                                               115     1           the Court is that we have presented evidence, a small sample     2           but nonetheless a lot of evidence that there are -- that     3           there is an enormous amount of material out there, a vast     4           amount of material to which the statute can constitutionally     5           apply.  And that is the type of material in Mr. Schmidt's     6           notebook --     7                    JUDGE SLOVITER:  Yeah, but if we think that that      8           is-- suppose we don't agree with you and we think that that     9           is obscene.  What would follow from -- I gather that you    10           think that some of it is not obscene, I'd like to see those    11           portions of it, maybe those are the few that I would look at.    12                    But leaving that -- leaving --     13                    JUDGE DALZELL:  "Chip's Erotic Tunes," probably.    14                    JUDGE SLOVITER:  Well, when we looked at it, we    15           thought and we had a motion from the plaintiffs that say    16           that's irrelevant because that's -- that's all obscene.  And    17           we let it in but that doesn't mean that we found that it was    18           not essentially obscene.    19                    MR. COPPOLINO:  Well, I don't think you have to find    20           one way or the other that it's obscene or indecent and I    21           don't think you should because this is a -- this is a    22           standard, the line between what types of pornography are    23           obscene and indecent is going to vary.  But I think it's very    24           clear under the law that what is obscene is extremely narrow    25           and if you were to decide that everything in the Schmidt                                                                                               116     1           notebook, everything that Surfwatch blocks is obscene, well,     2           I don't think I'm going to win on the substantial over-     3           breadth argument because the substantial over-breadth     4           argument does make the point that this material can be     5           covered and should be covered by the indecency standard     6           because what is obscene is far too narrow and therefore,     7           therefore the statute does have a broad, plainly legitimate     8           sweep because these materials are properly within the scope     9           of the indecency standard.  It is a major problem that    10           Congress sought to address and you don't have to re-write the    11           statute to reach this conclusion, you can see that the    12           materials are there, you can see that the statute can reach    13           them.      14                    And let me just make my point on the credit card    15           defense.  You can see that the credit card and access code    16           defense is readily available to those types of providers, no    17           re-writing required.    18                    JUDGE SLOVITER:  You'll agree that all of those    19           materials in the Schmidt notebook, I think now called the    20           Coppolino note --    21                    MR. COPPOLINO:  Oh, let's call it the Schmidt    22           notebook.    23                    JUDGE SLOVITER:  -- notebook were designed to appeal    24           to the prurient interests of the viewer?    25                    MR. COPPOLINO:  Do I think that?                                                                                               117     1                    THE COURT:  Yeah.     2                    MR. COPPOLINO:  Yes, I would say that they would but     3           they don't, that doesn't mean they're obscene, your Honor and     4           that's the point.     5                    JUDGE SLOVITER:  All right, well, whether or not     6           they are, you would agree that that classification of     7           material is designed to appeal to prurient interests?     8                    MR. COPPOLINO:  Yeah, but let me backtrack a half a     9           step and say that there are some of those images that some    10           might consider just artistic and that wouldn't, that wouldn't    11           find them pruriently appealing.  Very few, I would hasten to    12           add, but there are some mild nudes and centerfold type images    13           which are not as explicit as others.    14                    JUDGE SLOVITER:  all right.  But most of them were    15           very explicit?    16                    MR. COPPOLINO:  Yes, your Honor, but the point I'm--    17                    JUDGE SLOVITER:  Is that right?  Now, what is the    18           other area of the substantial so-called indecency material    19           that would come within the statute that is not of a serious,    20           that has no serious value?    21                    MR. COPPOLINO:  Well, I think the best examples I    22           can give the Court in that regard, the non-pornographic but    23           yet indecent materials would be of the nature of the kinds of    24           things that, for example, the SEC has identified.  They do    25           not go out and say --                                                                                               118     1                    JUDGE SLOVITER:  Such as?     2                    MR. COPPOLINO:  Well, such as I put forward, I     3           think, in the record three examples.  One was highly explicit     4           excerpts from a play on AIDS.  It wasn't the whole play, it     5           wasn't the subject matter, it was just those experts.  FCC     6           said we're not penalizing you for discussing AIDS, we are--     7           we are -- we do think these specific excerpts are indecent in     8           its text and it's obviously not necessarily pornographic but     9           let me make --    10                    JUDGE SLOVITER:  Wait a minute, wait a minute, let's    11           take that one.    12                    MR. COPPOLINO:  Mm-hmm.    13                    JUDGE SLOVITER:  So what you're saying is that even    14           though the play itself, the work itself could be viewed as     15           a-- and I don't remember what the work was -- but as a    16           serious literary work dealing with AIDS if excerpts of it are    17           patently offensive in some communities, then those excerpts,    18           at least, would fall within the statute?    19                    MR. COPPOLINO:  They might, your Honor, but I have    20           to say I don't think that's a terribly startling conclusion    21           because I think that the indecency standard makes clear that    22           if you do take stuff that is in the context of the    23           communication at issue is patently offensive, it can be    24           indecent.  And in this instance material is taken out of    25           context, out of its serious value and simply put out there.                                                                                               119     1                    JUDGE SLOVITER:  But wouldn't that cover almost all     2           the plays on Broadway today?  I haven't, I don't go     3           frequently, I --     4                    MR. COPPOLINO:  I don't -- you -- that assumes a     5           fact not in evidence that I know what's in those plays.     6                    JUDGE SLOVITER:  But don't almost all plays and I     7           gather from writer friends almost all books have to have a     8           little bit of sexual activity in order to sell?  And does the     9           fact that a portion of what is, even though not high    10           redeeming value but the serious work has some material that    11           you would call -- now, I know we're on your first category    12           but I want to explore that.    13                    MR. COPPOLINO:  Second category now, yeah.  Well,    14           we're on the non-pornographic category, right.    15                    JUDGE SLOVITER:  That's right.  That would -- that    16           would subject, putting those on the Internet would subject    17           the speaker to potential criminal sanctions cause it has a    18           portion?    19                    MR. COPPOLINO:  No, I would say not, your Honor.  I    20           would say --    21                    JUDGE SLOVITER:  Well, that's what I'm trying to    22           find out.    23                    MR. COPPOLINO:  -- that if you -- if you -- there's    24           been a lot of examples thrown about, "Catcher In The Rye,"    25           which I read in high school, "Lady Chatterly's Lover," I                                                                                               120     1           would say that these works are serious literary artistic     2           works which in context are not indecent and I have yet been     3           cited a case which says that those are indecent under     4           Congress' indecency standard.  They can show me some like--     5                    JUDGE SLOVITER:  Yes, but isn't it true that --     6                    JUDGE DALZELL:  But we know that in some communities     7           they are.     8                    MR. COPPOLINO:  No, I don't think we know that.  I     9           think we know that --    10                    JUDGE DALZELL:  Oh, sure, sure, we do.  "Lady    11           Chatterly's Lover?"  My God, it went to the Supreme Court,    12           that issue, didn't it?    13                    MR. COPPOLINO:  But, your Honor, I think that --    14                    JUDGE DALZELL:  On whether it was obscene.    15                    MR. COPPOLINO:  The issue is whether or not this    16           book in its entire context on the Internet is going to be    17           legally indecent under this standard as Congress has applied    18           it.  Whether the alternative is an obscenity standard where    19           very little is going to be covered, I think the answer is    20           that's not what Congress intended and that it would not and    21           should not be found to be indecent.    22                    JUDGE DALZELL:  Let me, if I may?    23                    JUDGE SLOVITER:  Go ahead, yes, sure, I didn't mean    24           to interrupt.    25                    JUDGE DALZELL:  I asked our friends on the other                                                                                               121     1           side a number of questions about the medium and the     2           significance of the medium.  Now -- and I think it's     3           undisputed or indisputable that Congress reached out to the     4           Pacifica case and you put tremendous weight on the Pacifica     5           case and the Sable case and begot the CDA.     6                    As I read your material and your position in this     7           case, you say that Pacifica should not be limited just to     8           broadcast because what really bothered the Supreme Court and     9           permitted that to be upheld was the surprise element.  And    10           that's why you took us through "Jasmine" and "Little Women."    11                    Do I understand your position correctly, that that's    12           why Pacifica, because you would agree this is not    13           broadcasting we're dealing with here?    14                    MR. COPPOLINO:  I do agree it's not broadcasting and    15           I have left the Pacifica argument in just to make a point    16           that as the Court applies the Sable standard, it considers    17           the elements of pervasiveness and surprise that are -- that    18           exist on the Internet.    19                    I am not here arguing, after I read the Fabulous    20           decision, that you've got to apply the Pacifica standard of    21           review, Sable doesn't even apply.  I don't think that's a    22           fair characterization of our position.    23                    But -- and so Sable requires the Government has a    24           compelling interest that the statute regulate least    25           restrictively.  But I'm not going to abandon the lessons of                                                                                               122     1           Pacifica entirely as you apply Sable.     2                    This is a highly pervasive medium.  You asked Mr.     3           Hansen how does it compare, what would you compare it more     4           to, print or broadcast.  It's a hard question but I think     5           clearly you've got to compare it more to broadcast.  In my     6           first exhibit --     7                    JUDGE SLOVITER:  Why?     8                    MR. COPPOLINO:  Well, I would say Mr. Bradner, Mr.     9           Bradner and others have made the point that this is a medium    10           that for which other types of media area converging.  It's    11           not just point and click and get a text, you get text, you    12           get images, you can get video, you can get -- you can get a    13           lot of other materials that are piped through to the home in    14           a manner in which the differentiation between the media is    15           diminishing.    16                    JUDGE SLOVITER:  Yeah, but isn't the key in    17           broadcasting the fact that there are only limited number of--    18                    MR. COPPOLINO:  Well, that's definitely a key, your    19           Honor.    20                    JUDGE DALZELL:  Frequencies.    21                    JUDGE SLOVITER:  -- frequencies.    22                    MR. COPPOLINO:  I think that's right, that's    23           definitely our key but I think there what --    24                    JUDGE SLOVITER:  Is that not -- isn't -- and    25           therefore the Government has to regulate.                                                                                               123     1                    MR. COPPOLINO:  It's ap-- I think it's almost--     2                    JUDGE SLOVITER:  Don't --     3                    MR. COPPOLINO:  Okay.     4                    JUDGE SLOVITER:  And here you don't have that kind     5           of limitation and therefore governmental interest or     6           involvement.  I just want to hear your response.     7                    MR. COPPOLINO:  Well, the response to that is that     8           yes, the limited number of entities on the broadcast spectrum     9           is a key factor in Pacifica which I think led the Court to    10           find that communication was indecent.    11                    The point I'm trying to make is that there are other    12           elements that can be derived from Pacifica such as    13           pervasiveness and elements of surprise which can be applied    14           here.  It's not a perfect analogy, but I don't think you can    15           discount it entirely in this media.    16                    JUDGE BUCKWALTER:  But even though there is no    17           perfect analogy here, and, you know, I think you can get a    18           list and you can put on one side and, you know, it's going to    19           kind of balance out, I think.  But why does that matter?     20           Both parties seem to think the specific nature here matters.     21           Why does it matter?    22                    MR. COPPOLINO:  I think it matters most directly in    23           connection with the Government's compelling interest because    24           if we can -- as we have demonstrated to the Court, this is a    25           pervasive media, there's 12 million on line through                                                                                               124     1           commercial on-line services, millions more through ISP's,     2           computers -- computers come right in --     3                    JUDGE BUCKWALTER:  But I mean in the law and this,     4           this is I'm asking you for your explanation of the law, why     5           does it matter if we look at this more like broadcasting than     6           if we look at it more like a newspaper?     7                    MR. COPPOLINO:  Well, I think it matters more if you     8           look at it more like broadcasting because I think that     9           certainly there's less tolerance of indecency in    10           broadcasting.    11                    JUDGE BUCKWALTER:  Okay, as I just -- that's what I    12           thought your answer would be and I wanted to understand your    13           position.    14                    JUDGE DALZELL:  But that's what I don't get.    15                    MR. COPPOLINO:  So I'm trying to get you closer to    16           that and then the newspapers.    17                    JUDGE DALZELL:  In terms of pervasiveness and    18           surprise, okay?  Let me give an example because it relates to    19           this medium question that I've been pressing, okay?    20                    I brought with me yesterday's Inquirer, okay?  Now,    21           I'll tell you a little anecdote.    22                    JUDGE SLOVITER:  The Philadelphia Inquirer, you    23           might as well advertise it.    24                    JUDGE DALZELL:  The Philadelphia Inquirer, right.    25                    (Laughter.)                                                                                               125     1                    JUDGE DALZELL:  And I'll tell you a little anecdote,     2           little anecdote, okay, in the Dalzell household.  My ten year     3           old son within the class that Congress wants to protect, we     4           know that.  My ten year old son is a rabid Phillies fan and     5           the first thing he does in the morning when he comes down for     6           his breakfast is he gets the Inquirer and he looks to see how     7           the Phillies did.     8                    So yesterday he looked and he saw that the Phils     9           edged Astros' intent, but he also saw above the fold a    10           Liberian prisoner faces death and that is to say one of the    11           more grisly pictures I have ever seen above the fold of an    12           unarmed man being shot to death while men in the background    13           are laughing.    14                    Now, let's assume that parents who shared the horror    15           of my son at seeing this went to Congress and said this has    16           got to stop, so let's pass a newspaper decency act that    17           provides that any depiction of murder be shown below the    18           fold.  It's a trivial intrusion, it costs nothing.   Do you    19           have any doubt that that would be unconstitutional?    20                    MR. COPPOLINO:  I have very few doubts that that    21           would be unconstitutional.    22                    JUDGE DALZELL:  So why would that minimal, that    23           minimal intrusion on the editors of the Philadelphia Inquirer    24           to prevent what I think most fair-minded people would say is    25           the most indecent picture that they could imagine of one                                                                                               126     1           human being wantonly killing another defenseless human being,     2           that that can't be moved to the bottom of the fold but that     3           Congress has the power to control the access of a much more     4           pervasive medium, the Internet?     5                    MR. COPPOLINO:  A couple of points, your Honor.      6           First of all, indecent, yes, but not necessarily, but not     7           indecent as this indecency standard means.  Indecency under     8           the Communications Decency Act or in a number of these other     9           acts in Dial-A-Porn does not mean serious material, not    10           suitable for adults -- or for children like someone getting    11           killed on the front page of the Philadelphia Inquirer.  It    12           means, first of all, sexual or excretory activities.    13                    For example, Mr. Ennis, I believe, cited an abortion    14           case, a District Court decision where someone wanted to put    15           on an ad about abortion and there was going to be a very    16           graphic depiction of abortion.  And the District Court said    17           hey, I think this is indecent and you have to channel it to    18           past ten o'clock, FCC disagreed with that.     19                    FCC said you should channel it under a separate    20           regulation but it's not indecent.  So that's my first point    21           in response.    22                    JUDGE DALZELL:  Yeah, but I don't think you're    23           answering my question.  My question is since we agree with    24           each other under Tornillo and other cases that Congress would    25           not have the power to adopt a newspaper decency act which                                                                                               127     1           would merely require the Inquirer to put this same photo on     2           the same page but below the fold so it has no cost, it's     3           trivial, but that would still be unconstitutional.  What is     4           it about the Internet medium that makes it a completely     5           different ball game?     6                    MR. COPPOLINO:  Well, I think -- I think one of the     7           differences, we all know the print medium has the very     8           broadest of First Amendment protections and I think the     9           differences with the Internet media is that it allows for    10           tremendously broad array of materials far beyond what would    11           go into a newspaper to come right into the home and be easily    12           available, not mere text, not even mere images but moving    13           images as well and as technology advances you're going to see    14           the speed with which the stuff can come down to your computer    15           increase.  It is becoming television-like, I guess is the    16           point.    17                    JUDGE DALZELL:  But this happened instantly to my    18           son on his way to finding out that the Phillies beat the    19           Astros, instantly, total surprise, worse than finding    20           "Jasmine" he sees this human being wantonly murdering an    21           unarmed person who is pleading for his life.    22                    MR. COPPOLINO:  I think the answer is the best I can    23           think of at this point is that I think the answer is that the    24           interactive computer services and home computers are becoming    25           more entertainment and television-like in what they can put                                                                                               128     1           forward to children.     2                    And I guess to change the analogy a little bit, if I     3           may, your Honor, what I am putting at issue in this case and     4           what I believe is at issue in the indecency standard are the     5           types of materials that we have submitted and your son could     6           not pick that up on his doorstep.     7                    He couldn't go into a drugstore and buy Penthouse or     8           PLayboy, I think you said he was ten years old, they can't     9           tell that to minors.  He couldn't go into an adult book    10           store, he couldn't go into an adult movie theater and he    11           can't get that stuff.    12                    So he can pick up a paper and see a very graphic    13           picture of that, but he can't get our stuff -- this stuff as    14           easily.    15                    JUDGE SLOVITER:  If he subscribed, I don't know if    16           these are subscription magazines or anything, but if he    17           subscribed, if his parents subscribed to them they'd come    18           through the mail and Congress couldn't, could it, say that    19           you can't let the child look in the centerfold?    20                    MR. COPPOLINO:  No, Congress can't regulate every    21           problem but it can regulate problems in some ways.  And what    22           it has done is try to regulate this problem in a I think    23           fairly described a least restrictive manner, certainly as    24           with respect to the content providers because these, the    25           content providers certainly for commercial sites because                                                                                               129     1           these folks can avail themselves of these very specific     2           defenses.     3                    JUDGE SLOVITER:  Isn't a key to your argument that a     4           child, person under 18, could inadvertently come across some     5           of this material?  I notice that you put a lot of focus on     6           that evidence during the evidentiary portrayal.  Is that --     7           and in your brief.  Is that inadvertence a key to your     8           argument?     9                    MR. COPPOLINO:  Well, I'm not sure I would describe    10           it as -- well, I certainly wouldn't describe it as the key or    11           a key.  I think it's an important part of the argument to    12           show to the Court, number one, that the Government has a    13           compelling interest here and, number two, that this material    14           is pervasive and you should take that into account.    15                    JUDGE SLOVITER:  The Government's -- yeah, but let's    16           go back.  What is the connection between the Government's    17           interest and the what we'll call for this point inadvertence?    18                    MR. COPPOLINO:  Well, here is the connection.  You    19           can get this kind of material on the Internet by looking for    20           it and I believe  the evidence shows you can get this kind of    21           material when you're not looking for it.    22                    Certainly you can get -- you can get right up to it.     23           And I think that the reason we put those searches in Mr.    24           Schmidt's testimony, we put both kinds.  You're a 14 or 15    25           year old, you're familiar with the ways of the world, you                                                                                               130     1           want to go out and find stuff you can't get in the drugstore     2           or the book store, you can find it.  You can look for and     3           find it.     4                    But you are someone who is searching for a Disney     5           character or for something on media images of women, the     6           journalism student at -- in a high school who is searching     7           for that and you can be confronted then with sexually     8           explicit, links to sexually explicit sites.  And I would     9           suggest to the Court this demonstrates that the Government    10           does have a compelling interest here and underscores what    11           that interest is.    12                    JUDGE SLOVITER:  If we-- if we find -- and I'm not    13           saying we will, we haven't even talked to each other for    14           weeks -- well, they may have, but I haven't.  If we -- they    15           are on the same floor.    16                    If we find that the evidence does not support the    17           proposition that there is a significant problem of    18           inadvertently chancing upon such material because you have to    19           do a lot of clicks or because there's a warning, what would    20           remain of the Government's contention of a compelling    21           Government interest?    22                    In other words, is there a compelling Government    23           interest as a matter of law to shield 15 year olds from -- 14    24           year olds from material they want to see and their parents    25           don't care whether they see or not?                                                                                               131     1                    MR. COPPOLINO:  Your Honor, I think that virtually     2           all of our interest remains.  And I'll tell you -- I'll tell     3           you why.  I think that to just evaluate  the case on this     4           issue of inadvertence, of surprise, it's a factor, it's     5           something to take into account.  Certainly these hits are     6           jarring when you're looking for something that's not sexually     7           explicit, but the key point is the ease with which minors --     8           anybody, but minors in particular can get access to this     9           stuff and that is the important thing.  Not whether --    10                    JUDGE SLOVITER:  If they want it.    11                    MR. COPPOLINO:  If they want it.    12                    JUDGE SLOVITER:  And whether or not the parents    13           care?  Because I thought in reading the conference committee    14           that it all dealt with, you know, they want to help the    15           parents.    16                    MR. COPPOLINO:  Well, yes, they do want to help the    17           parents.  Here's the point, your Honor.  A child or a minor,    18           let's take a junior high student or someone over 13, as I    19           said, he can't go buy it in the store, he can't go into the    20           movie theater, he can't go into the adult book store, but he    21           can't --    22                    JUDGE SLOVITER:  He can go into the library in    23           Pittsburgh.    24                    MR. COPPOLINO:  Well, he can't get this stuff in the    25           library.                                                                                               132     1                    JUDGE SLOVITER:  Oh.     2                    MR. COPPOLINO:  And he can click it on and get it,     3           and that's really, I think, the heart  of the interest.  If     4           he knows what he's doing or if it's an accident, but the key     5           to the interest is that you can get it, you can get a lot of     6           it, you can get it easily and you can get it across a range     7           that has never been available before to minors.  And that's     8           the significant interest at stake.      9                    JUDGE DALZELL:  Books, what, I keep coming back to    10           that question: what is it about this medium which our    11           friends, I think you would have to agree with them, have    12           established is this most democratic of mediums that the human    13           mind has come up with yet, what is it about this medium that    14           makes it different from print in terms of the constitutional    15           protection it should receive?    16                    MR. COPPOLINO:  Uhm, well, I'm not sure I really    17           understand the question but I'm going to try to -- I'm going    18           to try to answer it this way.  This is a telecommunications    19           medium which pipes down to the home this kind of material    20           along with other kinds of materials that would be useful to a    21           child, educational materials, scientific materials and so on.    22                    If you talk about the print medium, the print medium    23           in your newspaper there, you're not going to get access to    24           this kind of patently offensive, sexually explicit material    25           at all.  You're not going to get access to that kind of stuff                                                                                               133     1           unless you go buy it, but this you can.     2                    JUDGE DALZELL:  Above the fold in the New York Times     3           just within the last two weeks above the fold was a story on     4           female genital mutilation in Africa, it had a photograph of a     5           woman who was scared to death to go back there, and I'll tell     6           you, I think -- it's a terrible problem but I would be a bit     7           concerned about my son reading it above the fold.     8                    MR. COPPOLINO:  Sure.     9                    JUDGE DALZELL:  Should we have that newspaper    10           decency act?    11                    MR. COPPOLINO:  I'm not going to advocate the    12           newspaper decency act, your Honor.    13                    JUDGE DALZELL:  So your argument really is that this    14           is like broadcasting?    15                    MR. COPPOLINO:  My argument is that this is much    16           closer to broadcasting than it is to print.  And in a few    17           years, as Mr. Bradner said, it will be virtually the same as    18           broadcasting.  You're not going to have a handful of    19           entities, but you're going to have -- you're going to have    20           this very pervasive -- if I could just make one last point,    21           your Honor.    22                    JUDGE SLOVITER:  No, it won't be last because we    23           have questions.    24                    MR. COPPOLINO:  Mr. -- Mr. Burrington and I believe    25           Mr. Bradner, but certainly it is a fact in the record that                                                                                               134     1           the Internet can be piped through not just through a 14.4 or     2           a 28.8 modem, but through coaxial cables, that's a coming     3           technology, it's being tested out in the market right now.     4                    That's going to zoom the stuff down to the     5           marketplace faster than we can do now with these, with even     6           this T-1 line that we had in here.  And, and as I have     7           indicated, you have more than just pictures and text.  You're     8           going to have images, you're going to have movies.  It's     9           going to be like cable television more than anything else.    10                    JUDGE DALZELL:  If we hold, for example, that a    11           chatroom bears no resemblance to anything on the broadcast    12           medium, do you lose?    13                    MR. COPPOLINO:  No, I don't -- I don't think we lose    14           but I do think that the chatrooms and some of the other    15           medias present different questions and admittedly tougher    16           questions.    17                    JUDGE DALZELL:  But you would agree with me that the    18           chatroom bears no resemblance whatever to a broadcast medium?    19                    MR. COPPOLINO:  Well, one thing --    20                    JUDGE DALZELL:  It's interactive, people are talking    21           to one another --    22                    MR. COPPOLINO:  Mm-hmm.    23                    JUDGE DALZELL:  -- not the telephone.    24                    JUDGE BUCKWALTER:  Well, aren't the broadcast media                                                                                               135     1           shows interactive, too, some of them, as I recall?  The talk,     2           the call-in shows and so forth?     3                    MR. COPPOLINO:  I think that's right, but even --     4           even with --     5                    JUDGE BUCKWALTER:  Are they --     6                    MR. COPPOLINO:  The one thing you have to bear in     7           mind on the interactive computer service is  that it's     8           generally run over telephone lines and a chatroom certainly     9           is not -- is not all that different from communicating over a    10           telephone line although you can see it in print on your    11           screen.  And Dial-A-Porn comes over the Internet.  You can    12           have audio applications.    13                    JUDGE DALZELL:  But Dial-A-Porn doesn't go beyond    14           porn, by definition.  The Supreme Court made it absolutely    15           clear that's all they were dealing with was porn, they    16           weren't dealing with the generic question of whether Congress    17           has the power to control a conversation that I have with    18           Chief Judge Sloviter or, I guess more accurately for this    19           case, that she has with my ten year old son.    20                    MR. COPPOLINO:  Your Honor, that's right.  But were    21           kind of back now to does this indecency standard cover every    22           time someone uses a dirty word in a chatroom when they get    23           mad.  And I would suggest that that's really not what it's    24           intended to cover and the chatrooms do present tougher issues    25           than the commercial Web sites where it is clearly                                                                                               136     1           constitutional.  But as Mr. Baron will indicate this     2           afternoon, there are methods that if you -- there are methods     3           where if you're going to have a highly sexually explicit     4           chatroom discussion, that there are methods that people can     5           take to screen access even to that, screen access by minors     6           even to that kind of stuff, that this is not -- there are      7           not -- there are not, as Mr. Ennis says, no possible defenses     8           even for those media.     9                    But if I could maybe --    10                    JUDGE SLOVITER:  I'd like to get back  to the    11           Government's first, basic First Amendment position because    12           I'm -- and I know we've thrown this at you, but we've been    13           bottling this up as we read it.    14                    If -- does the Government have the right to make it    15           a criminal offense for a 14 year old to read Henry -- let's    16           assume that Henry Miller's "Tropic of Cancer" would be    17           indecent under the statute.  I mean, as I recall from when I    18           read it and I was probably not 18 at the time, there -- I    19           mean I think I might find it much more indecent now than I    20           did then, but my --    21                    (Laughter.)    22                    JUDGE SLOVITER:  -- sensibilities have changed.    23                    But I'm thinking of like the most indecent,    24           potentially indecent book I ever read.  And let's assume, I    25           think, can we assume that "Tropic of Cancer" would be                                                                                               137     1           indecent in some communities?     2                    JUDGE DALZELL:  Oh, yes, I think so, in some     3           communities.      4                    JUDGE SLOVITER:  Certainly patently offensive, the     5           language, the subject matter and everything else.  Do you     6           claim that the First Amendment's extension of rights to read     7           that kind of material don't cover a 14 year old?  I just want     8           to -- yeah, do --     9                    MR. COPPOLINO:  Don't cover a 14 year old?  Well, I    10           do think that, first of all, if you assume the conclusion    11           that it is indecent --    12                    JUDGE SLOVITER:  Yeah, let's --    13                    MR. COPPOLINO:  -- which I'm not quite sure I agree    14           with.  But if you take that assumption, I do think that    15           Congress can draw a bright line, that it's very difficult to    16           differentiate between the maturity levels and the abilities    17           of minors at different ages to deal with this stuff.    18                    Now, certainly a 14 year old might be able to deal    19           with it better than an eight year old that probably couldn't    20           even read it.  So there are differences between minors, I    21           don't dispute Mr. Hansen's point on that.  I think the    22           problem though is once you try to move that line down and try    23           to capture the more mature minors, you're going to have a    24           terribly difficult problem regulating that.  And therefore I    25           think Congress is entitled to say age of, you know, age of                                                                                               138     1           adulthood, age 18, is the line that we're going to draw here.     2                    Now, you're assuming that this book is indecent and     3           I'm not sure.  I mean I read "Catcher In The Rye" in high     4           school and I wasn't 18 yet.     5                    JUDGE SLOVITER:  I think this is -- this is a     6           different medium.  I think that this is a different, as I     7           recall I think this is far different from "Catcher In The     8           Rye."     9                    JUDGE DALZELL:  Oh, very different.    10                    JUDGE SLOVITER:  And I think they even tried  to    11           keep it out of this country at some point.    12                    JUDGE DALZELL:  They did, they did.    13                    MR. COPPOLINO:  I'm going to go buy it, in fact.    14                    (Laughter.)    15                    JUDGE DALZELL:  It's really not that good.    16                    JUDGE SLOVITER:  I don't think it is now but one    17           might have argued that it had some benefit at that time    18           because it opened the freedom to read literature like this.     19           I don't know.    20                    But I'm just interested in the basic proposition    21           because we're dealing with the Government's interests.  I    22           mean I am coming back to this case because the question is,    23           is there a compelling Government interest?    24                    And if you don't deal with the inadvertence, if you    25           say well, inadvertence is not really a problem, there's more                                                                                               139     1           of a Government interest here and you say yes, there is and     2           it's not just the inadvertence, then the question is how much     3           Government interest has been sustained by the case law in     4           keeping children from material that is not purveyed for     5           prurient interests by commercial enterprises, and that's a     6           very basic question that we have.  And --     7                    MR. COPPOLINO:  Yeah, I -- I'm not aware of the     8           cases which have said that the Government has a compelling     9           interest in shielding minors from access to literature of    10           this -- I'm not quite sure what this is so I'm not going to,    11           I'm not going to talk about that.  But let's just assume    12           serious literature that might contain sexually explicit    13           scenes in it, the Government's compelling interest has been--    14                    JUDGE SLOVITER:  Themes.    15                    JUDGE BUCKWALTER:  What is the Government's    16           compelling interest in this case?    17                    MR. COPPOLINO:  The Government's compelling interest    18           has been in this case and in many cases like it has been    19           consistently upheld as to protecting minors from exposure to    20           non-obscene materials, that is materials that are not obscene    21           as to adult but nonetheless harmful to minors.  And when you    22           look at every one of those cases, whether it's the indecency    23           cases or the harm to minors cases, you are talking about the    24           kinds of sexually explicit materials we've put forward.  And    25           we are suggesting to the Court that that is the compelling                                                                                               140     1           interest that is here.  The plaintiffs --     2                    JUDGE SLOVITER:  But we didn't, but they didn't put     3           a harmful to minors provision in.  We have to read it in?     4                    MR. COPPOLINO:  No, your Honor, the cases involving     5           non-obscene mater-- materials that are not obscene as to     6           adults but harmful to minors are both the harmful to minors     7           test and the indecency test.  In Sable and in these cases     8           implying the indecency standard, they point that right out.     9                    They say the Court in -- Supreme Court in Ginsburg    10           and Ferber says that the Government has a compelling interest    11           in protecting children from material that is not obscene as    12           to adults but harmful to minors and in this case they're    13           using the indecency standard, I don't think that that really    14           matters much.    15                    I could probably conclude with two --    16                    JUDGE SLOVITER:  Go ahead.    17                    MR. COPPOLINO:   I could -- I could conclude now, I    18           could start again this afternoon.  The only --    19                    JUDGE SLOVITER:  No, go ahead, you finish up    20           yourself.    21                    MR. COPPOLINO:  Okay.  That would be probably a good    22           idea.  I mean the -- just the one point I want to make, the    23           one --    24                    JUDGE SLOVITER:  And you've done beautifully.    25                    MR. COPPOLINO:  The one -- two final points.  On                                                                                               141     1           this issue of over-breadth and I think least restrictive     2           means, I would ask the Court to very seriously consider that     3           there is a substantial valid application of the statute as to     4           the types of materials that we have submitted and you don't     5           have to re-write the statute to find that.  I think we     6           presented you the evidence that there is a serious problem     7           and I think the defenses, certainly the credit card and     8           access code defenses easily apply, it can apply and the     9           providers can do it.    10                    Let me just touch briefly on the --     11                    JUDGE SLOVITER:  Could I ask you another question?    12                    MR. COPPOLINO:  Okay.    13                    JUDGE SLOVITER:  Okay, I didn't think you'd say no.    14                    (Laughter.)    15                    JUDGE SLOVITER:  Mr. Baron is going to deal with the    16           defenses but as I understand, you're saying that if it's    17           material with a serious redeeming value it wouldn't be    18           covered and --    19                    MR. COPPOLINO:  No, I'm saying that material that as    20           a whole has a serious redeeming value --    21                    JUDGE SLOVITER:  Okay.    22                    MR. COPPOLINO:  -- it shouldn't be covered by this    23           standard such as the materials the plaintiffs have submitted.    24                    JUDGE SLOVITER:  Now, in the conference committee    25           report the conference committee report says they would --                                                                                               142     1           they are not really a problem because there is no intent to     2           offend.     3                    Do you think we have to read into the statute an     4           intent to offend?     5                    MR. COPPOLINO:  well, I think that that language is,     6           I think that intent to offend is such a significant standard     7           that that would be a lot to read that intention standard into     8           the statute, but I think it underscores Congress' intention     9           that the material be limited to -- to the types of materials    10           that they specifically identified in the Congressional    11           Record, to the types of materials that I am talking about.    12                    But I don't --    13                    JUDGE SLOVITER:  Is your answer a yes or a no?    14                    MR. COPPOLINO:   I guess my answer is I don't think    15           you can read into the statute an intent to offend cause it's    16           not in the statute.    17                    JUDGE SLOVITER:  Even though that was the reason --    18           well, neither are a lot of the other things.  But that was    19           the reason the conference committee report gave for exempting    20           in a way although not explicitly material of a serious    21           redeeming value.    22                    MR. COPPOLINO:  Yes, but my arguments with respect    23           to your construction of indecency and over-breadth I think    24           are fully comfortable within the statutory language, to read    25           in an intense standard is more.  And I would just suggest to                                                                                               143     1           the Court that that language in the conference report     2           underscores the parameters and the limitations of the     3           indecency standard, but I think beyond that I really couldn't     4           ask -- tell the Court to construe it that way because it's     5           just -- it's just not plain from the statute.     6                    The -- I guess the last point, I'll make this fairly     7           quickly.  As you know, I cross-examined Mrs. Duvall and I     8           think that the parental controls -- I just want to make a     9           point on the parental controls as a less restrictive means.    10                    They are certainly very commendable products but I    11           think we saw a number of the flaws with those products which    12           suggest that they cannot by themselves serve this purpose.    13           And I think, just to sum it up in a nutshell, Mrs. Duvall I    14           think very candidly indicated that Surfwatch is constantly    15           trying to update.  They started with 2,000 sites, they're now    16           up to about 8,000.  There's four to eight hundred new sites a    17           week, there's a constant lag and there is a constant effort    18           to change, to chase up and catch up with these sites.     19                    And, as the Court also saw in Mr. Schmidt's    20           testimony, sites change their names almost within a couple of    21           days.  And therefore Surfwatch by itself and products like    22           that which try to identify sites or have key words can't do    23           the job.  Key words don't necessarily get you there either    24           because you saw there's lot of exhibits that we submitted    25           that don't have a sexually explicit URL and they're not going                                                                                               144     1           to get picked up on a key word search.  So you've either got     2           to know what that site is, if you haven't found it already,     3           Surfwatch is not going to pick it up.     4                    So I think -- I think our brief has made that point     5           pretty clearly and I guess I will -- I will stop there.     6                    JUDGE SLOVITER:  What scrutiny do we apply?     7                    MR. COPPOLINO:  Your Honor, I -- you apply the Sable     8           test, but you -- which is --     9                    JUDGE SLOVITER:  Is that strict scrutiny?    10                    JUDGE DALZELL:  That's strict scrutiny, sure.    11                    JUDGE SLOVITER:  Okay, that's all right.    12                    MR. COPPOLINO:  Taking into account my argument on    13           Pacifica.    14                    (Laughter.)    15                    JUDGE SLOVITER:  Thank you very much.  We will meet    16           again in an hour and we will begin with Mr. Baron.    17                    Thank you, Mr. Coppolino.    18                    (Court in recess; 12:46 o'clock p.m.)    19                                 AFTERNOON SESSION    20                                (1:48 o'clock p.m.)    21                    JUDGE DALZELL:  Hello, Mr. Baron.    22                    MR. BARON:  Good afternoon, your Honors.  Jason R.    23           Baron for the Justice Department.      24                    I'd like to pick up where Mr. Coppolino left off, in    25           outlining what are the available affirmative defenses to non-                                                                                               145     1           commercial content providers on the Internet.     2                    JUDGE SLOVITER:  Before you do that, could you     3           address briefly, if necessary, my question which is whether     4           the availability of defenses -- the viability of the theory     5           that if you have defenses in the statute, assuming that they     6           were good defenses, that saves it from any over-breadth or     7           vagueness?     8                    MR. BARON:  I think you would need to restate the     9           question, your Honor.  Is it in the context of other statutes    10           you're asking, or --    11                    JUDGE SLOVITER:  No, has any Supreme Court case held    12           that a criminal statute that has defenses in it is thereby    13           saved from overbreadth.    14                    MR. BARON:  I'm not aware of case law that parallels    15           the statute, your Honor.    16                    JUDGE SLOVITER:  Or is there any other statute like    17           this that talks in terms of defenses to a criminal statute?    18                    MR. BARON:  Other than the Dial-a-Porn context, I'm    19           not aware of one that dovetails with the words of this    20           statute.    21                    JUDGE SLOVITER:  I don't mean the words, I mean this    22           context that the existence of a defense is enough to save the    23           statute, that you have to consider it with the existence of a    24           defense.    25                    MR. BARON:  Yes, but it is the position of the                                                                                               146     1           Government, however, that the broad nature of the affirmative     2           defenses that are part of this statute do allow for     3           sufficient defenses to be asserted so that there would not be     4           a substantial number of applications that would be subject to     5           the kind of overbreadth challenge that Mr. Coppolino was     6           discussing.     7                    JUDGE SLOVITER:  But you can't give us any     8           citations?     9                    MR. BARON:  Not today, your Honor.  The touchstone    10           of --    11                    JUDGE SLOVITER:  We don't want more briefs.     12           (Laughter.)  But go ahead, Mr. Baron, we'll hear you.    13                    MR. BARON:  The touchstone of what Congress intended    14           by way of the affirmative defenses that are set forth in the    15           CDA is of course the statute itself supplemented by its    16           legislative history.  Congress not only provided for the    17           concrete defenses that are listed in E5(b) regarding credit    18           card, debit account, adult access code, adult personal    19           identification numbers, but they went further.  The text of    20           223 E5(a) provides for a broad range of affirmative defenses    21           to be asserted by content providers based on their taking    22           reasonable, effective and appropriate actions under the    23           circumstances and in light of what is feasible based on    24           available technology.  The statute represents a forward-    25           looking approach to what everyone concedes is an                                                                                               147     1           extraordinarily creative, flexible and powerful new means of     2           communication.     3                    The very words of the statute imply that what is     4           feasible under the circumstances based on available     5           technology today may change.  Congress expected that it would     6           change.  Thus, the statute does not consist of a static     7           snapshot of available defenses, but keys those defenses to     8           what is feasible to do under available technology.     9                    JUDGE BUCKWALTER:  And if none are available, then    10           that is a defense, too?    11                    MR. BARON:  Excuse me, your Honor?    12                    JUDGE BUCKWALTER:  If none are available, is that a    13           defense?    14                    MR. BARON:  The statute contemplates that there --    15           well, I believe the evidence of record shows that there are    16           certainly available defenses --    17                    JUDGE BUCKWALTER:  Well, we might discuss that    18           later, but --     19                    MR. BARON:  But the --     20                    JUDGE BUCKWALTER:  Maybe Judge Dalzell wants to    21           discuss it now.  (Laughter.)    22                    JUDGE DALZELL:  Well, I mean tagging isn't available    23           now, is it?    24                    MR. BARON:  It has been the evidence of record that    25           as was evident from the first day of the hearings before the                                                                                               148     1           Court that there are schemes that the available standards and     2           protocols of the Internet allow for putting in place, and     3           that the marketplace is poised to allow for tagging and     4           labeling schemes that are content selection schemes such as     5           Congress envisioned.     6                    JUDGE DALZELL:  But getting at what Mr. Hansen said,     7           which is to say this statute is effective immediately.  But     8           for the TRO and then the stipulation and order of February     9           26th, this statute would be effective.  Are we agreed?  And    10           therefore those defenses would be effective immediately.    11                    MR. BARON:  Well, the power of the scheme that we    12           have brought forth is if this -- by plaintiff's own    13           concession this morning and by the testimony that you've    14           heard from plaintiff's own witness, Mr. Vezza, as well as    15           others, that if this hearing were being held in July or even    16           earlier, it would be expected that Microsoft and Netscape and    17           virtually all of the marketplace of browsers would be able to    18           assimilate a PICs compatible labels and by the force of our    19           argument other labeling schemes that are more generic.    20                    So but for the fact that this was an expedited    21           schedule and the Court has wanted to go forward in settling    22           this matter on a facial challenge as fast as possible, we're    23           in May, we may be in a different place in July.  That is the    24           thrust of the Government's position on tagging, that it's    25           poised, the marketplace is poised and the admissions there.                                                                                               149     1                    JUDGE DALZELL:  But it's not a defense now because     2           it can't be.  Nobody has -L18 because it was just Dr. Olsen's     3           idea that was born on or about April 1, 1996.     4                    MR. BARON:  It was certainly something that was     5           brought forward by our expert after the passage of the Act as     6           one way that a content selection standard as envisioned by     7           Congress in the conference report could go into widespread     8           effect.     9                    Now, I --    10                    JUDGE DALZELL:  Now, since it's not available, since    11           we agree it's not available yet, right?    12                    MR. BARON:  Certainly the -L18 standard as proposed    13           by Dr. Olsen is not available today.    14                    JUDGE DALZELL:  And neither is the PICs available.    15                    MR. BARON:  It's certainly not widely available by    16           the evidence presented in this court.    17                    JUDGE DALZELL:  But what is available is, for    18           example, what Compuserve tried to do, isn't it?  What more    19           could Compuserve have done than it did before the FBI visited    20           them?    21                    MR. BARON:  I don't think that's a good example,    22           your Honor.    23                    JUDGE DALZELL:  Well, but would you answer my    24           example?  What more could Compuserve have than what it did,    25           assuming the CDA applied?                                                                                               150     1                    MR. BARON:  Let me say, Judge Dalzell, that I am not     2           aware of all the facts and circumstances that have given rise     3           to the set of correspondence that was just filed with the     4           Court.  And I will say that --     5                    JUDGE DALZELL:  I know no more than you do because I     6           read their motion.     7                    MR. BARON:  Correct, your Honor, and the evidence     8           that submitted as part of the correspondence back and forth     9           showed that the Justice Department was concerned that there    10           may be obscenity with respect to the particular transmissions    11           and forum at issue.  And so the transaction was captioned as    12           the Communications Decency Act matter but the Communications    13           Decency Act is obviously broader than 223(d).  Congress    14           amended various provisions of the statute, including current    15           existing obscenity law for on line communication.    16                    So with that caveat, the question would be whether    17           the posting of material in a Compuserve directory which is an    18           adult directory and where parental controls are known to be    19           in place, if that's the hypothetical that I can sort of boil    20           -- boil down the Compuserve example --    21                    JUDGE DALZELL:  Well, it's not hypothetical --    22           right, and it's labeled, it's labeled adults only.    23                    MR. BARON:  Correct.    24                    JUDGE DALZELL:  And not in a titillating way as I    25           recall.  It was just text.  It was just text.                                                                                               151     1                    MR. BARON:  I will take that as a given, your Honor.      2           The fact is that as we stated at page 62 of our post-hearing     3           brief about other available means by which content providers     4           could avail themselves of the affirmative defenses, and by     5           means of Mr. Keeney's (ph) letter in the Shea case, the     6           answer to your hypothetical would be, I would expect that     7           there would be an affirmative defense in this situation.  But     8           that matter would have to be evaluated under the facts and     9           circumstances of the case.  But clearly there's an    10           affirmative defense if there's that kind of posting under the    11           available technology today.  But we have to go back to the    12           words of the statute.    13                    JUDGE BUCKWALTER:  So that right now, Mr. Baron --    14           I'm sorry to interrupt you, but this either indicates the    15           weakness of the Government's case or my lack of    16           understanding, which is considerable in some of these areas.     17           As I understand it now under 5(a) there is no way to take an    18           effective means -- for a speaker --  speaker to take    19           effective means to make sure that someone under 18 doesn't    20           get his material that is indecent or patently offensive.    21                    MR. BARON:  No, that's not correct.    22                    JUDGE BUCKWALTER:  What is the way?  I thought there    23           was no effective way.    24                    MR. BARON:  We set out a number of ways in our    25           brief, in our post-hearing brief as well as in earlier briefs                                                                                               152     1           in discussion before the Court.     2                    JUDGE BUCKWALTER:  Please tell me one of them.  I     3           must -- maybe I don't understand.     4                    MR. BARON:  I will concentrate on tagging, because     5           it is the most simple and elegant solution.  But you're     6           asking what other means are available.  And what we said was     7           that --     8                    JUDGE SLOVITER:  Effectively --     9                    JUDGE BUCKWALTER:  That's not available now.  That's    10           not available now and it's --    11                    JUDGE SLOVITER:  It's hypothetical.    12                    MR. BARON:  I think under a broad interpretation of    13           what is available, the technology exists for putting that    14           into place.  It's just a question of, as Dr. Olsen said, four    15           hours of tweaking a Netscape proxy server to have 80 percent    16           of the market put into place.  But conceding for the moment    17           the thrust of the question --    18                    JUDGE SLOVITER:  Effectively available and has been    19           shown to work, let's put -- is that a fair modification?    20                    JUDGE BUCKWALTER:  Yes, that's right, yes.    21                    MR. BARON:  Okay.  But understanding your question,    22           we did put forth as a secondary means the means of    23           registering sites to make known to the world what your    24           material consists of.    25                    JUDGE BUCKWALTER:  I understand that, but that                                                                                               153     1           doesn't do -- that's not effective at all, is it under the     2           present --     3                    MR. BARON:  Well, I disagree, your Honor.     4                    JUDGE BUCKWALTER:  Well, how is it effective?  I     5           mean that person who registers his site, that doesn't     6           guarantee that someone under 18 won't get into it.     7                    MR. BARON:  Well, if the test, as plaintiffs would     8           posit it throughout their voluminous filings in this case     9           with declarations and their other papers -- their whole case    10           is that your Honors should rule against the statute because    11           it doesn't guarantee, in your words, or doesn't assure that    12           every minor in the United States --    13                    JUDGE BUCKWALTER:  Well, you don't have to do that,    14           but effective certainly means that it has to have something    15           more than no effect, or little, no or little effect.    16                    MR. BARON:  And the evidence shows that if    17           individual content providers make known to the world their    18           sites that would be otherwise within the scope of the CDA,    19           then that is enormously effective as compared with not making    20           their sites known.    21                    JUDGE BUCKWALTER:  Oh, well, as compared with not,    22           yes.    23                    MR. BARON:  And therefore the surfwatches, the    24           cyberpatrols, the major online services that either have in    25           place parental controls today or are imminently about to have                                                                                               154     1           parental controls for not only their own proprietary systems     2           but also the Internet, can take advantage of knowing that     3           you're out there.  We have heard extensive --     4                    JUDGE BUCKWALTER:  You have explained that and     5           that's the position that I understood from the evidence.     6                    MR. BARON:  And Congress did not say that one needed     7           to take an action so as to be 100 percent effective, 100     8           perfect.  Obviously the case law suggests that enterprising     9           youth in a variety of contexts can overcome whatever schemes    10           are in place.  So the question is, is there some reasonable,    11           appropriate and effective measures, and the Justice    12           Department has said it, both in this case as well as the    13           collateral case up in New York, that there are those measures    14           available today.  The key is to put the burden on the content    15           provider to do something rather than nothing.  Because    16           nothing means that left to its own devices, the parental    17           control software just won't be effective.    18                    JUDGE BUCKWALTER:  I understand that, but you're    19           saying that something as just simply tagging his material or    20           in --    21                    JUDGE DALZELL:  But the something -- what does the    22           something get you?  That's what I'm getting at.    23                    JUDGE BUCKWALTER:  Yes, that's what I --    24                    JUDGE DALZELL:  The something that Compuserve did --    25           we don't have to hypothesize anymore.  They did something and                                                                                               155     1           it got them headlines in their local newspaper, in the     2           Washington Times and other newspapers that A, undoubtedly was     3           a catastrophe in the corporate life, and B, hurt their     4           business according to Mr. Ennis, which is at least a credible     5           hypothesis that it would do that.  That's what you get paid.      6           If you're wrong, you're going to find that your company or     7           your organization is going to be the subject of a headline     8           saying that you're peddling smut.     9                    MR. BARON:  And I would submit to you, Judge    10           Dalzell, that Compuserve might have a problem today under    11           existing statutes going to obscenity independent of the    12           Communications Decency Act.  That might be the reason for the    13           headline as well.    14                    JUDGE DALZELL:  All I can do is take your colleague    15           in another division at his word.  And he cited the    16           Communications Decency Act.  He did not cite 1864 or 1865.     17           He cited the CDA.  So I'm taking him at his word, that's all    18           I'm doing.    19                    MR. BARON:  But the correspondence that is of record    20           in this action does explicitly say that the actions that were    21           taken by the Department of Justice in the sort of initial    22           look at this is possibly for obscenity provisions, not just    23           223(d).  It does say that in the correspondence.    24                    JUDGE DALZELL:  Well, not the one that I saw, but    25           that's all right.  Move on.                                                                                               156     1                    MR. BARON:  It's a letter to Mr. Ennis signed by     2           Terry Lord that is at Exhibit 3 --     3                    JUDGE DALZELL:  I'm looking at the April 29th letter     4           --     5                    MR. BARON:  Right.     6                    JUDGE DALZELL:  -- the April 29th letter that was     7           sent to --     8                    MR. BARON:  There is a further letter.     9                    JUDGE DALZELL:  -- to the complainant --    10                    MR. BARON:  Right, there is a further letter at the    11           top of Exhibit 3 to plaintiff's motion which does indicate    12           that citizen complaints can be reviewed to the extent they    13           may relate to other possible Title 18 violations.  And that's    14           really a key to understanding what's going on there.    15                    JUDGE SLOVITER:  Could I ask you the key -- well,    16           maybe one key.  Is it your position, the Government's    17           position, not personally, that a content provider could avoid    18           criminal liability by tagging its material, or would some    19           other action also be necessary?    20                    MR. BARON:  Merely tagging by itself, just doing the    21           four key strokes, -L18 or putting a PICs-compatible label or    22           self-labeling is today not fully sufficient because you have    23           to do something more.  The browsers of the marketplace have    24           not been tweaked or tuned to get that label.    25                    JUDGE BUCKWALTER:  Well, but what does the content                                                                                               157     1           provider have to do with the browsers, in that example?  I     2           mean I'm a content provider, I put on there -L18, there you     3           are.     4                    MR. BARON:  Right.     5                    JUDGE BUCKWALTER:  Now, I can't help it the browsers     6           aren't configured out there in the market.     7                    MR. BARON:  Well, that may be right, but the fact is     8           that the evidence by plaintiff's own case shows that the     9           browsers are going to move to a PICs-compatible labeling    10           format which fully assimilates the alternative suggestions of    11           character strings.    12                    JUDGE BUCKWALTER:  But the point that Judge Sloviter    13           made, I think, is that it is sufficient.  All a person has to    14           do, a speaker, is to put -L18.  I'm using that example, and    15           that's enough.    16                    MR. BARON:  We have said in our briefs that on the    17           condition that the marketplace has moved and the testimony    18           before you says that it will imminently, then it would be an    19           affirmative defense.    20                    JUDGE SLOVITER:  Mr. Baron --    21                    JUDGE BUCKWALTER:  That's the --    22                    JUDGE DALZELL:  -- the official position of the    23           department.  The official position of the department was    24           expressed by the Acting Assistant Attorney General, the    25           Criminal Division, to our three colleagues in New York on May                                                                                               158     1           3, 1996.  And the most he would say is, and I quote, "Under     2           present technology, it is the position of the Department of     3           Justice that, absent extraordinary circumstances, such     4           efforts would constitute substantial evidence that a content     5           provider had taken good faith, reasonable, effective and     6           appropriate actions under the circumstances to restrict or     7           prevent access by minors to the covered material."  Do you     8           find that comforting if you were advising a client?  Oh,     9           don't worry, here's a letter from Mr. Keeney (ph).  It just    10           says that the jury might acquit you.  It doesn't say you    11           won't be indicted, does it?    12                    MR. BARON:  Well, your Honor, that's not the    13           statute.  As plaintiffs would have you rule on it, what they    14           are asking you to say is to strike down the statute because    15           it doesn't as a per se matter establish in all cases what    16           individuals can do.  But the statutory scheme, not only in    17           E5, but in the E6 provision, which talks about the FCC    18           describing measures which are reasonable, effective and    19           appropriate and that the use of such measures shall be    20           admitted as evidence of good faith efforts for purposes of    21           paragraph 5, the statute is written in the terms of     22           evidence --    23                    JUDGE DALZELL:  You mean the same FCC that gave us    24           the Merrill Hansen (ph) decision, that said that the purpose    25           was just one of many factors to consider.                                                                                               159     1                    MR. BARON:  The Congress broadly prescribed that the     2           FCC has a role that it may describe these measures.  Along     3           the way, the Department of Justice has in the context of this     4           action, as well as the collateral proceeding in New York,     5           sought to further make concrete what it is that content     6           providers can do.  And they said it, that if you do these     7           measures it will be absent extraordinary circumstances,     8           substantial evidence of having an affirmative defense.     9                    JUDGE SLOVITER:  Mr. Baron --    10                    JUDGE DALZELL:  It doesn't say we won't prosecute    11           you.    12                    MR. BARON:  But that's not what the structure of the    13           statute is either.  So --    14                    JUDGE DALZELL:  Well, in a First Amendment setting    15           surely you would agree with me that the chilling effect of    16           prosecution is something we need to consider.    17                    MR. BARON:  Of course, you may consider chilling    18           effect in First Amendment cases.  But the -- but what    19           plaintiffs would have you do is penalize the Congress by    20           striking a statute which is very broadly worded with respect    21           to reasonable, effective and appropriate actions.  And we've    22           set to put flesh on that both in our briefs and in Mr.    23           Keeney's letter which is not inconsistent with the briefs    24           that we've filed in this action.    25                    JUDGE BUCKWALTER:  It may be broadly worded but it's                                                                                               160     1           impossible to comply with, it seems to me, under the evidence     2           that I've heard, except by virtue of the letter which you now     3           say or someone says it's -- that mere labeling will be     4           sufficient compliance.  But --     5                    MR. BARON:  Not only is it not impossible to comply     6           with, it's very easy to comply with.  Plaintiff's whole case     7           is--     8                    JUDGE BUCKWALTER:  The defenses are easy to comply     9           with?    10                    MR. BARON:  That the -- that the defenses, if the    11           content providers who are putting a material that is sexually    12           explicit within the definition of the CDA out into cyberspace    13           in various forms, if they take just simple measures to ensure    14           that the world knows that they're there, the Department of    15           Justice is saying that that's substantial evidence of an    16           affirmative defense.    17                    JUDGE BUCKWALTER:  That's not what the act says    18           though.  My point is that's not what the act says, that's    19           what the Department of Justice says.    20                    MR. BARON:  Well, we have keyed our defense of this    21           act to the broadly worded provisions of E(5)(A) as well as    22           the conference report that talks about a content selection    23           standards.    24                    And I asked Dr. Olsen whether his scheme was a    25           content selection standard, it is.  The self-labeling scheme                                                                                               161     1           that's embodied as part of the PICs methodology is a type of     2           content selection scheme for content providers.  Congress set     3           it out, we're not departing or going further afield than     4           what's in the conference report.     5                    JUDGE SLOVITER:  We have before us a motion for     6           preliminary injunction.  It seems to me that you are arguing     7           in your defense argument that there will be a way in due     8           course in which one could comply with the statute because the     9           brow-- the market -- and in your brief, the market will rise    10           to the occasion, et cetera.    11                    Inasmuch as all we're dealing with is what is    12           available now because we're dealing with a preliminary    13           injunction, why doesn't the Government concede that a    14           preliminary injunction would be appropriate and wait for the    15           permanent hearing until those matters become available so    16           that they can be tested and see if even -- I mean these are    17           the product of Mr. Olsen's creative imagination -- Dr.    18           Olsen's creative imagination.  They may work and they may not    19           work.    20                    But at the moment we haven't seen anything that does    21           work that wouldn't also effectively block some of the    22           material from adults.  And therefore why this big challenge    23           to the preliminary injunction part of it until the market    24           catches up?    25                    MR. BARON:  Well, we -- I have several responses to                                                                                               162     1           that.     2                    JUDGE SLOVITER:  Yeah, and I'd be interested.     3                    MR. BARON:  It's not Dr. Olsen's imagination, it is     4           the testimony of plaintiff's own witnesses, both with respect     5           to Mr. Bradner's extensive testimony on the standards and     6           protocols of the Internet and Mr. Vace's testimony about the     7           W-3 consortium.     8                    There is a creative genius in the Internet other     9           than Dr. Olsen's own creativity.    10                    JUDGE SLOVITER:  Yeah, but Dr. Olsen's plan depends    11           on the content provider doing this whereas, as I understand    12           it, the PICs plan necessarily involves the receiver who is    13           willing --     14                    JUDGE BUCKWALTER:  Well, a proxy --    15                    MR. BARON:  Or third-party labeling services, a    16           complex scheme --    17                    JUDGE SLOVITER:  So there's a -- I think that --    18           yeah.  That's a very big difference.    19                    MR. BARON:  -- where parents would be relying on any    20           number of sources other than the content providers, that the    21           burden is not on the content provider to do anything,    22           although it allows for it, but that Congress would require    23           it.    24                    To respond to the point, this --    25                    JUDGE SLOVITER:  I mean how can we sustain it today                                                                                               163     1           based on some hypothetical catching up in the marketplace in     2           the future?  Is really what I'm troubled about.     3                    MR. BARON:  I would hope, your Honors, that an     4           aspect of your decision would be an acknowledgement of the     5           substantial, if not overwhelming, testimony that the     6           marketplace is poised to provide a tagging scheme which would     7           be a defense under the CDA so that the marketplace, this     8           litigation and the marketplace will catch up with each other.      9           But short of --    10                    JUDGE SLOVITER:  Nobody -- nobody said it was really    11           working, as I -- I mean except for soft spots which I, but my    12           reaction was it was pretty minuscule, as you pointed out in    13           cross-examination, in the marketplace, this all is including    14           PICs, something that is supposedly about to happen that all    15           sorts of things can happen that will affect that.    16                    And I, just as a practical matter, they put on    17           evidence or testimony of chill or possible -- of chill and    18           that certainly is credible testimony, how can -- how can we    19           as a matter of judicial responsibility sustain against that    20           chill on the basis of what isn't there now?  And that's my    21           basic question to you as on the defenses.    22                    MR. BARON:  Well, obviously if the Court were    23           inclined to say there are no available defense under E(5)(A),    24           then one -- as of today, then one possible action is to    25           suspend implementation of E(5)(A) as opposed to E(5)(B), for                                                                                               164     1           a period of time pending development of the tagging schemes     2           in the marketplace.     3                    But I am not willing, as I stand here, to concede     4           that the other available means set out in our brief, which     5           include registration or posting to limited participation     6           forums or other matters that are set out --      7                    JUDGE DALZELL:  For the credit cards, but of course     8           the people who do that already are the people who are the     9           pornographers.    10                    MR. BARON:  Well, and there were a variety of other,    11           right, and access codes and third-party registration.    12                    JUDGE DALZELL:  So the only thing that you're going    13           to prevent if the CDA is sustained are the teasers.    14                    MR. BARON:  I would beg to differ, your Honor,    15           because there has been testimony from Dr. Olsen, and I    16           realize that there is cross testimony on this, that there are    17           a number of content providers or organizations, non-profits,    18           who can put in place third-party registration schemes as a    19           technical matter or come up with other types of access    20           restriction and proxy server schemes.  His extensive    21           declaration on that is part of the record.     22                    JUDGE DALZELL:  Let's take Mr. Kuromiya's group    23           which is a non-profit group which as I recalled his    24           testimony, of very modest means, okay.  So for credit card    25           identification, the evidence is that unless it's accompanied                                                                                               165     1           by a commercial transaction, the verifier is going to charge     2           you something.     3                    I think he testified that there were -- just pick a     4           number, 20,000 hits a month, okay?  That's $20,000 right     5           there, that's $240,000 per annum that I suspect this     6           organization doesn't have for credit card identification.     7                    Now, wouldn't you agree with me that Mr. Kuromiya's     8           group, that credit card identification is a non-starter for     9           him?    10                    MR. BARON:  Uh, I --    11                    JUDGE DALZELL:  Because it would come out of their    12           pocket.    13                    MR. BARON:  I'm not sure I would want to concede all    14           the hypothetical facts in that because, as the Court is well    15           aware, there has been substantial testimony about what hits    16           mean and how it actually translates into real individuals    17           where you would have to do a verification.    18                    JUDGE DALZELL:  So whether it's 16,407 people    19           instead of 20,000, it's still more money than he has.    20                    MR. BARON:  I would concede that the credit card    21           defense may not be available to each and every individual who    22           is a content provider, that is correct.    23                    JUDGE DALZELL:  And in fact, since we're talking    24           about Mr. Kuromiya's group, he wants to reach people under    25           18.  So is that an admission for the Grand Jury?  And you                                                                                               166     1           know he's going to show them some very graphic depictions of,     2           as I understand it, the male sexual organ, at least the male     3           sexual organ.  Okay?  He wants to do that and he's probably     4           going to do it in a titillating and pandering way because he     5           wants to get their attention, that's his purpose.     6                    MR. BARON:  Well, I want to put --     7                    JUDGE DALZELL:  So should we say to him get, you     8           know, we'll give you the guidebook to Federal correctional     9           institutions?    10                    MR. BARON:  Well, I want to put aside as a legal    11           matter for this, for the purposes of this part of the    12           discussion whether or not he -- his actions would meet or not    13           meet the legal standard of patent offensiveness.    14                    But he certainly does have a variety of means today    15           to segregate out that portion of his site and perhaps use a    16           third-party registration scheme or some other scheme short of    17           merely relying on tagging.    18                    JUDGE DALZELL:  No, perhaps I'm not being clear    19           enough.  He doesn't want to block to people under 18, he    20           wants to reach them.  They're sexually active, he just    21           doesn't want them to die of AIDS, that's all.  So he wants to    22           reach them, he wants to entice them to learn about safe sex.    23                    MR. BARON:  I can't respond to an individual --    24                    JUDGE DALZELL:  Is that bad faith on his part?    25                    MR. BARON:  -- who doesn't want to take advantage of                                                                                               167     1           the affirmative defenses, notwithstanding a known quantity     2           that he might otherwise be liable under the act.  But let      3           me--     4                    JUDGE DALZELL:  So he ought to just take his     5           chances.     6                    MR. BARON:  But let me say this: the only proposal     7           that the Court has heard as an alternative to putting the     8           burden on content providers that is -- that comes in any way,     9           shape or form in terms of effectiveness is a proposal to    10           block the entire Internet based on unrated sites. And if Mr.    11           Kuromiya doesn't want to rate his site or take any other    12           affirmative action, his site would be blocked under Mr.    13           Ennis' theory of --    14                    JUDGE DALZELL:  Ah.    15                    MR. BARON:  -- the PICs compatible label.    16                    JUDGE DALZELL:  But that's because the parents of    17           the under 18 year old user have made that decision, a very    18           big difference, you would admit, than the Government making    19           that decision for them.    20                    MR. BARON:  Well, the fact is that the scheme, I    21           mean the ironic position of the parties before the Court    22           today is that we want the Internet to be available to    23           children based on the findings of Congress that said this is    24           a dramatic, wonderful medium of educational value.  And if    25           you look at the proposal to block everything, it makes no                                                                                               168     1           sense.  99.9 percent of the Internet or thereabouts, as Dr.     2           Olsen testified, would be blocked if you're merely relying on     3           third-party labeling schemes such as envisioned by PICs to     4           label a few thousand or even tens of thousands of URL's.     5                    Professor Hoffman's testimony was at last check     6           there are 22 million URL's just on the World Wide Web.  There     7           is testimony in this action that the World Wide Web is     8           growing every two months, that the Internet is doubling nine     9           to -- every nine to twelve months.    10                    The third-party labeling schemes such as envisioned    11           just can't keep up and anybody can do the mathematics to show    12           that the effect of a PICs scheme that blocks sites is going    13           to block virtually everything.    14                    JUDGE DALZELL:  So it's better for Mr. Kuromiya to    15           bear the risk of going to a Federal correctional institution    16           because he guesses wrong?    17                    MR. BARON:  Uh --    18                    JUDGE DALZELL:  As apparently Compuserve guessed    19           wrong.    20                    MR. BARON:  Your Honor, I just will not concede that    21           Mr. Kuromiya is within the scope of the act for the purpose    22           of this discussion.  And if he doesn't want to avail himself    23           of any access measures, well, then -- then he can take the    24           consequences.    25                    JUDGE SLOVITER:  You referred us to 5(B) as an -- I                                                                                               169     1           think you said, well, if 5(A) is not effectively available     2           right now, they still have 5(B).     3                    Is 5(B) available, just fill me in on this, to chat     4           groups and news groups and -- or is it the 5(B) being credit     5           card, debit account, adult access code or adult personal     6           identification number.  There are lots of speakers back and     7           forth in this whole other area, other than the commercial     8           pornographers.  Is 5(B) directed toward them?     9                    MR. BARON:  There may be -- there are applications    10           that non-commercial providers can avail themselves when    11           they're in those applications that some of these defenses    12           might make sense.  It might make sense based on available    13           software on a particular proprietary chat room to have an    14           access code, for example.    15                    JUDGE SLOVITER:  But you agree that by and large    16           these are not effectively available to most chat rooms and    17           you know the stuff, news groups, is that what they're called?    18                    JUDGE DALZELL:  Right, right.    19                    JUDGE SLOVITER:  Chat rooms.    20                    MR. BARON:  Well, they have to parse it by    21           application but there, certainly there the availability    22           differs by the various applications.    23                    JUDGE SLOVITER:  I understood your brief to say that    24           it was mostly designed for --    25                    JUDGE BUCKWALTER:  For Web sites and bulletin                                                                                               170     1           boards, isn't that right, for --     2                    JUDGE SLOVITER:  Commercial, yes.     3                    MR. BARON:  It is certainly possible to utilize     4           E(5)(B) for Web sites and bulletin boards and certainly in     5           the commercial context it's done all the time.     6                    JUDGE SLOVITER:  Now, as a matter of law, if you are     7           telling us that we should sustain this -- I mean we do deal     8           with law -- if you are telling us that we should sustain the     9           statute based on the availability of defenses and defense    10           5(A) is not effectively available now and defense 5(B) covers    11           at most only some but not most of the Internet users, then    12           would we be effectively, as your brief seemed to suggest, at    13           least to me, cutting the statute down to apply only to the    14           commercial type user and then we would put in the discussion    15           with Mr. Coppolino who was really purveying pornographic    16           material?    17                    MR. BARON:  You could certainly, short of striking    18           the statute, you could parse the statute in that manner.    19                    JUDGE SLOVITER:  Isn't that what we would have to do    20           based on what you say in your brief?    21                    MR. BARON:  Well, your Honor, let me go back.  I    22           understand that there is difficulty accepting an argument    23           that because of the marketplace being poised to do something    24           and the widespread availability today not being there, that    25           the main proposal, which is the elegant, simple proposal that                                                                                               171     1           we put forward may not be an available defense.     2                    But we've suggested alternatives and I am not     3           willing to stand here and concede that notions of letting     4           your site be known in cyberspace through the registration     5           process that we've suggested, the multiple ways that you can     6           make it known isn't an available defense that the Justice     7           Department would take as substantial evidence en route to     8           where we're going to be in a couple of months time which is     9           widespread availability of tagging schemes.    10                    Well, your Honor, with all --    11                    JUDGE SLOVITER:  Maybe, I mean, you know.    12                    MR. BARON:  Well, we've heard evidence of the --    13                    JUDGE SLOVITER:  And we saw that they couldn't get,    14           what couldn't we get on the -- oh, we couldn't get London or    15           something.    16                    JUDGE BUCKWALTER:  We couldn't get Paris so we    17           settled for London.    18                    JUDGE SLOVITER:  We couldn't get Paris.    19                    MR. BARON:  No, there are --    20                    (Laughter.)    21                    JUDGE SLOVITER:  No, I mean all I'm suggesting is    22           that -- and it wasn't really facetious.  All I'm suggesting    23           is that technology doesn't always go where you expect it to    24           go.  Space ships blow up, also, I mean, so we cannot assume    25           that something will work until it has actually worked.                                                                                               172     1                    MR. BARON:  But we're --      2                    JUDGE SLOVITER:  I mean --      3                    MR. BARON:  But your Honor --     4                    JUDGE SLOVITER:  And that's all I'm -- I'm     5           suggesting.     6                    MR. BARON:  With all due respect, we are not     7           operating in a vacuum where I'm making an oral argument prior     8           to an evidentiary hearing.  We have had five days of     9           testimony.  We have a consortium --    10                    JUDGE SLOVITER:  And all we got was hypotheticals so    11           that we expect that this will be available.  I'm -- I'm    12           looking, I went through this evidence afterwards, based on    13           your brief, and I'm looking for specific examples of    14           operating systems in which your defenses would actually work,    15           not based on something that might happen if you put X    16           together with Y, but this is really working.      17                    And except for Surfwatch which you kept pointing out    18           was minuscule, there isn't anything that's actually working    19           that you can point to, to say to a potential defendant: use    20           that.  Is there?    21                    MR. BARON:  Well, I would disagree with that.    22                    JUDGE SLOVITER:  Well, what -- what would you point    23           us to in the evidence?    24                    MR. BARON:  I mean the findings that plaintiffs have    25           put in and the evidence of record would suggest that there                                                                                               173     1           are other parental controls.     2                    JUDGE SLOVITER:  But what do you point us to?     3                    MR. BARON:  I can point you to the fact that the     4           major on-line providers either do or are about to implement--     5                    JUDGE SLOVITER:  Are not about to.  Do now --     6                    MR. BARON:  -- parental controls.     7                    JUDGE SLOVITER:  This is the preliminary injunction,     8           what do they do now?     9                    MR. BARON:  For Compuserve or Prodigy, Cyber Patrol    10           is present.  So it's a large subscriber base and there are,    11           there are a variety of parental control software products    12           that are out there.  What we are suggesting is they are    13           known, they're known to the plaintiffs in this courtroom.    14                    JUDGE SLOVITER:  But the parental control software    15           doesn't provide a defense to the content provider, does it?    16                    MR. BARON:  I believe it, not by itself because it    17           doesn't work by itself because of delays and because of the    18           inefficiencies in relying on just sort of an ad hoc matter    19           for them to pick up sites, as we've got abundant evidence.     20                    But what the -- the act puts the burden, Congress    21           put the burden on those that would put inappropriate material    22           for children up in cyberspace.  And we should let that burden    23           stay where it is and make those individuals do something.    24                    And what the -- we have suggested is that en route    25           to the widespread availability of a tagging scheme which, as                                                                                               174     1           Dr. Olsen said, take four hours for Netscape to change their     2           proxy server to get 80 percent of the market and those kind     3           of actions, en route to that there are actions that the     4           providers can take today.     5                    JUDGE DALZELL:  Wait a minute, to beat a live      6           horse--     7                    (Laughter.)     8                    JUDGE DALZELL:  -- Compuserve has used available     9           options and they're being reviewed, investigated by the FBI.     10           It's not over.    11                    MR. BARON:  I just will not accept that as a good    12           example because of the particular circumstances of the    13           referral being potentially on obscenity and we've cleared it    14           up in a letter.    15                    JUDGE DALZELL:  Even though the April 29 letter    16           never mentions it?    17                    MR. BARON:  Your Honor, well, the prior colloquy    18           would establish.    19                    JUDGE DALZELL:  No, we have to be -- this is deadly    20           serious to Compuserve, you know, deadly serious.    21                    MR. BARON:  And I would suggest that --    22                    JUDGE DALZELL:  And that's why a preliminary    23           injunction, you know, we have to do these things to get at    24           this now because it's having effects now.  If we had any    25           doubt about it, we just read the Columbus Dispatch of the                                                                                               175     1           last two days, right?     2                    MR. BARON:  Well, your Honor, the --there are     3           existing laws on the books about obscenity that are being     4           flouted by individuals, not just in cyberspace, but I mean     5           the fact is that there's a lot of stuff that would meet the     6           obscenity statutes independent of the passage of this act.     7                    JUDGE DALZELL:  Of course, and nobody is arguing     8           about that here.     9                    MR. BARON:  And the individuals are putting it up in    10           cyberspace and, you know, they may or may not be prosecuted.     11           Not everybody who drives over 55 miles an hour gets a ticket.    12                    JUDGE SLOVITER:  Thank heavens.    13                    JUDGE DALZELL:  Right.    14                    (Laughter.)    15                    JUDGE DALZELL:  All I can tell you, Mr. Baron, is    16           when your colleague, Mr. Moore, wrote to Mr. Truman on April    17           29, 1996, the only statute he cited was to CDA, the only one.    18                    MR. BARON:  But -- but, your Honors, as a matter of    19           law the Communications Decency Act did amend obscenity    20           provisions and other provisions that are now part of this    21           litigation.  And so I mean it could be fairly read as that.    22                    JUDGE DALZELL:  So maybe in the Communications Act.    23                    MR. BARON:  Well, it could be read as --    24                    JUDGE SLOVITER:  At the risk of incurring Judge    25           Dalzell's forever anger, let me get you to another point off                                                                                               176     1           of the Compuserve.  And that is you have in your brief, you     2           say in your brief, you make the argument that chat rooms     3           because that -- go back to my -- and other four that contain     4           indecent material could be segregated to adult areas by -- of     5           cyberspace, I don't understand that argument.  Would you     6           explain?  Is that what you meant when you said in our brief     7           we raise some others?  I don't understand --     8                    MR. BARON:  Well, there's --     9                    JUDGE SLOVITER:  What testimony you're relying on    10           for that and what it would do.    11                    MR. BARON:  There -- there are other actions that    12           could be taken --    13                    JUDGE SLOVITER:  But you mentioned that one.  Where    14           does that appear in the testimony?    15                    MR. BARON:  The -- the stipulation of the parties    16           and Dr. Olsen's declaration talks about various other    17           applications that you could have limited participation areas    18           or forums whereby you have a known list of people who have a    19           part of that cyberspace forum.  It's a limited application.     20           But I'm not suggesting --    21                    JUDGE SLOVITER:  Well, wait a minute, would it need    22           to have a gatekeeper, a live gatekeeper in order -- you know,    23           in order to -- somebody -- is that what you mean?  I guess    24           I'm trying to find out what you mean by this.    25                    MR. BARON:  It certainly could have a live                                                                                               177     1           gatekeeper who allows access into a forum depending on     2           whether one is an adult.  You wouldn't have to have a live     3           gatekeeper, you could set up something else.      4                    JUDGE SLOVITER:  Now, how do they find out if one is     5           an adult?     6                    MR. BARON:  Through either supplying credit card or     7           virtual card over the Net or other means by which --     8                    JUDGE SLOVITER:  But suppose it's not commercial so     9           you wouldn't have a credit card?  I'm just trying, you know,    10           it's vague, I'm trying to put it all together.    11                    MR. BARON:  There are a number --    12                    JUDGE SLOVITER:  I'd like to sustain this but give    13           me arguments based on your record.  Go ahead.    14                    MR. BARON:  Well, there are a num-- number of forms.     15           We have set out in the stipulation so the parties, beginning    16           that they were moderated forums but there's also limited    17           participation forums on list serves or one can set out news    18           groups that are of limited participation or in chat rooms    19           that allow for only adults to be admitted by a gatekeeper or    20           otherwise.  But --    21                    JUDGE SLOVITER:  Okay, you mean a gatekeeper?    22                    MR. BARON:  Yeah.    23                    JUDGE SLOVITER:  Now, you also suggest that --    24                    MR. BARON:  I'm not suggesting that's a widespread    25           solution to all the problems in cyberspace, it's a secondary                                                                                               178     1           matter that can be taken care of in certain applications.     2                    JUDGE SLOVITER:  You also suggest that where a proxy     3           server would be a vehicle that would operate with the     4           tagging.  What is the current technology that would enable a     5           trusted proxy to obtain the relevant age information and     6           whose testimony do you rely on?     7                    MR. BARON:  Well, Dr. Olsen testified about the     8           ability to set up proxy servers to receive tags and also to     9           have access codes or hash codes, other type of methods could    10           be set up on particular Web sites to allow for adults coming    11           in.    12                    JUDGE SLOVITER:  Right, but with all due respect to    13           Dr. Olsen, this is all his hypothetical --  I mean he was, he    14           was really talking as a hypothetical analyst, this could    15           happen and this could happen and the other could happen, is    16           that not correct?    17                    MR. BARON:  Yes.     18                    JUDGE SLOVITER:  And there's no evidence that it's    19           currently feasible and happening, is there?    20                    MR. BARON:  Uhm --    21                    JUDGE SLOVITER:  If there is I'd like to know where    22           it is.    23                    MR. BARON:  Right.  No, there isn't evidence that    24           these plaintiffs have put these particular measures into    25           effect, but the evidence suggests that it would be easy to do                                                                                               179     1           so and they could avail themselves of the 223(E)(5)(A)     2           provisions for doing so.     3                    Obviously it may not be available in all cases.      4           That's why we have emphasized the tagging and registration     5           scheme as a way en route to a better solution which is     6           feasible under the whatever available technology there is to,     7           as the way by which content providers can avail themselves of     8           a remedy.     9                    I'm not sure how much --    10                    JUDGE SLOVITER:  And the tagging scheme is something    11           that Dr. Olsen thought of after you hired him as an expert as    12           I think the questions brought out when he testified?    13                    MR. BARON:  He certainly amplified on a tagging    14           scheme which was suggested itself by the legislative history    15           which suggested content selection standards and other    16           available measures would be an affirmative defense.    17                    So we weren't inventing something out of whole    18           cloth, we are hooked to the conference report that suggests    19           that measures which plaintiffs here know very much about,    20           given that they represent some of the people that are behind    21           the PICs standard, can effectuate.    22                    JUDGE DALZELL:  But just in terms of the defense, if    23           Bianca's Smut Shack were to tag itself minus L-18, that    24           doesn't advance the ball one bit, does it, until the software    25           is out there?                                                                                               180     1                    MR. BARON:  Well, Bianca's Cage actually does     2           represent affirmative actions which have been taken by a     3           content provider to provide their IP address, their computer     4           address in cyberspace to the unknowns for blocking purposes.      5           And that, I would submit, is an action which comes within     6           what we suggested at Page 62 of our brief as well as in Mr.     7           Keeney's letter as something that an affirmative action that     8           someone has done.     9                    Now, it would have to be evaluated.    10                    JUDGE DALZELL:  But it has to be effective, doesn't    11           it?  You have to, in order to avail yourself of the defense,    12           it has to be effective, doesn't it?    13                    MR. BARON:  Well, she has given notice in some sense    14           to the world that -- that that page exists.  And we are not    15           suggesting that the burden is great with respect to    16           individuals.  There are --    17                    JUDGE SLOVITER:  But how does that keep under 18's    18           from accessing it?    19                    MR. BARON:  Because the--    20                    JUDGE DALZELL:  Yes, that's exactly what I'm getting    21           at.    22                    MR. BARON:  Because it notify-- because it does    23           provide for some notification where she hasn't done -- she    24           hasn't availed herself of all the kinds of steps that we set    25           forth in both the letter and our brief, but the fact is that                                                                                               181     1           there is some notification to the world of the blocking     2           software that's out there today so as it can be effectively     3           blocked from sectors of -- of -- that are either subscribed     4           to various ISP's or on-line services.     5                    It doesn't -- I'm not going to represent --     6                    JUDGE SLOVITER:  How do you block -- yeah --     7                    MR. BARON:  -- that it's blocked for everybody.     8                    JUDGE SLOVITER:  But how do you block for Judge     9           Dalzell's ten year old and at the same time let Judge Dalzell    10           see it, if he wants to?    11                    MR. BARON:  The parents and would be availing    12           themselves of the turning on or off the software or the    13           browser that existed to either block or not block that site.     14           But they wouldn't even know.  What if, just imagine, as I've    15           said, we are talking about a vast realm here, it's impressed    16           all the different applications, the Internet.  This is a    17           complex area where it's not just one size fits all, there are    18           lots of applications.  The fact is that through the    19           affirmative actions that content providers could take, they    20           can make a difference.  And maybe they can't make as    21           effective a difference today as if I were back here in July    22           with the PICs standard having been adopted by Netscape and    23           Microsoft.    24                    I assure you that if I were here in July and that--    25                    JUDGE SLOVITER:  You may be, you know, one way or                                                                                               182     1           the other for a permanent injunction.  You know, we're going     2           to -- whatever happens they'll ask for a permanent     3           injunction, I guess.     4                    MR. BARON:  As long as they employ me at the     5           Department of Justice and I'm still on the case, I'll be back     6           here.  The fact is I may be back here --     7                    (Laughter.)     8                    MR. BARON:  -- and arguing that there isn't a more     9           effective solution than what we argued at the preliminary    10           injunction hearing, but that's not to say that there isn't    11           something that content providers can do.    12                    And again the irony is that it would be plaintiffs--    13                    JUDGE SLOVITER:  But it's not a negligence suit.  I    14           think what Judge Dal-- what's been bothering, you know, Judge    15           Dalzell is, one, we're not sure that the U.S. Attorney's    16           Office in all of the districts is as reasonable as you and    17           Mr. Coppolino have been in the course of this litigation.    18                    MR. BARON:  Well, I -- your Honor, it is not just --    19                    JUDGE SLOVITER:  And there isn't --    20                    MR. BARON:  -- Mr. Coppolino and I, it is Mr. Keeney    21           who is the acting Assistant Attorney General for all the    22           District Courts in the United States --    23                    JUDGE SLOVITER:  Well --    24                    MR. BARON:  -- for all U.S. Attorneys making this    25           representation.                                                                                               183     1                    JUDGE DALZELL:  And Mr. Lord.     2                    MR. BARON:  Yes.  And individual cases may be     3           investigated under their facts and circumstances.  Now,     4           obviously not under the stipulation for this --     5                    JUDGE SLOVITER:  Well, investigation is not a     6           prosecution, so I mean, you know, that I'm -- that troubles     7           me a little less, frankly, than, you know, anybody, the FBI     8           can investigate anybody and, you know, I'm not concerned     9           about that although there might be a chill involved in that    10           as well.     11                    Go ahead, Mr. Baron.    12                     MR. BARON:  Well, I would hope not because it's an    13           isolated case and I'd hope that there wouldn't be.  And we    14           are adhering to the stipulation that the Court entered.    15                    JUDGE SLOVITER:  We don't -- we don't deny that,    16           yeah.  Or I don't think the plaintiffs deny that, I don't    17           know.  Go ahead.    18                    MR. BARON:  I would submit to your Honors that we    19           are proposing simple solutions.  What plaintiffs are    20           proposing are very complex ones.  We have pointed out--    21                    JUDGE SLOVITER:  No, the plaintiff wants to declare    22           the statute unconstitutional, period.     23                    MR. BARON:  But the --    24                    JUDGE SLOVITER:  And that's not very complex, when    25           you think about it.                                                                                               184     1                    MR. BARON:  -- solution --     2                    (Laughter.)     3                    MR. BARON:  The solution for -- for the problem     4           represented that Congress was addressing is not to have     5           parents absorb the costs and absorb the complexity of going     6           out to third-party labeling schemes in the hope of catching       7           particular sites when there is simple actions that content     8           providers can take.  That's the essence of our case.  We     9           believe the affirmative defenses do work, that we have    10           suggested a wide array of them, both for the future as well    11           as for the present, we believe that those defense -- the    12           actions that content providers can take certainly represent    13           more effective deterrent than relying on Surfwatch alone.    14                    And, for that reason, I'd submit that the    15           affirmative defense provisions should be upheld and the CDA    16           should be upheld.    17                    JUDGE DALZELL:  I don't know whether you or Mr.    18           Coppolino are dealing with the question of the simply talking    19           about defenses.  In your brief at Page 37, Footnote 5 and the    20           text associated with it, you heap ashes on Ms. Warren's    21           concern about a prosecution and you ridicule her statement    22           that, quote, "All that is needed is for some person or group    23           of people in some community in the United States to have a    24           problem with my existence on line and to come to the Justice    25           Department with a complaint," close quote, as though that's                                                                                               185     1           not depicting reality, that she shouldn't worry about that.     2                    Of course, isn't that exactly what happened with     3           Compuserve?     4                    MR. BARON:  Oh, I --     5                    JUDGE DALZELL:  A group went to the Justice     6           Department with a complaint?     7                    MR. BARON:  There may be complaints, your Honor,     8           that is not a reason for striking down a statute and a facial     9           challenge.  These cases have to be -- there is -- there are    10           powerful reasons to let the CDA be upheld and let the    11           marketplace and its creative genius as represented by many of    12           the plaintiffs and the organizations that are here in the    13           court to make -- to ensure that there are measures that    14           individuals can take.    15                    And I submit that the briefing in this case is going    16           to look a lot different six months or a year or two years    17           from now because there will be, that if the CDA were upheld,    18           that at least for on a preliminary basis subject to further    19           proceedings, there will be a number of measures which I'm    20           sure the plaintiff's community will come up with as well as,    21           you know, others to ensure  that individuals can screen or    22           block inappropriate material.     23                    JUDGE DALZELL:  But doesn't the record show --    24           doesn't the record show that they don't need a CDA for this,    25           that the market forces are so powerful, they exist out there                                                                                               186     1           without a CDA.  Because parents like me and -- are worried     2           about their ten year olds and twelve year olds and America On     3           Line and Compuserve and all these other folks better have an     4           answer soon or they're not going to have my business, or     5           people like me.     6                    So that they don't need a CDA to have that goad to     7           come up with that technology, do they?     8                    MR. BARON:  I think the --     9                    JUDGE DALZELL:  I mean that's the record that's been    10           developed here.    11                    MR. BARON:  It's -- and there -- we are, the two    12           sides are not clashing completely on the issue of the -- the    13           facts that there are parental controls and certainly we are    14           relying in part that they do exist out there.  But we have    15           also shown in the testimony Mr. Coppolino alluded to that    16           through cross-examination of Ms. Duvall through Mr. Schmidt's    17           testimony and through Dr. Olsen that the site, that the --    18           that the third-party software mechanisms just can't keep up.     19           And there are -- there -- it's a flawed remedy and there is a    20           tremendous amount of inappropriate material that will seep    21           through.  And I think --    22                    JUDGE SLOVITER:  But you know --     23                    MR. BARON:  -- otherwise Congress is throwing up its    24           hands.    25                    JUDGE SLOVITER:  Well --                                                                                               187     1                    MR. BARON:  And it can't do anything.  I mean you     2           heard here an unwillingness on the part of plaintiff's     3           counsel to say that there was any effective legislation which     4           they would substitute for the CDA.     5                    JUDGE SLOVITER:  I wouldn't expect them to come out,     6           I wouldn't expect the American Civil Liberties Union, knowing     7           its history, to come up with something that required self-     8           tagging or to acquire some.  I mean it's just that's an     9           unrealistic position.    10                    But you knock their argument that we can use    11           parental controls on the ground well, it's really, and not    12           really effective and they won't be effective.  And yet I'll    13           ask you the same question that I asked Mr. Coppolino, on the    14           other hand you're asking us to sustain the statute based on    15           defenses that are not even in being, much less I mean where    16           the technology is not even in being much less not effective.     17           And we won't know whether it could be effective until it's    18           tried and somebody doesn't come up and say to us: well, it    19           isn't really going to work because some clever 16 year old    20           knows how to get around it anyway.    21                    Until it works we don't know how it -- until it    22           exists, it isn't working  and until it works, we don't know    23           how well it will work.    24                    MR. BARON:  WEll, I --    25                    JUDGE SLOVITER:  I mean tell me what's wrong in that                                                                                               188     1           problem statement of your position?     2                    MR. BARON:  You have to accept that on     3           representations going forth from defendants that there are     4           measures which would constitute, absent extraordinary     5           circumstances, substantial evidence of an affirmative defense     6           today.  Mr. Keeney's letter says that as well as our brief.     7                    If you accept that proposition, then in as applied     8           challenges it will -- the law will develop.  And it will also     9           develop that in short -- in very short order there will be an    10           extremely effective solution as we suggested and as    11           plaintiffs have alluded to.  So --    12                    JUDGE SLOVITER:  I don't want to --    13                    JUDGE DALZELL:  By the way -- by the way, for future    14           reference in the event this act would be upheld and I'm    15           instructing a jury as to burden of proof, who has the burden    16           of proof as to these defenses, affirmative defenses, what's    17           your position?    18                    MR. BARON:  The Government always has, absent a    19           statute, well, let me start again.  The Government has the    20           ultimate burden of proof and -- but one would expect that a    21           plaintiff -- I'm sorry, that a defendant in a criminal    22           context would have to make some sort of showing that there is    23           an affirmative defense --    24                    JUDGE DALZELL:  Well, they'd make a showing but then    25           the burden of proof --                                                                                               189     1                    MR. BARON:  -- going forward.     2                    JUDGE DALZELL:  -- would go back to you to prove?     3                    MR. BARON:  Yes.     4                    JUDGE DALZELL:  That it was not --     5                    MR. BARON:  Yes, unless there's unusual     6           circumstances, statutory or otherwise, that would be the     7           usual formulation.     8                    I have no further questions -- or no further --     9                    (Laughter.)    10                    MR. BARON:  -- remarks to make, subject to your    11           further questions.    12                    JUDGE SLOVITER:  Well, I will say, as I always do in    13           the Court of Appeals, that questions do not indicate that the    14           panel has reached any conclusion at all and the fact that we    15           have asked both you and your colleague, Mr. Coppolino,    16           pointed questions and that you have answered very well    17           doesn't mean really -- you know, we just ate lunch, we didn't    18           confer.    19                    (Laughter.)    20                    JUDGE SLOVITER:  Thank you.    21                    MR. BARON:  All right, thank you.    22                    MR. HANSEN:  Your Honors, might I ask that we take a    23           very brief recess between at this point so that Mr. Ennis and    24           I can confer to determine whether we feel we need rebuttal    25           argument and, if so --                                                                                               190     1                    JUDGE SLOVITER:  All right, especially if you come     2           back and you tell us you don't need rebuttal argument, five     3           minutes.     4                    MR. HANSEN:  Well, at least to make it more     5           efficient.     6                    JUDGE SLOVITER:  Okay.     7                    MR. HANSEN:  Thank you.      8                    JUDGE SLOVITER:  Is that all right?  No, five,     9           let's, I mean you can do that in five minutes, can't you?    10                    MR. HANSEN:  Absolutely.     11                    JUDGE SLOVITER:  Yeah, cause we...    12                    (Court in recess; 2:46 to 2:55 o'clock p.m.) Back to Hearing Transcripts index Back to Citizens Internet Empowerment Coalition Page WT02-B05-86IA095-001027-B014-154http://www.cdt.org:80/ciec/transcripts/May_10_Plaintiffs_add.html 205.177.10.31 19970215012911 text/html 12823HTTP/1.0 200 OKDate: Sat, 15 Feb 1997 01:27:49 GMTServer: Apache/1.1.1Content-type: text/html Plaintiff's Additional Remarks Plaintiff's Additional Remarks May 10, 1996     13                    MR. HANSEN:  Well, your Honor, I'm sorry, we weren't    14           able to restrain ourselves completely from any rebuttal    15           argument, but I think we've managed to make it quite -- both    16           Mr. Ennis and I will be quite brief.    17                    JUDGE SLOVITER:  How brief?    18                    MR. HANSEN:  I will take less than -- if I got no    19           questions I would use less than five minutes.    20                    JUDGE DALZELL:  Okay.    21                    MR. HANSEN:  If I get questions, I can't --    22                    JUDGE SLOVITER:  You don't want equality?     23                    MR. HANSEN:  Certainly I can't speak, nor can I    24           speak for Mr. Ennis as to how much time he's going to need.    25                    I'd like to pick up on the discussion that the Court                                                                                               191     1           was having with Mr. Baron at the end in the nature of the     2           changes in technology that may or may not occur over the next     3           six months.  And I'd like to talk about how even if     4           technology does in fact change over the next six months and     5           even if we are back at a -- at the final injunction stage six     6           months from now and PICs has come into place or PICs hasn't     7           come into place, I think there are still two things that are     8           enormously troubling about this statute and which I think the     9           Court must necessarily wrestle with.    10                    The first is the nature of the speech that is    11           criminalized under this statute.  And if we had any doubt at    12           all about the intent of Congress to reach valuable speech    13           under this act, all we have to do is look at the statute.  At    14           three separate occasions in the statute Congress reached out    15           to say we intend the statute to apply to libraries and we    16           intend the statute to apply to institutions of higher    17           education.    18                    Congress, I think, was making it unmistakably clear    19           that they intended to reach out and criminalize --    20                    JUDGE SLOVITER:  Is that in 223?    21                    MR. HANSEN:  It's at three separate occasions in the    22           statute, your Honor.    23                    JUDGE SLOVITER:  Yeah, but it's a big statute, do    24           you mean the two sections that --    25                    MR. HANSEN:  Yes.                                                                                               192     1                    JUDGE SLOVITER:  --  you are challenging?     2                    MR. HANSEN:  Yes, yes, it is in the sections we're     3           challenging.  The first place it appears is in the 223(F) in     4           the definitional section.  You know, 223(H) in the     5           definitional section where it talks about the term "library"     6           means library -- means --     7                    (Laughter.     8                    MR. HANSEN:  -- means library is defined in another     9           statute.  Earlier in -- and that's H.  Earlier in F there is    10           a preemption clause which says "No state or local government    11           may impose liability for commercial activities or actions by    12           commercial entities, non-profit libraries or institutions of    13           higher education that are different.  And then finally later    14           there's another definition section defining interactive    15           computer device which specifically also includes libraries    16           and institutions of higher education.    17                    Now, in addition to that, the Government's     18           proposal--    19                    JUDGE SLOVITER:  Excuse me.    20                    MR. HANSEN:  Yes.    21                    JUDGE SLOVITER:  It says that but where does it-- I    22           just want to know for my own benefit because we finally got    23           it, you know, through the computer, I think.  Because up    24           until now it's been a relatively new statute.    25                    Where is the prior reference in those two sections                                                                                               193     1           to institutions of higher education and library?     2                    MR. HANSEN:  Well, the -- the term interactive     3           computer device is defined to include interactive computer     4           devices used by libraries and institutions of higher     5           education.     6                    JUDGE SLOVITER:  I see.     7                    MR. HANSEN:  So the prior -- the cross-reference--     8                    JUDGE SLOVITER:  That refers to A.     9                    MR. HANSEN:  That's -- you're correct.    10                    JUDGE SLOVITER:  That would then refer to Subsection    11           A where they use interactive computer things.  D?    12                    JUDGE DALZELL:  D.    13                    JUDGE SLOVITER:  Okay.      14                    MR. HANSEN:  D, right, it refers to Subsection D,    15           that's right.    16                    JUDGE SLOVITER:  Go ahead.    17                    MR. HANSEN:  The second and final point I'd like to    18           make concerning the nature of the speech here is that the    19           Government's ultimate proposal is that technology will    20           develop to appoint where they think it will be possible for    21           speakers to label themselves as indecent speakers or not as    22           indecent speakers.    23                    They think it will become possible at a time when    24           the Government can compel people to issue a label before they    25           speak describing their speech as indecent or not indecent.                                                                                               194     1                    Even if that is to come to pass, the notion that the     2           Government can impose upon all of us, upon the millions of     3           people who use the Internet in the context of the Web, in the     4           context of the news groups and chat rooms, the requirement     5           that before we speak we label our speech as decent or     6           indecent, in our view, represents a serious constitutional     7           problem, one that is sufficient to justify this Court in     8           declaring this statute unconstitutional, even in the event     9           the technology comes about as the Government predicts.    10                    Thank you, your Honors.    11                    JUDGE DALZELL:  Thank you, Mr. Hansen.      12                    MR. ENNIS:  I'd like to make three brief points,    13           your Honors.  The first is, is that with respect to news    14           groups, chat rooms and lists or mail exploders, everyone    15           agrees, including the Government's expert, that there is no    16           technology available now, there is none in the pipeline,    17           there is not going to be any here in July that makes it    18           possible to speak in those forums by getting a credit card,    19           an adult ID number, anything like that.  And I simply refer t    20           he Court to our proposed findings of fact, 862, 883, 884,    21           894, and 901 where that evidence is summarized.    22                    Second, with respect to tagging, I think it's    23           important to recall that the Government admitted here tagging    24           is not a defense today because the browsers are not set to    25           read those signals today.  But even if today all the browsers                                                                                               195     1           in the world were in place and set to read those tags, it's     2           still not a defense.  At most, it's substantial evidence,     3           it's not a defense.  It's not a truly safe harbor.  So we're     4           not going to be in any different position in July from the     5           position we're in right now.     6                    Third, I think it would be strange indeed for this     7           court to construe this statute to make tagging a defense     8           because, as Mr. Hansen pointed out, any requirement that     9           speakers self-label their own speech as a condition of    10           speaking would violate the doctrine against compelled speech    11           which was Meese v. King, Wooley v. Maynard, the Riley case.     12           Attaching a pejorative label to your own speech is something    13           the First Amendment forbids the Government to require you to    14           do.    15                    And I think it's also not even necessary to reach    16           that difficult constitutional question because as the NTEU    17           case makes clear, you should never construe a statute in a    18           way that would simply create a new First Amendment problem    19           which requiring speaker self-tagging would do.    20                    Furthermore, there's no reason to construe this    21           statute that way because there's no reason to believe    22           Congress had any intent whatsoever to require speaker self-    23           labeling or tagging.    24                    In fact, if you look at the Communications Decency    25           Act, in the very next section of the same act passed by the                                                                                               196     1           same Congress on the same day, Congress specifically rejected     2           speaker labeling of indecent or sexual speech by broadcast     3           speakers, the medium that is the most amenable to     4           Governmental regulation, precisely because Congress had     5           serious concern whether they could constitutionally require     6           broadcast speakers to self-label their own speech.     7                    It's incredible in that context to think this     8           Congress intended speaker self-labeling in the Internet     9           context.    10                    Thank you very much.    11                    (Discussion off the record.)    12                    JUDGE SLOVITER:  All right, thank you all very much.     13           We will close the -- adjourn the hearing and you will hear    14           from us.  The press seems to think it knows when we will    15           decide this case, to my amazement.  It makes that -- those    16           hypothetical, well, it makes that judgment without any    17           communication with us and you will hear.  We know that there    18           are some motions pending, but you will hear from us on all    19           those matters in due course.      20                    Thank you very much.    21                    I want to thank counsel very much.  I find that    22           having come to the District Court level for this type of --    23           counsel has been exceedingly cooperative, all counsel, and    24           very helpful throughout and I do thank you all.    25                    And you can show this part of the transcript to your                                                                                               197     1           superiors.      2                    (Laughter.)     3                    COUNSEL:  Thank you, your Honor.     4                    (Court adjourned at 3:05 o'clock p.m.)     5                                       * * * Back to Hearing Transcripts index Back to Citizens Internet Empowerment Coalition Page WT02-B05-87IA095-001027-B014-210http://www.cdt.org:80/ciec/transcripts/April_15_Olsen.html 205.177.10.31 19970215012933 text/html 175728HTTP/1.0 200 OKDate: Sat, 15 Feb 1997 01:28:03 GMTServer: Apache/1.1.1Content-type: text/html Testimony of Daniel Olsen Testimony of Dr. Daniel Olsen, Brigham Young University April 15, 1996                               IN THE UNITED STATES DISTRICT COURT                            FOR THE EASTERN DISTRICT OF PENNSYLVANIA                                             - - -                 AMERICAN CIVIL LIBERTIES      :  CIVIL ACTION NO. 96-963-M                 UNION, et al                  :                                   Plaintiffs  :                                               :                             v.                :  Philadelphia, Pennsylvania                                               :  April 15, 1996                 JANET RENO, in her official   :  9:31 o'clock a.m.                   capacity as ATTORNEY GENERAL  :                 OF THE UNITED STATES,         :                                   Defendant   :                 . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .                 AMERICAN LIBRARY ASSOCIATION, :  CIVIL ACTION NO. 96-1458                 et al                         :                                    Plaintiffs :                                               :                               v.              :  Philadelphia, Pennsylvania                                               :  April 15, 1996                 DEPARTMENT OF JUSTICE, et al  :  9:31 o'clock a.m.                                    Defendants :                 . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .                                        HEARING BEFORE:                               THE HONORABLE DOLORES K. SLOVITER,                          CHIEF JUDGE, UNITED STATES COURT OF APPEALS                                     FOR THE THIRD CIRCUIT                               THE HONORABLE RONALD L. BUCKWALTER                                 THE HONORABLE STEWART DALZELL                                  UNITED STATES DISTRICT JUDGES                                             - - -                 APPEARANCES:                 For the Plaintiffs:  CHRISTOPHER A. HANSEN, ESQUIRE                                      MARJORIE HEINS, ESQUIRE                                      ANN BEESON, ESQUIRE                                      American Civil Liberties Union                                      132 West 43rd Street                                      New York, NY  10036                                             -and-                                      STEFAN PRESSER, ESQUIRE                                      American Civil Liberties Union                                      123 S. 9th Street, Suite 701                                      Philadelphia, PA  19107                                                                             2                 APPEARANCES:  (Continued)                 For the ALA          BRUCE J. ENNIS, JR., ESQUIRE                 Plaintiffs:          ANN M. KAPPLER, ESQUIRE                                      JOHN B. MORRIS, JR., ESQUIRE                                      Jenner and Block                                      601 13th Street, N.W.                                      Washington, DC  20005                                             -and-                                      MICHAEL TRAYNOR, ESQUIRE                                      Cooley Goddard Castro Huddleson & Tatum                                      One Maritime Plaza, 20th Floor                                      San Francisco, CA  94111-3580                 For the Defendant:   ANTHONY J. COPPOLINO, ESQUIRE                                      PATRICIA RUSSOTTO, ESQUIRE                                      JASON R. BARON, ESQUIRE                                      THEODORE C. HIRT, ESQUIRE                                      MARY KUSTEL, ESQUIRE                                      CRAIG M. BLACKWELL, ESQUIRE                                      Department of Justice                                      Federal Programs Branch                                      901 E. Street, N.W., Room 912                                      Washington, DC  20530                                             -and-                                      MARK KMETZ, ESQUIRE                                      U.S. Attorney's Office                                      615 Chestnut Street, Suite 1250                                      Philadelphia, PA  19106                                             - - -                 Also Present:         MICHAEL KUNZ                                       Clerk of the Court for the                                       Eastern District of Pennsylvania                                             - - -                 Deputy Clerks:        Thomas Clewley                                       Matthew J. Higgins                 Audio Operator:       Andrea L. Mack                 Transcribed by:       Geraldine C. Laws                                       Grace Williams                                       Tracey Williams                                       Laws Transcription Service                 (Proceedings recorded by electronic sound recording;                 transcript provided by computer-aided transcription service.)                                                                             3     1                    (The following occurred in open court at 9:31     2           o'clock a.m.:)     3                    CLERK OF THE COURT KUNZ:  Oyez, oyez, oyez, all     4           persons having any matter to present before the Honorable     5           Dolores K. Sloviter, Chief Judge for the United States Court     6           of Appeals for the Third Circuit; the Honorable Ronald L.     7           Buckwalter and the Honorable Stewart Dalzell, Judges for the     8           United States District Court for the Eastern District of     9           Pennsylvania; may at present appear and they shall be heard.     10           God save the United States and this Honorable Court.  Court    11           is now in session, please be seated.    12                    JUDGE DALZELL:  Good morning, everyone.    13                    ALL COUNSEL:  Good morning.    14                    JUDGE SLOVITER:  Good morning.  Let's see, we're...    15           I think we have Mr. Olsen on the stand?    16                    JUDGE DALZELL:  Mr. Olsen?  Yes.    17                    JUDGE SLOVITER:  And he has been previously sworn.    18                    (Pause.)    19                    MR. BARON:  Good morning, your Honors, Jason R.    20           Baron for the Justice Department.    21                    DANIEL OLSEN, Defendants' Witness, Previously Sworn,    22           Resumed.    23                                REDIRECT EXAMINATION    24           BY MR. BARON:      25           Q   Good morning, Dr. Olsen.                                                                             4     1           A   Good morning.     2           Q   You will recall that on Friday Mr. Ennis started off by     3           asking you a series of questions about your technical     4           expertise as it relates to the issues involved in this case,     5           do you recall that?     6           A   Yes, I do.     7           Q   You received your PhD in 1981 from the University of     8           Pennsylvania right here in Philadelphia, correct?     9           A   That is correct.    10           Q   And after more than ten years at Brigham Young University    11           you have recently been appointed to be director of the Human    12           Computer Interaction Institute at Carnegie-Mellon University,    13           correct?       14           A   That is correct.    15           Q   What was your specific background and expertise that has    16           led to this recent appointment?    17           A   Carnegie-Mellon has one of the foremost computer science    18           departments in the world, they saw a need to address the    19           needs of people in using computers.  I have a long background    20           of software expertise and how people use computers.    21           Q   Now, with respect to your general expertise regarding    22           technical matters involving the Internet let me first ask,    23           have you ever created a new application that required    24           software to communicate over the Internet?    25           A   Yes.  Several years ago we were interested in what are                                                                             5     1           called multi-user interfaces, this is where multiple people     2           interact simultaneously across the Internet.  To make that     3           work we had to develop a new protocol for communication     4           between those two applications.     5           Q   Have you created software which integrates with the     6           Worldwide Web?     7           A   Yes.  I believe that there are two papers listed in my     8           declaration where what we were interested in doing is     9           enhancing the interactivity of the Worldwide Web.  It is    10           currently somewhat restricted in what interactively you can    11           do.  So, what we needed to do is take our user interfaces and    12           be able to download them via the Web and have them    13           automatically run on the user's machine, so that we could    14           enhance that ability.  So, we built that software and    15           integrated it with existing Web technology, yes.    16           Q   Have you also created software that automates E-mail?    17           A   Yes.  As part of that we were very interested in all of    18           the various other Internet activities that we could integrate    19           our software with.  One of the first ones we used was being    20           able to from the user interface automatically generate E-mail    21           of various kinds.    22           Q   Would it be fair to say that in creating all of this    23           software one needs a working familiarity with the standards    24           and protocols used over the Internet?    25           A   Yes.  I and my graduate students spent several months                                                                             6     1           studying those protocols and deciding how we could use them     2           in -- as part of our software and what we would have to put     3           in our software to be able to perform the same functions over     4           the Internet.     5           Q   Now, let's turn to the specific areas Mr. Ennis touched     6           on regarding your expertise.  First, based on your knowledge     7           of Surfwatch and other blocking software programs, and your     8           general knowledge and expertise in the field of computer     9           science, do you believe you are able to form an expert    10           opinion on how Surfwatch purports to function?    11           A   Yes.    12           Q   Would you please tell the Court what you believe the    13           level of expertise would be to form such an expert opinion?    14           A   My opinion is based on two principles; one is called    15           computational complexity, that is, how difficult    16           computationally the problem is and what the nature of that    17           problem is; and the other is general data base and    18           communication technology.    19           Q   Would your answer be the same for what technical    20           expertise is necessary to evaluate parental-control software    21           utilized by America Online?    22           A   Yes.    23           Q   The third area Mr. Ennis mentioned was with respect to    24           direct or third-party verification of credit cards, do you    25           recall that?                                                                             7     1           A   Yes, I do.     2           Q   Dr. Olsen, are you familiar with the computer mechanisms     3           that exist to process a transaction through Mastercard over     4           the telephone?     5           A   Yes, we did look in a particular instance with IC verify,     6           we did look at exactly what a program, say, for example, a     7           CGI program from a Web Browser would have to do in order --     8           Q   Excuse me, you may need to explain CGI.     9           A   CGI is the common gateway interface.  One of the    10           particularly nice features of the Worldwide Web and    11           particularly HTTP is that when a user makes a request for a    12           file or a named item the Web server, that is, on the content    13           provider's side does not necessarily have to have a file by    14           that name.  What they can do is they can run a program, a CGI    15           program, which will go out and compute a file of the type    16           that the user has requested, this leads to a very powerful    17           mechanism.    18           Q   Do you also have expertise in secured protocols that    19           would lend itself to issues involving third-party    20           verification over the Internet?    21           A   Yes.  One of the problems we had when we were downloading    22           user interface software is that in essence you were    23           downloading an executable program.  If you don't know who you    24           downloaded it from then you could download it from a stranger    25           who could then do damaging things to your system.  So, we                                                                             8     1           spent considerable time looking at existing technology for     2           how to protect ourselves there.  We are currently finishing a     3           Master's thesis that points out several holes in the formal     4           technology and ways in which those things could be     5           circumvented by individuals.     6                    JUDGE SLOVITER:  Did you -- I didn't hear, did you     7           say that you are getting a Master's --     8                    THE WITNESS:  No, I am supervising a Master's.     9                    JUDGE SLOVITER:  No, you were supervising.  I didn't    10           think -- I thought that was going backwards.  Your student is    11           getting a Master's degree?    12                    THE WITNESS:  That is correct.    13                    JUDGE DALZELL:  And you're supervising that thesis?    14                    THE WITNESS:  And I am supervising that, yes.    15           BY MR. BARON:      16           Q   You're the thesis advisor, as --    17           A   That is correct.    18           Q   Okay.  Mr. Ennis also brought up your knowledge of PICs;    19           have you read the PICs technical specifications on labels and    20           services found at the PICs Website?    21           A   Yes.    22           Q   Do you see anything, Dr. Olsen, in those specifications    23           that represent anything other than normal, traditional    24           computer science?    25           A   No, I don't see anything in that regard.  A label under                                                                             9     1           the PICs standard is essentially a record, this is a standard     2           concept in computing.  A -- sort of the threshold you would     3           set in a browser are simply a very simplistic numeric     4           mechanism for defining a class of records you want to     5           receive, we teach this at sophomore-level computer science.     6           Q   Dr. Olsen, do you believe you can form an expert opinion     7           on how PICs technology can be utilized based on your study of     8           the PICs materials?     9           A   Yes.    10           Q   Dr. Olsen, am I correct that your very own field of    11           research has contributed to the development of PICs    12           technology?    13           A   Yes.  One of the issues that PICs faced was when they    14           wanted to have lots of rating services, but the parents would    15           only have, say, one browser, how are the parents with their    16           one browser going to set the controls for several rating    17           services.  PICs has a very nice solution where they    18           distribute on the Web the information about what the controls    19           are, then the browser can automatically configure the user    20           interface to be able to set those controls.  There is a paper    21           listed in my curriculum vitae on language-based    22           specifications that actually pioneered that user-interface    23           technique.    24           Q   Dr. Olsen, the fifth and final area Mr. Ennis inquired    25           about concerning your expertise was with respect to issues                                                                            10     1           involving libraries, do you recall that?     2           A   Yes.     3           Q   Have you ever studied the costs involved in creating an     4           on-line digital library?     5           A   Yes.  The Family History Library in Salt Lake has about     6           20 million rolls of microfilm, currently the masters are     7           locked in a mountain in Little Cottonwood Canyon, this makes     8           them less accessible than people would like.  The people that     9           run that library have been working with us for several years    10           as to what it would take to bring those materials and bring    11           them on-line.  And we did some cost studies of what it would    12           take to scan them and what it would take to index them, we    13           spent several years working with them on that issue.    14           Q   Have you ever studied or done any work on electronic card    15           catalogues?    16           A   Yes.  Again, in our distributed user interfaces research    17           we were very interested in providing interactive access to    18           other repositories other than Websites.  So, we spent some    19           time working with the people at the BYU library,    20           understanding how the library electronically manages their    21           card catalogue.  We looked very carefully at the Mark    22           standard, which is the one that libraries use to communicate    23           with each other, essentially that is a property list, which    24           is a standard mechanism in computer science.  Yes, we did    25           look at that.                                                                            11     1           Q   Have you ever done anything with naming methods for     2           electronic library materials?     3           A   Yes.  Again, with the Family History Library, they have     4           the unique problem of wanting to link together genealogies of     5           -- essentially their goal is the world, if they could     6           accomplish it,  there are things about the way things are     7           named in the Worldwide Web that make that difficult.  Once     8           you have linked up a genealogy you would not like it to be     9           broken.  So, we spent some time developing new naming    10           technology for how to do that, so that once somebody decided    11           a person was related to a particular other person that link    12           would not easily be detached.  That approach is actually    13           outlined in the papers we delivered to the plaintiffs.    14           Q   One last question:  Have you ever written any software    15           code that would enable the posting of library materials?    16           A   Yes.  In the same project with the Family History    17           Library, they have the largest ideological data base that's    18           on-line in the world, they wanted to make -- so, they wanted    19           to know if it was technically feasible to put that on the    20           Worldwide Web.  I spent a couple of weeks, built the software    21           and demonstrated that it was; it's not available because of    22           copyright problems, but we demonstrated the technology.    23           Q   Let's turn to the substantive topics on which Mr. Ennis    24           and Mr. Hansen cross-examined you on Friday.  Dr. Olsen, you    25           were asked a number of questions about your Minus L18                                                                            12     1           proposal, could you succinctly explain to the Court what the     2           central points of that proposal represent?     3           A   Most of the proposal is a response to some assertions by     4           Mr. Bradner that it would be exceedingly difficult to -- for     5           content providers to label their materials, most of the     6           proposal is a counter-example.  It's a standard approach in     7           computer science that when someone says it can't be done you     8           disprove that by a counter-example, that's the purpose of the     9           L18.  In essence the argument is that for content providers    10           to label their materials is technologically quite    11           straightforward.  On the other hand, for a third party or for    12           parents to detect those materials without the assistance of    13           the content provider is computationally quite difficult.     14           That really is the central issue of what I stated in the    15           declaration.    16           Q   You will recall that you were asked a number of questions    17           about PICs, you recall those?    18           A   Yes.    19           Q   Would you please explain to the Court the ways in which    20           your Minus L18 proposal is consistent with aspects of the    21           PICs proposal?    22           A   The PICs proposal specifically lays out something called    23           self-labeling, I believe is what they termed it, whereby    24           content providers can classify their materials.  Because the    25           L18 proposal was meant as a counter-example I did not                                                                            13     1           extensively develop it in any way, it was only meant to show     2           that it was possible.  It is trivial to take the L18 proposal     3           and embed the same idea inside of PICs labeling.  PICs     4           provides a more extensive way to describe the information,     5           but relative to this law they are the same in that regard.     6           Q   How does your L18 proposal go further than PICs in terms     7           of enabling communications in a variety of applications over     8           the Internet to be labeled?     9           A   PICs is restricted to being able to label something that    10           has a URL.  So, for example you could label a news group, you    11           can label a file, you can label a site, et cetera.  L18 can    12           do that also, they're pretty much the same in that regard.     13           There are many kinds of communication that do not have    14           specifically a name, for example, an individual E-mail    15           message does not have a name.  For that, in my declaration, I    16           said you could take Minus L18 and put it in the subject line    17           and thereby tag it, so even though it doesn't have a name a    18           speaker could identify it.  The same thing with a news group.     19           A news item can have a name, that is possible; however, news    20           items are so ephemeral, they live typically for a week or two    21           weeks, most of them, some actually get preserved, but most of    22           them, they appear and then some time later they disappear.     23           So that the task of actually rating individual news postings    24           and naming them in PICs would be very difficult, if not    25           impossible.                                                                            14     1           Q   There's nothing magical about your having picked Minus      2           L18, correct?     3           A   No, any string of characters that didn't have an English     4           meaning would work fine.     5           Q   And nothing in your proposal does away with or eliminates     6           the continued use of more sophisticated schemes like PICs,     7           right?     8           A   No, it was simply a counter-example, other things are     9           possible and probably should be used.    10           Q   What does the term content selection standard mean to    11           you, Dr. Olsen?    12           A   In my mind it was a mechanism or a way agreed upon within    13           the community, let's say the Internet community, whereby    14           people would identify particular kinds of content.    15           Q   Is your Minus L18 proposal a type of content selection    16           standard?    17           A   Yes, it would -- if adopted by a large portion of the    18           community it would be a standard for saying these things are    19           inappropriate for people under 18.    20           Q   Now, Mr. Ennis asked you a whole set of questions on    21           whether cooperative technology presently exists which will    22           pick up the Minus L18 tag, do you recall those questions?    23           A   Yes.    24           Q   How does Surfwatch and other parental-control technology    25           already function to pick up such tags?                                                                            15     1           A   If, as Mr. Ennis pointed out on Friday, you used XXX it     2           already picks it up.  If Surfwatch was to add the string     3           Minus L18 to the data base they already distribute to their     4           customers that would be picked up and it would be recognized,     5           yes.     6           Q   Tell the Court about your Netscape proxy server     7           experiment and why it's relevant to the issue of available     8           technology?     9           A   That was a specific response to the fact that no software    10           exists that could do blocking on a tag.  What we did is we    11           took the Netscape proxy server, we specifically put in it the    12           regular expression that would identify any URL with Minus    13           L18, and then we checked to see if it was blocked, they were.     14           We then said can we block it and require a password, we did.     15           This took us about four hours of work, again, it was a    16           counter-example.  It was asserted that this was hard or    17           impossible, it was not.    18           Q   Could you also tell the Court about your Eudora    19           experiment?    20           A   We were looking at the same issue related to mail    21           programs.  Eudora is a client mail program, it's the one I    22           happen to use that receives mail over the Internet.  In    23           Eudora it has a filtering technique, as I have described.  I    24           took ten minutes, put in the Minus L18 tag to see if it would    25           filter, it did.  The minor difficulty with this particular                                                                            16     1           experiment is that, unlike the proxy server, what I did could     2           be easily undone.  The point, however, being that if Eudora     3           wanted to it would take them an hour to make that code so it     4           couldn't be undone.  But the technology for checking is     5           there, we tried it, it works.     6           Q   Do you have any reason to believe that the folks at     7           Netscape couldn't repeat your experiments and incorporate     8           them into their existing software?     9           A   It would be very easy for them to do.    10           Q   The same question for Microsoft, do you have any reason    11           to believe that Mr. Bill Gates couldn't basically do the same    12           thing with respect to Microsoft software and browsers?    13           A   I suspect Mr. Gates would have to ask one of his    14           programmers to do it, but it could be done.    15                    (Laughter.)    16           Q   The same question with respect to America Online, Prodigy    17           and Compuserve, could they do the same thing?    18           A   I see nothing that is difficult about this technology,    19           they could do it very easily.    20           Q   Now, in response to Mr. Ennis' questions you talked about    21           a notion of, quote, "statistical assurance," could you    22           explain to the Court what you meant by statistical assurance?    23           A   Statistical assurance has to do when you're dealing with    24           not an absolute is it or is it not possible, but what is the    25           probability of something.  I looked specifically at that                                                                            17     1           because my understanding of the law was that a hundred     2           percent was not required under the law.  So, statistical     3           assurance says to some extent that, for example, browsers     4           which pick up L18 or browsers that pick up PICs have been     5           deployed, if they have been deployed to, say, 90 percent of     6           all client sites then you are 90 percent assured that if you     7           have labeled in accordance with that that your material will     8           not get through to minors, if they're deployed to 99 percent     9           of the sites then you're 99 percent assured.    10           Q   How high would your statistical assurance be if Netscape,    11           Microsoft, America Online, Prodigy and Compuserve fixed their    12           browsers and software to incorporate tags such as the L18    13           tag?    14           A   Microsoft -- excuse me, Netscape claims to have 80    15           percent of this market.  Therefore, if all of their current    16           customers updated, which they almost always do because new    17           features are added that they want, then that would lead one    18           to believe you have 80 percent coverage.  Assuming that    19           Microsoft is reasonably effective at overcoming -- or    20           grabbing off the remaining 20 percent or perhaps snatching    21           away that 80 percent, then your coverage is increased to    22           above 90 percent.    23           Q   Now, how would a consensus standard or convention develop    24           around a proposal like Minus L18?    25           A   There are several ways that it could be done.  It could                                                                            18     1           be done very formally through the IETF; it could be done     2           informally through news group communications, a lot of things     3           are done that way; it could be done, as Mr. Vezza has     4           testified, his W3C consortium is very interested in doing     5           exactly this kind of thing, it could be done that way.      6           Someone like Netscape, who dominates a market, they have     7           already shown their willingness and ability to set standards,     8           they would simply say this is the standard we are using and,     9           given their market dominance, that would quickly be adopted.    10           Q   Do you think Mr. Bradner and his colleagues at the IETF    11           have the technical expertise to sit down and design such a    12           standard?    13           A   Easily.    14           Q   Would you even need a consensus on such a standard, that    15           is, what I'm asking, could individuals who use Minus L18    16           essentially contact Surfwatch and other companies like    17           Netscape and Microsoft and say, here's my site and here's the    18           label, please block the site using a key-word search for    19           Minus L18?    20           A   They could easily do that.    21           Q   And how do the market forces surrounding the rollout of    22           the PICs-compatible software influence the ability of    23           browsers to pick a Minus L18 tag?    24           A   Those market forces are similar to what would be required    25           for Minus L18, the market forces that Mr. Vezza discussed.  I                                                                            19     1           think it's a very compelling case that the people who produce     2           this software are very interested in providing parental     3           controls.  They see an enormous home market, they see the     4           extent that the public feels that these kind of materials are     5           available to their children, that that market has diminished.      6           So, there is a very strong motivation on the part of the     7           people who produce this software to sort of make the problem     8           go away.  So, they have already bought on the PICs, which is     9           far more complicated than what's required for L18, they may    10           or may not adopt to L18 or they may just go ahead with PICs,    11           as they have said, either way would accomplish the arguments    12           I have presented.    13           Q   Let's turn to third-party schemes; would you please    14           explain to the Court, in your view, how do tagging schemes    15           without the required cooperation of content creators     16           -- strike that.  In your view, do tagging schemes without the    17           required cooperation of the content creators have less chance    18           of assuring the screening of inappropriate material?    19           A   The simple answer is yes, they do have less of a chance.     20           If I could clarify that a little, one approach for a label    21           bureau, which is what's outlined in the PICs proposal, or    22           someone like Surfwatch or Netnanny or one of the others, one    23           of the approaches they can take is to say that we will go out    24           and we will look at all of the Internet sites, and we will    25           decide which ones need to be blocked and we will put this in                                                                            20     1           a data base.  Surfwatch takes that data base and distributes     2           it to the individuals, PICs proposes that that data base be     3           kept on some Website somewhere, so that the individual's     4           computer is not encumbered with that.  Either way, what it     5           means is it means that some entity has to, number one, find     6           all of the Internet sites, which as Mr. Bradner has testified     7           is difficult even to count them, let alone find them, they     8           would have to find those sites, they would then have to look     9           at the materials and then have to make a judgment.  They    10           would also -- this is particularly problematic, because    11           again, as Mr. Bradner testified, the number of sites in the    12           Internet is doubling every nine months.  So, this means that    13           for a label bureau to be successful they would have to do as    14           much work in this nine months as they have ever done in the    15           history of their company, that's a significant challenge and    16           I'm not sure how they would ever accomplish that.  Now, that    17           assumes that what you're going to do is you're going to find    18           all of the sites that are a problem and that means that when    19           you find such a site you are going to block the entire site.     20           Well, this is problematic and PICs tries to get around this,    21           because there are certain nonprofit sites that may have very    22           specific areas that are sexually-explicit and most of the    23           site is not.      24                    You would have a problem with the Surfwatch    25           approach, which is as I understand it sites only.  PICs                                                                            21     1           allows you, however, to label for a label bureau to tag a     2           specific file or class of files.  Well, the problem with that     3           is that now instead of having the problem of finding all of     4           the sites we have to also now find and document all of the     5           possible files on all of those possible sites, and files are     6           growing at an even faster rate than the number of sites,     7           because they're easier to create.  So, we essentially -- if     8           we adopt a label bureau approach or a third-party approach we     9           have set for them the task of taking an exponentially growing    10           problem and trying to monitor that problem.      11                    What we have also set for them is that they must    12           somehow get income for doing this, this is very expensive.     13           The current approach under Surfwatch, Netnanny and others is    14           to sell a subscription to parents.  Well, if the work    15           required to do this is exponentially growing we have a    16           problem with where those costs might go in the long run.    17           Q   Are there other problems with key-word searches    18           associated with this kind of scheme?    19           A   Yes.  Another one of the technologies that parental    20           controls are using is to search for individual words.  The    21           problem there is the words, unlike something like L18 or    22           unlike a PICs label, which are specially designed to have    23           computable meaning, key words have English meanings.  For    24           example, if you search for the word sex and say I will not    25           allow anything to go through that contains the word sex it is                                                                            22     1           possible that you might screen out sites that you would not     2           consider offensive but did mention sex.  However, if you     3           search for the word sex you would have problems where sex is     4           embedded in a larger name.  For example, many of the     5           directories I looked at had the name Hotsex, well, that's now     6           a different word.  Well, we would either collect all of the     7           ways people would assemble adjectives and smash them     8           together, computer scientists regularly eliminate spaces and     9           periods and vowels and other stuff.  So, we could say, okay,    10           well, what I'm going to do then is I'm going to search for    11           the three characters s-e-x.  Well, that's a possibility too,    12           but now anything related to Essex County is caught and    13           screened and the child cannot look up Essex County, they    14           could not look up Middlesex County.  So, what we have done is    15           by using English terms we have been very imprecise about what    16           we want to screen.  Another example is one might want to put    17           playboy in as something I want to screen for, I don't want    18           that to go to children.  People who are fighting against such    19           restrictions might say, well, I will go to playmate.  Well,    20           if I go to playmate I could very easily then screen out a    21           chat room for kids, because it has a different meaning among    22           children than it does among people interested in sexually-    23           explicit material.  So, the more words I add to the list, the    24           more things that are appropriate for kids that will be    25           screened out; the less words I add to the list, then the more                                                                            23     1           things that I want screened out will come through.  The     2           problem is as you're trying to use English in a precise form,     3           for a precise purpose, all of the library people and the     4           information retrieval people have recognized this problem and     5           where possible they always recommend assigning a tag or a     6           classification, like the Library of Congress classification,     7           so that they can get around this imprecise-meaning-of-English     8           problem.     9           Q   Now, you were in the courtroom Friday when Mr. Vezza    10           described business models for third-party rating schemes    11           developing, correct?    12           A   Yes.    13           Q   Do you see specific problems arising with third-party    14           rating services such as Disney or the Boy Scouts actually    15           entering into contracts with sites that wish to label    16           content?    17           A   As I remember the interchange in that testimony it was     18           -- Mr. Vezza was asked how would you get around this problem    19           I have described of how do I track all of these sites and how    20           does a third party do all of this labeling.  The business    21           model he proposed that would solve that was that labeling    22           bureaus would enter into contracts with the content providers    23           and, based on the force of the content -- contract, the    24           content providers would do the labeling.  The problem is is    25           that -- there are two problems:  If for example Disney is the                                                                            24     1           labeling bureau I see no reason why the purveyors of serious     2           pornography want to enter into a contract with Disney,     3           they're not interested in what Disney thinks of them.  There     4           is also a problem with why would Disney want to make the news     5           by having contracted with some pornographer to do the ratings     6           for them, they want to stake their reputation on the fact     7           that they're doing the ratings themselves.       8                    So, I agree with Mr. Vezza to the extent that if we     9           can provide some legal force by means of a contract or by    10           means of a law that the content providers can do an excellent    11           job of labeling the stuff, but I see a lot of people who    12           would not voluntarily enter into such a contract.    13                    JUDGE DALZELL:  But haven't you said repeatedly, as    14           Mr. Vezza said, that the market forces -- I said and he    15           agreed with me that the market forces were enormous to solve    16           the problem that brought about this law, for example, and    17           that brings us together, and you agree with that point, don't    18           you?    19                    THE WITNESS:  Yes, I do agree with that point.    20                    JUDGE DALZELL:  Because huge parts of the market are    21           not even getting onto the Net precisely because of the    22           existence of the material that are in these binders.    23                    THE WITNESS:  That is correct, but those market    24           forces are brought to bear on the people who create browser    25           software, those market forces that we talked about are not                                                                            25     1           brought to bear on the people who produce the content.  The     2           people who produce the content have no motivation whatsoever     3           to cooperate.     4                    JUDGE DALZELL:  Oh, sure, that's true.  And wouldn't     5           you agree with the fact that we've heard testimony, I don't     6           think it's in dispute, that about 40 percent of the sexually-     7           explicit material is created offshore?     8                    THE WITNESS:  I couldn't characterize, I haven't     9           looked, frankly.    10                    JUDGE DALZELL:  Well, assume that's true.    11                    THE WITNESS:  Okay.    12                    JUDGE DALZELL:  If 40 percent is controlled offshore    13           or created offshore how in the world is anything that's going    14           to happen in the United States going to affect that?    15                    THE WITNESS:  To the extent of them providing    16           leadership of how it can be controlled for those countries    17           who are interested in controlling, it would help.  To the    18           extent of forcing a country who is not interested, I don't    19           see how it has effect, but I didn't consider that because I    20           didn't know that the CDA would apply to offshore.    21                    JUDGE DALZELL:  Well, that would be an interesting    22           subject by itself.  I'm sorry to interrupt you.    23           BY MR. BARON:      24           Q   Well, let me just pick up on Judge Dalzell's question.     25           If U. S. sites were tagged -- if U. S. sites tagged their                                                                            26     1           speech using a Minus L18 approach, as you suggested, would it     2           be easier or more difficult for the Surfwatches and other     3           blocking software to search for foreign sites to block?       4           A   Okay, if for example the CDA were upheld and people used     5           tagging or some other mechanism to take care of that, that     6           means now that the other 60 percent, using your 40 percent     7           figure, the other 60 percent is now no longer of interest to     8           Surfwatch and Netnanny and they can now concentrate on the 40     9           percent, which is a smaller problem.    10           Q   And based on your knowledge and experience of the    11           Internet do you believe that the U. S. sets a leadership role    12           on standard setting that would influence the behavior of    13           foreign speech providers on the Net?    14           A   In a technical sense, yes, most of the standards that    15           exist on the Internet were begun in the U. S.  Some of them,    16           for example the Worldwide Web, began elsewhere, but generally    17           the U. S. has a leadership role technically.    18           Q   We now turn to Mr. Hansen's questions to you Friday.  Do    19           you recall being asked hypotheticals about one or more    20           nonprofit groups having the problem of having to rate 14,000    21           pages or files on their Website?    22           A   Yes.    23           Q   Mr. Hansen used EFF, the Electronic Frontier Foundation,    24           as an example, do you recall that?    25           A   Yes, I do.                                                                            27     1           Q   Do you know if EFF rates their site with PICs?     2           A   Not to my knowledge.     3           Q   If a parent was blocking any site that was not rated     4           under the PICs methodology would children be able to reach     5           the EFF?     6           A   No.     7           Q   Assuming that a tag or label -- that browsers detecting     8           tags or labels were widely available, could the EFF tag their     9           entire site as not for minors?    10           A   Sure.    11           Q   Minors would still not receive any of the EFF speech    12           whether parents blocked all unrated sites or EFF tagged them    13           -- tagged their entire site as inappropriate for minors,    14           correct?    15           A   Either way minors would not receive it.    16           Q   If the EFF tagged their whole site would children still    17           have access to the entire remainder of the Internet?    18           A   Yes, they would.    19           Q   If EFF tagged their whole site and the parents left their    20           browser open to all sites not rated as inappropriate would    21           the child have access to more of the Internet?    22           A   Yes, they would.    23           Q   You also discussed some transition costs on Friday; how    24           would you go about identifying text materials that are    25           sexually-explicit under a very short time frame as Mr. Hansen                                                                            28     1           proposed?     2           A   Yes, Mr. Hansen I believe posed a very specific case of a     3           very short transition time.  In terms of the six fifteen     4           transition time, nothing can be done in software by six     5           fifteen.  If we impose a more reasonable transition time of a     6           month or two, you have to consider textual materials and you     7           have to consider images, I guess the first one I'd look up is     8           textual materials.     9           Q   I asked you about textual materials.    10           A   I'm sorry, textual materials.  If I had the    11           responsibility the first task I would take is mark the entire    12           site as not accessible to minors as a temporary measure, this    13           doesn't prohibit adults looking at it or anything else.  The    14           next step would be to identify some words that I would like    15           to search for.  In this case I can adopt quite a broad    16           screen, because what I'm really hunting for in this first    17           step is to find out of all of my materials those materials    18           that I know I can turn loose to kids and it won't be a    19           problem.      20                    So, one approach would be to pick a collection of    21           words that we think are sexually-explicit or otherwise    22           inappropriate, I would go to the thesaurus and expand that    23           collection with all of their synonyms that I could find.  If    24           I was feeling really conservative I could expand it again,    25           but let's assume I didn't.  I now have a set of search words.                                                                             29     1           Most large sites of that size already have a whole-word     2           index, but let's assume they didn't, because if they do have     3           a whole-word index then finding all of the documents that     4           contain those words is very easy, but assuming they don't one     5           could write a Purl (ph.) script that could run overnight and     6           examine all of their documents and flag them.  Now what I     7           would do is I would take all of the ones that weren't found     8           that way and un-tag them, these are inappropriate for minors.      9           So, in a matter of less than a week I've now taken most of my    10           site and re-exposed it to minors.  Now I have a few files    11           left and those files someone would have to manually look at    12           and make a determination.  At no point have any of these been    13           denied to adults.    14           Q   And how would you go about identifying sexually-explicit    15           images?    16           A   Images are another challenge, because sort of the key-    17           word search technique doesn't help here, I don't know of a    18           technique that will identify them.  After Mr. Hansen's    19           questions I sat down with my calculator and made the    20           following assumption:  Assuming all 1400 are images, which    21           they are not, but assuming they were --    22           Q   I believe Mr. Hansen said 14,000.    23           A   14,000, excuse me.  Assuming all 14,000 are images and    24           assuming I could hire someone or take someone on my staff and    25           say I want you to look at each one of these, all I want to                                                                            30     1           know is is there a sexual organ or act or an excretory organ     2           or act in this picture, that's all I want to know, in which     3           case, assuming I gave this person a full 15 seconds to make     4           this determination, and that's a long time to look at a     5           picture and say is there a sexual act or organ here, then it     6           would take such a person about two weeks to have made this     7           judgment on every single -- all 14,000 images.  Now, my     8           projection would be that most of those images are not.  I     9           mean, certain sites this would not be true, but those sites    10           already know that they have this problem.  So, most of those    11           images would be not, in two weeks I have taken the vast    12           majority of my images and said there is no problem here, and    13           I have opened them up to minors.  Now I take the last group    14           and I say how badly do I want to tell minors or show minors    15           these pictures.  Well, if I think really badly then I might    16           have to make a more careful analysis and I probably have to    17           involve my lawyers, but we very quickly screen, taking the    18           vast majority of our material, and made it available to    19           minors in a couple of weeks.    20           Q   And what about ongoing costs in terms of looking at text    21           and images?    22           A   Okay, this is a matter of the judgment calls being made    23           at the time the material is produced.  In the case of text    24           materials, if a site was particularly concerned about their    25           text materials they could very easily put a piece of software                                                                            31     1           in place that would periodically check for all new pages and     2           check to see if they had any of the words that we ought to     3           look at, that's one way.  Again, what I'm looking at here is     4           not a precise screen, but a screen by which manual     5           intervention can be required.  What we're trying to do is     6           take the vast majority of the stuff and simply not look, we     7           know it doesn't have a problem.  So, your initial screen     8           simply tells you that small amount of material that you     9           actually need someone to look at and make a human judgment.      10                    In the case of my images, again, if I simply publish    11           to the staff, if it contains a sexual or excretory organ or    12           act please let us know, so we can check it before you    13           actually put it up or mark it as not available to minors,    14           take the conservative approach, in which case we may not    15           care.    16           Q   Mr. Hansen asked you about Adultcheck and your knowledge    17           of whether third-party registration services such as    18           Adultcheck cater to pornographic sites, do you recall that?    19           A   Yes.    20           Q   In your opinion, Dr. Olsen, is there any technical    21           problem with other types of third-party registration services    22           catering to non-pornographic sites arising on the Internet?    23           A   Yes.  If Mr. Hansen's clients didn't like that particular    24           neighborhood they could form their own version of Adultcheck    25           and have a nicer neighborhood.                                                                            32     1           Q   Your testimony is that there is not a technical problem?     2           A   There is not a technical problem, they could do exactly     3           what Adultcheck did.     4           Q   Just on a stray topic here, the Court inquired how many     5           teenagers you knew who could reinstall an operating system,     6           do you recall that question?     7           A   Yes, I do.     8           Q   You said you knew four or five kids in every high school     9           that could do that and you characterized this number as a,    10           quote, "small majority," do you remember that testimony?    11           A   Yes.    12           Q   Did you mean small minority?    13           A   Yes, I did.  I'm sorry.    14           Q   Your proposals are not limited to just Minus L18,    15           correct?    16           A   That is correct.    17           Q   Your declaration sets out a number of options, right?    18           A   That is correct.  One of the things I intended to do in    19           the declaration is provide a broad menu of possibilities.    20           Q   And you have not ruled out using registrations of URLs    21           with specific directories as one way to reduce the    22           availability of sexually-explicit speech to minors on the    23           Net, correct?    24           A   Yes, if there was some directory or Surfwatch or Netnanny    25           I could very easily notify them and save them the labor of                                                                            33     1           having to search my material, and that would create a barrier     2           to minors, yes.     3           Q   Now, you've been working on these problems just for the     4           past few weeks, correct, Dr. Olsen?     5           A   That is correct.     6           Q   In your view, is there sufficient creativity in the     7           Internet community to come up with a variety of other     8           solutions to the issues of screening based on available     9           technology?    10           A   To the extent that I took a couple of weeks, generated    11           several technically-feasible solutions, there are a lot of    12           people who have done a lot of work on the Internet, I have    13           every reason to believe that they could generate many more    14           than I have thought about.    15           Q   In your view, Dr. Olsen, are the technical issues    16           involving and insuring compliance with the CDA as difficult    17           to solve as other issues facing on the Internet, like    18           electronic commerce security issues?    19           A   No, no.  We're not talking about an issue here of    20           entering into a contractual agreement to pay for a service,    21           which is one of the things people really want to do on the    22           Internet, we're not even talking about the difficulties of    23           actually getting all of the Internet to talk to each other,    24           that was a far more difficult problem.  If we have the    25           cooperation of the content providers in labeling their                                                                            34     1           materials, this is a trivial task, without their cooperation     2           it's a very difficult task.     3           Q   One last question, Dr. Olsen:  Do you believe that the     4           use of the Minus L18 tagging scheme you propose would have     5           any adverse effect on the growth or use of the Internet?     6           A   No.  For the people who are not producing sexually-     7           explicit materials, which constitute most of the content     8           providers, they frankly don't care, and they would not be     9           involved and they would not have any obligation of any kind    10           and could happily go their way.    11           Q   Your proposals would not have an adverse effect on the    12           Net as a whole?    13           A   Absolutely not.    14                    MR. BARON:  I have no more questions, your Honor.    15                    JUDGE SLOVITER:  Thank you.    16                    JUDGE DALZELL:  Recross?    17                    (Pause.)    18                    MR. ENNIS:  Bruce Ennis, your Honors, for the ALA    19           plaintiffs.    20                                RECROSS-EXAMINATION    21           BY MR. ENNIS:      22           Q   Dr. Olsen, you began by saying that it is simple for a    23           speaker to add a four-character string to speech for which    24           such a tag is appropriate, correct?    25           A   That is correct.                                                                            35     1           Q   But the speaker will add such a string after the judgment     2           has been made that that string is appropriate for that     3           particular speech?     4           A   They could do that or they could add it conservatively if     5           they thought there was a doubt and defer making that speech     6           available to minors to some later time when a determination     7           had been made.     8           Q   But, in any event, before the simple act of typing in     9           those four characters there's going to have to be a human    10           judgment about whether typing in those four characters is    11           appropriate, correct?    12           A   At any time you want to block material from minors    13           somebody will have to make a human judgment, that is correct.    14           Q   Is it correct that someone has to make a human judgment    15           to block material from minors if you're using the PICs system    16           and the PICs browser is set to reject all speech that's not    17           tagged or labeled, then you don't require a human judgment,    18           do you?    19           A   Other than the judgment to lock up most of the Internet    20           and put the kids in a ghetto of their own.    21           Q   Well, that's a parental judgment?    22           A   Other than that judgment your content providers would not    23           have to do anything.    24           Q   But with respect to any system that does require the    25           speech to be tagged or labeled, your proposal, that kind of                                                                            36     1           system would require human judgment as to what to tag?     2           A   That is correct.     3           Q   And I assume you agree that there is no -- I think you     4           just testified there is no technology that can make that     5           judgment with respect to images?     6           A   That's correct.     7           Q   That's not possible to automate, a human being is going     8           to have to look at the image and decide whether the image is     9           appropriate or inappropriate for minors?    10           A   That is correct with a minor caveat.  It is conceivable    11           that image processing technology could improve to do that,    12           but using today's technology it is impossible.    13           Q   All my questions are assuming using today's technology,    14           today that is not possible?    15           A   That is not possible.    16           Q   And in fact even with respect to words there can be    17           patently-offensive descriptions that don't use one of the    18           seven dirty words, correct?    19           A   Absolutely, that's I believe stated in my declaration.    20           Q   So, it's not enough just to search for key words that    21           would in some way be themselves dirty or offensive for    22           minors, correct?    23           A   Correct.    24           Q   There could be a combination of otherwise inoffensive    25           words which in combination produces a patently-offensive                                                                            37     1           depiction, correct?     2           A   Correct.  What I have just described to you in the     3           testimony earlier has to do with how you could use technology     4           to make a pre-screen, this is based on the assumption that     5           the content provider is completely ignorant of what the     6           materials are that are being posted, most content providers     7           are not that ignorant.     8           Q   Well, you're making a distinction between the content     9           creator and the content provider in assuming that the content    10           provider is also the content creator?    11           A   I haven't made a clear distinction, I'm more interested    12           in the creator than the actual provider.    13           Q   Well, let's make a clear distinction.  Let's suppose    14           you're a library and you're putting 2,500 magazines on-line,    15           every time the new issue comes out it goes on-line, you're    16           not creating that content, you're not the editor, you didn't    17           write it, you didn't look at it, you just put it on-line,    18           right?  Now --    19           A   That's correct.    20           Q   -- there's a difference there, the library is not going    21           to know in advance the content of all those 2,500 magazines?    22           A   That depends, that depends on what they expect of whoever    23           provided the content to them.    24           Q   Well, let's suppose Vanity Fair, which is one of the    25           magazines the declarations indicate is on-line today, is the                                                                            38     1           library going to know in advance the content of each issue of     2           Vanity Fair?     3           A   No, but the library may enter into an agreement or     4           libraries in general could enter into agreement to ask     5           magazines to identify the materials.     6           Q   All right.  Suppose a magazine --     7           A   They could, for example, this is what libraries already     8           do with most books, most books come with a Library of     9           Congress categorization.    10           Q   Then someone at the library is going to have to be    11           responsible for getting that information from Vanity Fair and    12           all of the other 2,500 magazines --    13           A   Or somebody at Vanity Fair.    14           Q   Well, somebody at the library has to receive it and then    15           make a human judgment about how to tag or label that before    16           putting it on line, correct?    17           A   This presumes Vanity Fair did not make the judgment    18           beforehand, yes.    19           Q   Well, Vanity Fair doesn't make the judgment, Vanity Fair    20           says, I'm going to have a cover image of Demi Moore and she's    21           partially nude, somebody at the library has to make a    22           judgment about whether that's offensive or not, correct?    23           A   The library would either make that judgment or they would    24           make the judgment that we're just not interested in    25           distributing Vanity Fair to minors --                                                                            39     1           Q   All right.     2           A   -- and tag it anyway.     3           Q   Now, let's suppose the library runs a key-word search and     4           suppose all of these magazines have the data base and     5           technology and it's there, which I think is a big assumption,     6           assume that's so and you find that somewhere in these -- each     7           of these 2500 magazines there is one word or two words or     8           three words that might be considered offensive, does the     9           librarian then have to go to the magazine and look at those    10           words in context, see how many of them there are?    11           A   You're asking me to make a judgment as to how the library    12           would decide whether or not they had met the CDA, I'm not    13           prepared to make that evaluation.    14           Q   Well, suppose each of the 2500 magazines has one of the    15           dirty words in it, the seven dirty words, you just    16           automatically classify them all as inappropriate for minors    17           or do you make a human judgment?    18           A   You could classify the particular issue or the particular    19           article.    20           Q   Which way would you classify it, inappropriate for    21           minors?    22           A   Inappropriate for minors, that's a possibility, but    23           that's a judgment, what you're asking for is do I know how    24           libraries would go about classifying materials and the answer    25           is, no, I don't.                                                                            40     1                    JUDGE DALZELL:  In other words, if in one issue -- I     2           want to get this right -- if let's say The Economist is on-     3           line and if in one issue the word fuck appears that under     4           your proposal the whole issue would be blocked?     5                    THE WITNESS:  Not necessarily, not necessarily, it     6           depends on --     7                    JUDGE DALZELL:  Well, wouldn't the library have to     8           do exactly what Mr. Ennis just said, it would have to go     9           through all of the content and tag -- I realize your system    10           would allow you to tag the word fuck so that it wouldn't be    11           accessed, but the Carnegie Library would have to do that if    12           The Economist didn't.  And the reason I give The Economist is    13           because it's based in the United Kingdom.    14                    THE WITNESS:  Somebody would have to -- to have to    15           make this screen.  As far as -- I would like to oppose a    16           little bit the characterization that the entire issue would    17           have to be screened or even the entire magazine would have to    18           be labeled.  The granularity is quite flexible as to how    19           deeply you wanted to actually do your labeling, but you are    20           correct, somebody would have to make this judgment.    21           BY MR. ENNIS:      22           Q   Is it quite flexible if you, the librarian, risk going to    23           jail for two years if you make the wrong judgment and you put    24           on-line material that is found to be patently offensive for a    25           minor?                                                                            41     1           A   Going to jail is a legal opinion.     2                    MR. BARON:  Objection.  This line of questioning     3           presumes that this witness is answering legal conclusions,     4           he's a lawyer, he knows what the CDA's legal import is, none     5           of that is true, he's just a technical expert.     6                    JUDGE SLOVITER:  Well, his testimony went pretty far     7           in terms of the implications of his proposal, so I think that     8           we ought to let them cross-examine him.     9           BY MR. ENNIS:      10           Q   Dr. Olsen, I believe you testified that your proposal    11           would require the cooperation of entities other than the    12           speaker and that without that cooperation it would be a very    13           difficult task to protect minors from inappropriate material,    14           correct?    15           A   If there isn't some filter at some place along the    16           communication chain the tag alone is not sufficient, that is    17           correct.    18           Q   And you mentioned that the entities that might have to    19           cooperate would include the people who create browsers, such    20           as the Netscape Navigator, correct?    21           A   That is correct.    22           Q   And the on-line service providers, correct?    23           A   On-line -- not necessarily.  To the extent that the on-    24           line service provider provides the browser --    25           Q   All right.                                                                            42     1           A   -- but -- or the on-line service provider, I believe in     2           my declaration there's the discussion of the provider could     3           if they wanted do this by means of a proxy server.     4           Q   Or even the end-user blocking software, like Surfwatch,     5           Cyberpatrol, Netnanny --     6           A   Absolutely.     7           Q   -- they could change their software to recognize your L18     8           tag, correct?     9           A   Or the PICs tags.    10           Q   Or PICs, all right.  But the central point is your    11           tagging proposal does require the cooperation of entities    12           down the communication pipeline?    13           A   It is effective to the extent that down the pipeline    14           screens have been deployed, that is correct.    15           Q   Do you know whether the Communications Decency Act    16           requires any cooperation or any such effort by any entity    17           down the communication pipeline?    18           A   I am not aware of any such requirement.    19           Q   Have you read the Act?    20           A   I have read the pieces you showed me.    21           Q   And that's all?    22           A   I believe I read a couple of other pieces that Mr. Baron    23           showed me.    24           Q   Did you read the conference report?    25           A   No.                                                                            43     1           Q   Are you aware that Congress made a considered decision to     2           impose no requirements on entities down the communications     3           chain whatsoever?     4           A   That is my understanding.     5           Q   So, your proposal would be directly contrary to the     6           policy choice Congress has already made?     7           A   That's not what I said.  What I said is that market     8           forces, which we have already had testimony on and which I     9           believe in, would provide the impetus and the legal impetus    10           in my mind is not required, but I do not know of a legal    11           impetus for that cooperation, no.    12           Q   All right.  Now, you testified that if all of these    13           entities down the line did cooperate, say, voluntarily that    14           you might then have a perhaps 90 percent statistical feeling    15           of security that if you're the speaker and patently-offensive    16           material would not reach minors, correct?    17           A   Correct.    18           Q   Of course that means patently-offensive material would be    19           reaching ten percent of the people it shouldn't reach?    20           A   Possibly.    21           Q   And if you are at risk of criminal prosecution if your    22           material reaches ten percent of the population that might be    23           a concern for you?    24           A   You're asking me I believe for a legal judgment as to    25           what effective means and I can't make that --                                                                            44     1           Q   Well, suppose you're the speaker, would you consider that     2           to be effective enough that you would feel comfortable in     3           putting your speech on-line?     4           A   If I was a speaker I would consult my lawyer as to     5           whether or not I was meeting the CDA.     6           Q   Now, your 90 percent statistical significance figure     7           assumes, does it not, that all of the speech has been     8           properly tagged and labeled according to your proposal?     9           A   Correct.    10           Q   And that assumes that all of the speech that originates    11           abroad by foreign speakers has been tagged and properly    12           tagged?    13           A   I think I have stated previously that we have not done    14           anything relative to foreign speakers and we would have to    15           rely upon Surfwatch or Netnanny technology for foreign    16           speakers.    17           Q   Well, then if we assume that some of the speakers are    18           foreign speakers and they're not tagging at all would your 90    19           percent go down considerably?    20           A   The 90 percent -- I think you're fallacious here.  The 90    21           percent is if I am a U. S. speaker how much can I depend will    22           actually get through to minors, that doesn't say anything    23           about how much minors -- how much potential sexually-explicit    24           material has come to a minor, that's a different question.    25           Q   I understand that, I'm asking you a different question.                                                                             45     1           I'm asking you to assume all of the communication entities     2           downline change their browsers, change their end-user     3           software, change everything so that your L18 proposal could     4           technologically be implemented, if no foreign speaker tags or     5           labels their speech will that speech be kept away from 90     6           percent of minors in America?     7           A   That speech, no, but I didn't remember that there's     8           anything in the CDA that involved those speakers.     9           Q   Now, let's just talk about domestic speakers for a    10           minute.  Your proposal assumes that domestic speakers, all    11           domestic speakers will tag, correct?    12           A   Mm-hmm.    13           Q   And that they will tag responsibly?    14           A   Mm-hmm.    15                    JUDGE SLOVITER:  Was that a yes?  I'm sorry.    16                    THE WITNESS:  Yes, I'm sorry.    17           BY MR. ENNIS:      18           Q   I assume it's of course possible that there are some    19           speakers out there who will willfully violate the law and not    20           tag or tag inappropriately, correct?    21           A   That's a good presumption.    22           Q   And I assume there are a larger number of speakers out    23           there who will tag, but they will not exactly know what's    24           patently offensive or not and will make the wrong judgment    25           and say my speech is appropriate for minors when later it's                                                                            46     1           turned out some community thinks it's inappropriate, that's     2           possible too?     3           A   That's possible.     4           Q   All of that speech, whether willful violations of the Act     5           or inadvertent violations of the Act, that will reach minors     6           in America, correct?     7           A   So will slander and fraud, yes, it's the same thing.     8           Q   But it would not, would it, if you were using the PICs     9           technology set to the default to tag -- to reject all un-    10           tagged speech and to reject all tagged speech that has not    11           been approved by a third-party rater, none of that would    12           reach minors in America?    13           A   That is correct.    14           Q   Even foreign postings?    15           A   That is correct.    16           Q   You indicated you doubted that Disney would be willing or    17           happy to label pornographic sites as pornographic?    18           A   That's not what I said.    19           Q   Well, perhaps I misunderstood you.  You don't doubt, do    20           you, that there are several, plenty of groups in America    21           today who would be happy to rate pornographic sites as    22           pornographic?    23           A   Yes, I believe that to be true.  What I did say, to    24           clarify though, was I doubt that many of them would    25           necessarily want to enter into contracts whereby purveyors of                                                                            47     1           pornographic material would do the rating in their behalf,     2           that was my testimony.     3           Q   And I believe you concluded your redirect testimony by     4           saying that the ACLU or other speakers who wanted to set up     5           their own verification systems could set up their own     6           neighborhoods, their own systems, they could set up their own     7           Website, correct, do that?     8           A   Yes.     9           Q   And is it fair to say that creating a Website costs    10           anywhere between $1500 and $10,000, depending on how    11           elaborate you want to be or need to be?    12           A   That is fair.    13           Q   And is it fair to say that maintaining, operating a    14           Website costs anywhere from $20 a month to thousands of    15           dollars a month, depending on how much traffic you have and    16           what you want to do?    17           A   That's fair.    18           Q   And is it fair to say that if the ACLU or one of these    19           groups wanted to set up their own Website to do this    20           verification they would also need software to be involved in    21           the verification process?    22           A   That is correct.    23           Q   And that would cost something too?    24           A   That is correct.    25           Q   And that also needs people who would be involved in                                                                            48     1           managing the actual act of verification?     2           A   They would have to have people involved in managing the     3           software, I believe that there is evidence that they could     4           automate the act of verification.     5           Q   Now, suppose you are not the ACLU, you're an individual     6           speaker and you simply want to go home some night and you're     7           disturbed by some event, and you want to go on-line and say     8           something which you think is appropriate for adults, but     9           might be patently offensive for minors, it's not practical or    10           realistic to think you can on the spot go out and set up your    11           own Website and all of this mechanism to screen access, is    12           it?    13           A   Nobody goes out and sets up their own Website -- or I    14           should say nobody but very few of the people, the speakers    15           we're talking about.  They almost all of them, the vast    16           majority have some service where they go to.  I presume that    17           such a person, if the ACLU were to set up such services, they    18           could go to the ACLU as a place to put their speech.  So,    19           nobody actually sets up their own Website with the exception    20           of universities and such entities.    21                    MR. ENNIS:  No further questions.    22                    JUDGE SLOVITER:  Thank you.    23                    JUDGE DALZELL:  Mr. Hansen?    24                    JUDGE SLOVITER:  Mr. Hansen?    25                    MR. HANSEN:  I have no other cross.                                                                            49     1                    (Pause.)     2                    JUDGE SLOVITER:  We'll take ten minutes before the     3           Court...     4                    (Court in recess; 10:35 to 10:50 o'clock a.m.)     5                    THE COURT CLERK:  Court is now in session.     6                    JUDGE SLOVITER:  Thank you.  Given the complexity of     7           this case and its quick wind-down and all of the technical     8           matters that we have to absorb and the different views of the     9           different witnesses, we needed a few minutes, although I'm    10           not sure I wouldn't have liked the weekend.    11                    (Laughter.)    12                    JUDGE SLOVITER:  Judge Buckwalter will begin.    13                    Thank you, Mr. Olsen.    14                    JUDGE BUCKWALTER:  Mr. Olsen, if the creator of the    15           material doesn't buy into your system, I think you testified    16           it really creates a big problem.  Maybe they weren't your    17           words, but if the creator of the material doesn't buy into    18           your system, what did you say, it would make it very    19           difficult to --    20                    THE WITNESS:  Oh, yes.  It's not so much a matter of    21           buying into my system but buying into the notion of if the    22           creator doesn't make an effort to electronically identify --    23                    JUDGE BUCKWALTER:  Okay, that's what I meant.    24                    THE WITNESS:  Then what happens is for parents to    25           protect their children, they have to hire somebody like                                                                            50     1           Surfwatch to go and hunt down all of this material on their     2           behalf and that's a problem because of the explosive growth     3           of the material.     4                    JUDGE BUCKWALTER:  Does it follow from that that     5           therefore the PIC system as proposed by the plaintiffs makes     6           more sense?     7                    THE WITNESS:  No.       8                    JUDGE BUCKWALTER:  Why not?     9                    THE WITNESS:  In the PIC system there are -- there    10           are multiple ways that the PIC system has been proposed,    11           there are multiple techniques in their proposal.  The self-    12           labeling technique in their proposal is for the purpose of    13           this case the same as what I've described.  It's a different    14           way of tagging but it still relies upon the content provided    15           to do the tagging.  So to that extent we are -- we are on the    16           same wavelength there.    17                    To the extent that they rely upon a label bureau,    18           that means the label bureau must look at all the sites, look    19           at all the documents, must hunt down all of the material that    20           might be offensive and that is a challenge.  It's actually a    21           greater challenge than the judgment required if a content    22           provider just simply said this is the nature of my speech.    23                    JUDGE BUCKWALTER:  You also stated that -- that this    24           service and news groups and chat rooms, that there is no    25           technology for the speaker to ensure that only adults are                                                                            51     1           listening.  I think you said you know of no possible way,     2           only statistically or something to that effect.  I'm sure     3           I've butchered up what you said, but what did you mean by     4           that?  If you could --     5                    THE WITNESS:  What I meant is that if the speaker in     6           any of those forums --          7                    JUDGE BUCKWALTER:  Right.     8                    THE WITNESS:  -- were to label L18 PICs, whatever,     9           PICs is a little hard in some of those forums, but if they    10           were to label them then to the extent that browsers were    11           screening, let's say, 80, 90 percent, then they have a 90    12           percent assurity that it isn't reaching minors.    13                    That's the statistical, you know, how much can I    14           depend on.  To believe that 100 percent of all browsers are    15           screening is naive, but if we presume the marketing claims of    16           Netscape and Microsoft to presume that in short order 90    17           percent are screening is a reasonable assumption.    18                    I shouldn't, if I could clarify that, not are    19           screening but could screen.  Nobody is screening today, with    20           the exception of Netscape, Surfwatch, Net Nanny, et cetera.     21                    JUDGE BUCKWALTER:  And all your declarations dealing    22           with determining which applicants are really adults have    23           nothing to do with the feasibility of that from an economic    24           standpoint, only that it's possible to in some way verify    25           that?                                                                            52     1                    THE WITNESS:  I only addressed is it technically     2           possible and is it technically difficult.  Those issues I did     3           address.  As to what the exact costs are, I suppose I could     4           find out but I'm not prepared to testify today.     5                    JUDGE BUCKWALTER:  Well, that's all right.  It's     6           technically possible, is it technically difficult?     7                    THE WITNESS:  For which one?     8                    JUDGE BUCKWALTER:  For that adult verification, to     9           very whether or not the person is an adult?    10                    THE WITNESS:  Uhm --    11                    JUDGE BUCKWALTER:  By that I mean the user.    12                    THE WITNESS:  I guess -- I guess an easier thing to    13           do is sort of describe in layman's terms what the technology    14           is.  What would have to happen there, there are two ways that    15           that could occur.  Let's presume the first way in which the    16           person or the organization is providing the Webserver decides    17           to take this responsibility.    18                    The technology would be when a person first came to    19           this site and the owner of the site doesn't know who they    20           are, the owner of the site could request a credit card, use    21           something like IC verified to make a charge on that card,    22           determine that it is a valid card, and then could issue them    23           a password.  And there's lots of stuff in the declaration    24           about how user databases and passwords or no user end    25           database could be used.                                                                            53     1                    But essentially they would issue an access code, if     2           you will.  From that time on standard Webserver technology     3           would do the verification for you.  It would ask for the     4           password whenever somebody came in.     5                    So in terms of asking for passwords, this is not a     6           problem, standard software that does that.  In terms of doing     7           the verification, you would have to write some CDI code that     8           actually goes out and calls IC verifier, whoever else you     9           decide is your provider of that.    10                    I don't believe that's a difficult code to write,    11           but it would take some time.    12                    Does that help clarify?    13                    JUDGE BUCKWALTER:  Yeah, that does to a certain    14           extent, it does.  Thank you.    15                    You may proceed, I don't have any other.    16                    JUDGE DALZELL:  Yeah, I have a few questions for you    17           of starting with chat rooms or news groups.  Let's assume a    18           chat group is talking about the CDA and its students are    19           talking about the CDA, students varying in age from 13 to 18.     20           And in the course of the chat an 18 year old, exasperated by    21           his or her view of the law, types in "Fuck the CDA."  Is it    22           your proposal that before he types in "Fuck the CDA" he    23           should tag that minus L18?    24                    THE WITNESS:  Yes.    25                    JUDGE DALZELL:  I beg your pardon?                                                                            54     1                    THE WITNESS:  Yes.     2                    JUDGE DALZELL:  Okay, so that is the -- so that     3           anybody even in that context must tag, that's your -- the way     4           it works?     5                    THE WITNESS:  If they want to identify -- if they     6           want to identify their speech that is one way they can do it,     7           yes.     8                    JUDGE DALZELL:  And protect themselves because,     9           after all, that is one of the seven dirty words.    10                    THE WITNESS:  Okay.    11                    JUDGE DALZELL:  Okay.  We've had a lot of testimony    12           in this case about caching.  Do you know what caching is?    13                    THE WITNESS:  Yes, I do.    14                    JUDGE DALZELL:  And since it's also agreed, I think    15           it's not in dispute, that upwards of 40 percent of the    16           sexually explicit content comes from offshore, at least we've    17           heard testimony about that.  I don't think that's an issue    18           but  very significant percentage is offshore, but that it can    19           get, it does get cached on this side.     20                    Is it feasible in your judgment for the entity that    21           is doing the caching to tag one, let us say the people in    22           Amsterdam won't tag?    23                    THE WITNESS:  Okay.  Let me -- if I could    24           characterize a legal presumption for you and I may be wrong    25           on the legal aspects of this, but  I'm under the assumption,                                                                            55     1           which may be wrong, that the transmitters of the information     2           are not liable under this act.  My presumption is that only     3           the creators or the people who served the information are     4           liable.     5                    The caching you describe is a standard computer     6           science technique in communications and the caching, to     7           computer scientists, will be considered part of the     8           communication mechanism.     9                    For example, it doesn't' work for telephones, but we    10           would consider the cache site as much like your phone switch    11           and whoever operates the phone switch isn't responsible for    12           what you say.    13                    So, yes, it is being stored, but it's being stored    14           as an optimization of the communication process.  Now, I may    15           be wrong in my legal assumption, but my legal assumption    16           would be that they're not -- the people who have caches are    17           not even considered under the law.    18                    JUDGE DALZELL:  Well, but I think you've assumed    19           away my question.  What I'm trying to get at is the technical    20           feasibility of the cacher --    21                    THE WITNESS:  Mm-hmm.    22                    JUDGE DALZELL:  -- okay, the cacher doing the    23           tagging.    24                    THE WITNESS:  That would be very difficult, that    25           would be very difficult because generally the cacher has no                                                                            56     1           idea of what it is.  All they've done is a stream of bits     2           came across that had a particular name.     3                    JUDGE DALZELL:  And what if the lawyers for the     4           cacher said you know, you may be wrong in your interpretation     5           of the statute, you may be deemed the re-publisher?  What     6           then?     7                    THE WITNESS:  If I was them I'd hire a lawyer and     8           fight that, but --     9                    JUDGE DALZELL:  Well, okay, well --    10                    THE WITNESS:  -- it's a legal, it's a legal    11           presumption that, you know, if they did that, then obviously    12           I'm going to have to do something, I think.    13                    JUDGE DALZELL:  What would you do?  That's what I'm    14           trying to get at.    15                    THE WITNESS:  If I was a cacher?    16                    JUDGE DALZELL:  Yes.  Let's assume you had    17           definitive ruling that caching is a republication of the    18           improper content?    19                    THE WITNESS:  I'd turn the cacher off.    20                    JUDGE DALZELL:  Oh, you wouldn't tag?    21                    THE WITNESS:  No.    22                    JUDGE DALZELL:  Because?    23                    THE WITNESS:  Because it's too much bother.  I'd    24           turn the cacher off, everything slows down and, I mean, this    25           is not a nice thing to have happen on the Internet but if --                                                                            57     1                    JUDGE DALZELL:  Well, why isn't it a nice thing to     2           have on the Internet?     3                    THE WITNESS:  Everything slows down.     4                    JUDGE DALZELL:  Anything that slows it down is not a     5           nice thing?     6                    THE WITNESS:  Not in my view.     7                    JUDGE DALZELL:  Okay.  Well, I think a lot of     8           witnesses would agree with you on that.       9                    All right, I want to talk about standards now.  You    10           in your declaration speak warmly of -- I think the word you    11           used was the "nurturing" of the Government for the Internet,    12           okay?    13                    THE WITNESS:  Mm-hmm.     14                    JUDGE DALZELL:  Okay.  Am I not correct though that    15           the Government did not establish a single standard that    16           creates the actual operation of the Internet as we use it    17           today?    18                    THE WITNESS:  Uhm, let me characterize what I think    19           you mean by or at least what I think I mean by establish a    20           standard.  If you mean establish a standard to mean somebody    21           like the FCC created a regulation which everybody has to sort    22           of conform to, no.    23                    JUDGE DALZELL:  No, I mean IP-4, I mean IP-4.    24                    THE WITNESS:  If you mean -- well, if you mean, so,    25           no, there is no legislation that I'm aware of that says this                                                                            58     1           is what IP-4 is.  On the other hand, the nurturing that I     2           talked about is that the creation of IP-4 and the money for     3           the researchers that did much of the early work, well, most     4           of it came from Government money.     5                    JUDGE DALZELL:  Well, that's to open that because     6           that was -- that's all the history because that was in the     7           defense business, right, the defense research.     8                    THE WITNESS:  Right.     9                    JUDGE DALZELL:  And that's all you were talking    10           about, right?    11                    THE WITNESS:  That's right.     12                    JUDGE DALZELL:  Because can you -- can you tell me,    13           can you identify for me any Government official who    14           participated in writing IP-4?    15                    THE WITNESS:  No, you'd have to ask Mr. Bradner,    16           he's more expert in that area.    17                    JUDGE DALZELL:  He couldn't think of anybody either.     18           But what I'm getting at is the standards therefore, of course    19           you say in your declaration that the Internet has to have    20           standards to operate, no one disagrees with that, the    21           question is whether it has governmental standards, that is to    22           say governmentally imposed standards.  Wouldn't you agree    23           that's the real question here?    24                    THE WITNESS:  Not completely, not completely in the    25           sense that let's take for example the creation of the                                                                            59     1           Arpanet.  In the creation of the Arpanet the military said we     2           need a way to communicate that is resilient to adverse things     3           like nuclear war, I think Mr. Bradner stated, so they     4           established a goal that says, you know, we will pay you money     5           if you will create for us a communication medium that has the     6           following attributes.     7                    JUDGE DALZELL:  Right, and they created the packet     8           switching.     9                    THE WITNESS:  Right.  The CDA has established a goal    10           but has not dictated any technology standards nor have I    11           proposed they do so.  They have only established a goal and    12           left it to the community to come up with technical solutions    13           that achieve that goal.    14                    JUDGE DALZELL:  I thought you've testified to us    15           that a governmentally imposed standard, let's assume either    16           we or the Supreme Court of the United States whose going to    17           review what we do says Dr. Olsen is right, we've had a    18           Damascus Road experience here, minus L18 is the answer.  That    19           will then have the force of law, will it not?  And so anybody    20           who doesn't tag with minus L18 doesn't have the safe harbor    21           that Mr. Coppolino says they have, isn't that right?    22                    THE WITNESS:  To the extent that the Supreme Court    23           said L18 is the answer, that would be true.  To the extent    24           that the Supreme Court said that tagging is the answer, that    25           would not be true because we could use PICs, we could use                                                                            60     1           L18, we could use XXX, we could invent something else     2           provided it met the goal.     3                    JUDGE DALZELL:  My point is once the Supreme Court     4           or any court definitively holds that a method is a safe     5           harbor, it's then a legally imposed standard, is it not?  Not     6           a scientifically imposed standard.     7                    THE WITNESS:  I would have to beg the question on     8           that because I just don't know enough about how the Supreme     9           Court enforces anything.    10                    JUDGE DALZELL:  Others enforce it; you're looking at    11           them.    12                    (Laughter.)    13                    THE WITNESS:  I believe President Jackson objected,    14           but that was a long time  ago.    15                    JUDGE DALZELL:  That's a long time ago.    16                    (Laughter.)    17                    JUDGE DALZELL:  I think that's all I have.    18                    JUDGE SLOVITER:  Dr. Olsen, would you first satisfy    19           my curiosity?  At the very beginning of today's questioning    20           you were asked, you mentioned that you built some software.    21                    THE WITNESS:  Yes.    22                    JUDGE SLOVITER:  What did -- I wanted to know what    23           the next question was -- what did your software do?  What    24           kind of software were you talking about in that colloquy with    25           counsel?                                                                            61     1                    THE WITNESS:  Okay, they're a variety, there are     2           actually a variety of pieces of software that were in that     3           and we were focused on my work that has related to     4           interacting over the Internet.       5                    Perhaps the first one I could characterize for you     6           is let us suppose that you and I were both chip designers,     7           microchip designers.     8                    JUDGE SLOVITER:  It's not likely from this     9           standpoint, but go ahead.    10                    (Laughter.)    11                    THE WITNESS:  It's as good as some of the other    12           hypotheticals we've had, so let's suppose that we are and we,    13           you are here in Philadelphia and I am in Utah and we would    14           like--     15                    JUDGE SLOVITER:  More likely.    16                    THE WITNESS:  More likely.  And we would want to    17           collaborate on this design.  What we would like to do is we    18           would like to have you bring up the design on your machine    19           and I would bring it up on my machine, and when I made a    20           change, a message goes over the Internet and you see what I    21           just did.  When you make a change, the reverse thing happens.    22                    So we developed a protocol and the user interface    23           architecture to make that work.    24                    JUDGE SLOVITER:  I see.    25                    THE WITNESS:  That was one of the pieces.  There are                                                                            62     1           variations of other kinds of --     2                    JUDGE SLOVITER:  Is that available now?     3                    THE WITNESS:  There are things that will do that.      4           They don't necessarily use our technology, it was a prototype     5           that hasn't been widely adopted yet, but there are other     6           software that does that similar idea.     7                    JUDGE SLOVITER:  All right.  Let me go into the     8           final series of questions.     9                    Do you think it is likely that there will be -- that    10           they will ultimately develop, if -- if the idea of tagging    11           catches on, is it likely that there would ultimately develop    12           two separate tagging systems, i.e., minus L18 and PICs as a    13           practical matter?    14                    THE WITNESS:  If the technical people were left to    15           themselves that would probably happen.  I believe it will not    16           happen for the following reasons: to the extent that the    17           technical people start to argue with each other about and not    18           come to a consensus, they're far more afraid of the FCC than    19           they are of each other so they would probably come to a    20           consensus very quickly because they just don't want anybody    21           else messing in their part.    22                    JUDGE SLOVITER:  I'm afraid I don't understand what    23           the FCC has to do with this --    24                    THE WITNESS:  Oh --    25                    JUDGE SLOVITER:  -- nor do I understand -- yes.                                                                            63     1                    THE WITNESS:  Internet people very much don't like     2           outside people telling them what to do, so they would rather     3           come to a consensus than be told what they have to do.     4                    JUDGE SLOVITER:  And who would make this decision     5           then, would it be the market that would make the decision as     6           to whether you go with PICs or with minus L18?     7                    THE WITNESS:  There are a couple of ways that they     8           can do.  There already is a large amount of market momentum     9           behind PICs.  Once you get Netscape, Microsoft and Apple    10           committed, most everybody else becomes irrelevant.  They    11           will, those three organizations are big enough that even if    12           one of them said this was the standard, it would push the    13           market almost immediately.    14                    So let's say it's PICs.  But another thing that    15           might happen is having read this transcript, Netscape might    16           decide well, hey, we could screen for minus L18, too, that's    17           easy, it only takes us 20 minutes to put the code in, and    18           they might just do -- put multiple screens in simply because    19           isn't hard and because they just don't want to quarrel about    20           the problem, they just do both and be happy.    21                    JUDGE SLOVITER:  So then minus L18 is more    22           theoretical and since you're -- I know that's a conclusion    23           but since you are the creator, I feel as though a fair    24           question to ask you, was created as a hypothetical, as a    25           technical possibility that shows what would be available                                                                            64     1           rather than as a proffer of something that could be put in     2           relatively promptly to comply with the statute, and that is a     3           question.     4                    THE WITNESS:  That is -- that is correct.  I would     5           not characterize myself as having enormous influence on the     6           market, Mr. Gates would.     7                    JUDGE DALZELL:  This is your 15 minutes of fame.     8                    (Laughter.)     9                    JUDGE SLOVITER:  No, I think he's going to have more    10           than 15 minutes.      11                    So that under your proposal, you're suggestion is    12           that somebody -- and we'll get into the "somebody" in a few    13           minutes -- would label everything, every content that is    14           potentially within the statute, is that -- is that right?    15                    THE WITNESS:  Correct.    16                    JUDGE SLOVITER:  Falls within the statute.    17                    THE WITNESS:  I think you've sort of characterized    18           the conservative labeling strategy that someone might take.    19                    JUDGE SLOVITER:  Well, I thought that that was your    20           answer to the questions from Mr. Ennis mostly.    21                    THE WITNESS:  Right.    22                    JUDGE SLOVITER:  Okay.  But that covers, does it    23           not, only material of concern to parents and otherwise    24           dealing with checks in some way and rather than with other    25           problems that might concern parents more?                                                                            65     1                    THE WITNESS:  Sure.     2                    JUDGE SLOVITER:  Such as with violence, for example,     3           is that right?     4                    THE WITNESS:  That is correct.  The only reason I --     5           the only reason I narrowed what I responded to in that area     6           is I was responding specifically to the CDA.     7                    JUDGE SLOVITER:  Well, that's right, and that's what     8           your minus L18.     9                    Now, in your proposal is there any way in which    10           there could be a distinction between the type of content,    11           like for example there are some parents who are -- would be    12           concerned about material that they consider sacrilegious, for    13           example, although it would not fall within the CDA, correct?    14                    THE WITNESS:  That's correct.    15                    JUDGE SLOVITER:  And some as I mentioned with    16           violence.    17                    THE WITNESS:  Yes.    18                    JUDGE SLOVITER:  And some might not be concerned at    19           all with sex because they think their kids just couldn't care    20           less, and having seen Mr. Coppolino's book, you know, they    21           might realize that they just see one picture and turn it off,    22           there would be no way under your proposal if it were to be    23           the successful winner in the marketplace, let us say, to    24           advise the parents or the adults of the type of material that    25           the labeler thought was minus L18, is that right?                                                                            66     1                    THE WITNESS:  Yes, that's correct.     2                    JUDGE SLOVITER:  At least as the proposal stands     3           now.     4                    THE WITNESS:  That is correct and there is a valid     5           statement which it seems to me is outside the discussion of     6           the CDA, but there is a valid interest on a lot of parents to     7           get information on more than just what CDA is concerned with,     8           as you characterized, and PICs is actually assigned to     9           address that larger -- that larger context.    10                    To the extent that the content providers do the    11           labeling, I'm quite happy with PICs.    12                    JUDGE SLOVITER:  Now, well, what is it then about    13           PICs that you're not happy about?  I mean why did you then,    14           since this idea of PICs has gone out into the sort of    15           literature, literature that you rather than I are more    16           familiar with, what was it then that inspired you to research    17           into an alternate system such as minus L18?    18                    THE WITNESS:  Two things.  Two things, one of them    19           was assertions in declaration and in testimony by Mr. Bradner    20           that certain kinds of materials could not be tagged.    21                    JUDGE SLOVITER:  Was that -- I'd have to go back    22           because his testimony was sort of long, very long and very    23           technical.    24                    THE WITNESS:  Yes.    25                    JUDGE SLOVITER:  And very difficult to understand.                                                                             67     1           Was it technologically could not be tagged or -- I forget.      2           I'd have to --     3                    JUDGE DALZELL:  He said it was very difficult, as I     4           recall.     5                    THE WITNESS:  There are two -- there are two points     6           that he made.     7                    JUDGE SLOVITER:  Yeah.     8                    THE WITNESS:  One of them was that if I have data     9           which has some proscribed format like a JIF (ph.) image, I    10           believe we talked about on Friday, then putting the tag    11           inside the data, you couldn't do that.  And he's right.     12           That's why, you know, I looked and said he's right, is there    13           another way?  And another way would be to tag the name.    14                    JUDGE SLOVITER:  Hmm.    15                    THE WITNESS:  Another way also would be to use a    16           database on the side which is one of the architectures    17           proposed in PICs that contain the tag and that would work,    18           too.    19                    JUDGE SLOVITER:  Would the technical possibilities    20           that your declaration sets forth as to where the tag could be    21           put, I think you said three places, the server, et cetera.    22                    THE WITNESS:  That's where it could be filtered, not    23           where it could be put.    24                    JUDGE SLOVITER:  Filtered, would that work as well    25           for PICs as for minus L18?                                                                            68     1                    THE WITNESS:  Yes.  One of the reasons I picked     2           minus L18 is because I knew I could configure the Netscope     3           proxy server and the Netscape Web server today to do that.     4                    JUDGE SLOVITER:  Mm-hmm.     5                    THE WITNESS:  But since Netscape is so excited about     6           PICs, I assume that they'll have a product out very soon that     7           would do exactly the same thing with relative to PICs labels.     8                    JUDGE SLOVITER:  So that that reason, at least, and     9           I don't want to put words in your mouth but I want to    10           question, so that reason for developing minus L18 could be    11           solved with PICs, could it not?    12                    THE WITNESS:  Yes, I guess --    13                    JUDGE SLOVITER:  You said there were two reasons    14           then for developing minus L18.  What was the other?    15                    THE WITNESS:  The other one had related to a    16           different argument that Mr. Bradner made that was related to    17           the filtering we just talked about.  I think he said    18           something about he knew of no software that could be    19           configured to do the filtering and again I put together a    20           counter example.    21                    JUDGE SLOVITER:  I see.  So that with your computer    22           genius, and I mean that just as I say it, you know, true    23           computer genius, would the -- and with what you have shown    24           through your declaration and your testimony and your    25           experience in your work that will take place in Carnegie-                                                                            69     1           Mellon, would the problems that you saw with PICs be     2           technologically soluble?     3                    THE WITNESS:  My number one complaint with PICs has     4           to do with the concept of a label bureau, okay?  And there, I     5           have two complaints there.     6                    JUDGE SLOVITER:  But that's -- excuse me -- that's     7           not a technical problem --     8                    THE WITNESS:   Well, no, it isn't.     9                    JUDGE SLOVITER:  Oh, go ahead.     10                    THE WITNESS:  Yeah, it is a technical problem and    11           there are two.  One of them is the problems of building a    12           database that keeps track of an exponentially growing set of    13           things you're trying to monitor, that's my --     14                    JUDGE SLOVITER:  Oh, uh-huh.    15                    THE WITNESS:  The other problem is that the way PICs    16           would have -- the way a label bureau would be implemented, it    17           actually does slow down the way a user would get access to    18           their material.    19                    And if I could, without getting into acronyms --    20                    JUDGE SLOVITER:  Yes, but you're going to.    21                    JUDGE DALZELL:  Oh, go ahead, everybody else has.    22                    (Laughter.)    23                    THE WITNESS:  I know, I read their testimony.  I've    24           tried very hard to stay away from them.    25                    JUDGE SLOVITER:  And the Court's impatience.                                                                            70     1                    (Laughter.)     2                    THE WITNESS:  If I'm sitting at the browser much as     3           Mr. Schmidt showed us on Friday and I click on --     4                    JUDGE SLOVITER:  You mean Mr. -- when Mr. Schmidt     5           showed us this --     6                    THE WITNESS:  Right, when he led you through the     7           Worldwide Web.     8                    JUDGE SLOVITER:  On the -- on the screen?     9                    THE WITNESS:  Yes.    10                    JUDGE SLOVITER:  Yeah.    11                    THE WITNESS:  Yes, that whole demo.  When I click on    12           something, what has to happen right now is that name comes    13           into the software, we identify from that name something    14           called the domain which effectively identifies the computer I    15           want to talk to.    16                    I open a connection to that computer like making a    17           phone call and I sent it the rest of my request.  Their    18           server software will then try to fill that request and will    19           send me the information back.  So I've got an over and a    20           back.    21                    If the messages are small, my dominant cost is the    22           amount of time it goes over and back, and that really is a    23           problem.  Now, with the label bureau, if I want to have a    24           label bureau interposed, then the following thing has to    25           occur:  my software gets the URL and before it goes and                                                                            71     1           contacts with the information, it first has to go over and     2           back to the label bureau saying is this clear and give me the     3           label.     4                    JUDGE SLOVITER:  Mm-hmm.     5                    THE WITNESS:  Then I decide if I like the label and     6           then I go again over and back to actually get the     7           information.     8                    JUDGE SLOVITER:  Is the "I" in this hypothetical the     9           parent?    10                    THE WITNESS:  The parent, the software that the    11           parent has installed, the software is actually doing this.    12                    JUDGE SLOVITER:  So, in other words, it's going to    13           take a little more time.  So that if Judge Dalzell, who is    14           the only one among us who has any minor children at home, so    15           if Judge Dalzell were to go on the Internet, would it slow    16           down his or his children's receipt of the information?  Is    17           that what -- I'm trying to find out --    18                    THE WITNESS:  Yes, yes.    19                    JUDGE SLOVITER:  Okay.  And --    20                    THE WITNESS:  What it means that instead of an over    21           and back, I now have two of those and those are the most    22           expensive part of the transaction.    23                    It's also complicated by the fact that if this is a    24           popular label bureau, lots of people are trying to do an over    25           and back to that label bureau.  In the PIC spec this is                                                                            72     1           termed a hot spot because that potentially becomes a     2           bottleneck.     3                    They have proposed some solutions to that which     4           essentially allow me to have multiple label bureaus, but they     5           haven't tested them yet.  I --     6                    JUDGE SLOVITER:  Well, a lot of this all hasn't been     7           testing --     8                    THE WITNESS:  I'm actually, I mean in a technical     9           judgment I think the scheme they have proposed to alleviate    10           that hot spot problem is probably reasonable and I would not    11           contest them on that.    12                    But we still have this over and back, over and back    13           twice as much for every access.     14                    JUDGE SLOVITER:  So it adds cost or it adds an extra    15           minute to Judge Dalzell's children when they want to reach    16           the material?  I'm just trying to find out what we're talking    17           about in practicality.    18                    THE WITNESS:  If it inhibits the flow, if I'm    19           allowed to say that?    20                    JUDGE SLOVITER:  Yeah.    21                    JUDGE DALZELL:  Everybody else did.    22                    THE WITNESS:  Everybody else did.  I mean it    23           actually makes everything much more sluggish than it would    24           normally be.    25                    JUDGE SLOVITER:  But by sluggish in computer                                                                            73     1           language we mean that they get it in a minute or two later     2           than they would have otherwise had to get it?     3                    THE WITNESS:  Well, if you ever sat down and used     4           the Worldwide Web.     5                    JUDGE SLOVITER:  Oh, I tried.     6                    THE WITNESS:  Yes, well, if you ever used it, I mean     7           a minute is absolutely unreasonable, I mean just -- this is a     8           getting into the user interface side of my world, people will     9           not put up with a minute.    10                    JUDGE SLOVITER:  Of course when one thinks of what    11           the alternatives are, which we'll get into in a minute, in my    12           minute here, which means blocking the whole thing --    13                    THE WITNESS:  Right.    14                    JUDGE SLOVITER:  -- and that might be a balance one    15           would accept.    16                    THE WITNESS:  Yes.    17                    JUDGE SLOVITER:  If it means -- well, okay.  All    18           right.    19                    THE WITNESS:  I guess --    20                    JUDGE SLOVITER:  Yes, go ahead.    21                    THE WITNESS:  One point to make there.    22                    JUDGE SLOVITER:  Yes.    23                    THE WITNESS:  And that is if you have, if however    24           under PICs the content providers, Webserver is providing the    25           label and there is a proposal on PICs as to how the content                                                                            74     1           provider would be serving that label, then you don't need,     2           then it's the same traffic that we had before.      3                    And the other thing is if you use a label and the     4           name such as L18, for those materials that aren't related to     5           the statute at all there is no overhead whatsoever.  Whereas     6           in PICs with the label bureau, I don't know until I make the     7           first request whether or not I should block or not so     8           everything has to be checked.     9                    JUDGE SLOVITER:  Now, under the minus L18 scheme,    10           and I use the word "scheme" because that was your use of the    11           word and also the Government's, somebody would have to make a    12           judgment call right at the beginning and until -- from what    13           you testified, until the judgment call is made and we leave    14           aside because that's not within the scope of your testimony    15           the whole question of judgment calls and I don't intend to    16           ask you about that -- but during that period then students,    17           for example, Judge Dalzell's -- and the judgment call would    18           be made on the basis, as you said, that if there was a sexual    19           organ showing, then that would until somebody passed it    20           through or something or never passed it through, it would be    21           labeled L18 and it would then be blocked.  I think that's a    22           fair characterization.    23                    THE WITNESS:  That's -- that's fair.    24                    JUDGE SLOVITER:  I have noticed that you'll -- if    25           I'm not you can take care of yourself and you'll tell us--                                                                            75     1           then Judge Dalzell's children, whom I have never met, Judge     2           Dalzell's children or other students would be blocked at     3           least initially from bringing up on their screen parts of     4           museum collections, sculpture, for example, which is replete     5           with sexual organs showing, is that right?     6                    THE WITNESS:  And, yes, it would depend on how long     7           it actually took this museum to sort of clear the     8           information, if you will, but during that period of time when     9           they made a conservative judgment and then considered it more    10           deeply, during that period of time, yes, it would be blocked.    11                    JUDGE SLOVITER:  But is it true that suggestive    12           topics that in which the sexual organs are covered such as    13           the, what they tell me is the swimsuit issue of Sports    14           Illustrated would not be blocked?    15                    THE WITNESS:  Well, that would be a judgment call    16           that would have to be made by the server of the information    17           and how conservative or how liberal or how preemptive they    18           wanted to be, I'm sure they would decide with counsel.    19                    JUDGE SLOVITER:  Now, under your system, once you    20           blocked a museum with -- I don't remember if it was you or    21           somebody else -- with its pictures of Indian statutes and in    22           not only suggestive but very obvious sexual interludes and    23           some Japanese, I think that there are lots of Japanese,    24           famous Japanese prints that might have some of them, how do    25           they get unblocked for -- on an individual basis, you know,                                                                            76     1           technically what is your plan how they get unblocked so that     2           a viewer can see it, an under 18 viewer can see it?     3                    THE WITNESS:  Sort of -- sort of getting a grasp on     4           this, assuming that the provider has made a judgment that     5           they ought to be blocked for minors for whatever reason --     6                    JUDGE SLOVITER:  The provider -- the provider, I     7           gather from what you said the provider would say I'd better     8           make this L18.  It wouldn't be the creator because those     9           creators are dead, so let's say the provider.  The provider    10           has made under your hypothetical a decision under your scheme    11           that anything showing a sexual act comes within the CDA.  And    12           that goes -- and that becomes L18.    13                    How can either a teacher or a Judge Dalzell or    14           somebody else say wait a minute, I want individual items on    15           this showing, how does that work technically is what I'm    16           asking.     17                    THE WITNESS:  A teacher or a parent who felt for    18           whatever reason that it was appropriate, actually they did    19           want to show this, they could log onto the Worldwide Web,    20           they could download those pictures, they could store them on    21           their own hard disk and then they could print them or they    22           could display them in class or whatever way they wanted to.    23                    So an adult could use their authority as an adult to    24           retrieve the material and then do whatever they pleased with    25           it.                                                                            77     1                    JUDGE SLOVITER:  Wouldn't that slow the flow?     2                    (Laughter.)     3                    THE WITNESS:  Assuming it was legal, I don't know     4           whether it's legal for --     5                    JUDGE SLOVITER:  Neither do I at this point.     6                    THE WITNESS:  Yes, assuming it was legal for the     7           teacher to sort of have created a flow experience related to     8           these, then the teacher could actually put together a small     9           Web site locally within the classroom which actually is --    10           doesn't require all the overheard that's necessary to    11           distribute one on the Internet.    12                    Their putting those up in files so the students    13           could readily access them in class is not technologically a    14           problem.    15                    JUDGE SLOVITER:  Now, you said that the blocker --    16           obviously the minus L18 system works, would work only    17           effectively in conjunction with a blocker and you made that    18           very clear.  And you also made clear that the blocker could    19           be at different places and they were, if maybe you'll -- one    20           was in the server.    21                    THE WITNESS:  That's correct.    22                    JUDGE SLOVITER:  And what were the other two?    23                    THE WITNESS:  Another one is in the proxy server.  I    24           can explain that if you want me to but --    25                    JUDGE SLOVITER:  I think you did.                                                                            78     1                    THE WITNESS:  Okay.     2                    JUDGE SLOVITER:  Yeah, and the third?     3                    THE WITNESS:  And the third is at the actual client     4           software, the browser or the E-mail leader.     5                    JUDGE SLOVITER:  And the client in that case is     6           Judge Dalzell or is it --     7                    THE WITNESS:  It is the software that Judge Dalzell     8           has put on his computer.     9                    JUDGE SLOVITER:  Not Judge Dalzell individually.    10                    THE WITNESS:  That's correct.  I keep forgetting    11           that clients mean different things to lawyers than they do to    12           computer scientists.    13                    JUDGE SLOVITER:  That's right.  Well, I was thinking    14           of the ultimate consumer, the user.    15                    Is it technologically feasible to have the blocker    16           in different places under this scheme or does a decision have    17           to be made somewhere at the inception as to where the blocker    18           would be?    19                    THE WITNESS:  What do you mean -- what do you mean    20           by inception?    21                    JUDGE SLOVITER:  Well, your system is not yet in    22           effect.    23                    THE WITNESS:  Oh, okay.    24                    JUDGE SLOVITER:  Okay.  When the system goes into    25           effect, if the system goes into effect --                                                                            79     1                    THE WITNESS:  If Mr. Gates adopts it, let's say.     2                    JUDGE SLOVITER:  Yeah, but if Mr. Gates adopts it     3           and then somebody else adopts it and America On Line, he's     4           not America On Line, adopts it --     5                    THE WITNESS:  No.     6                    JUDGE SLOVITER:  -- does there have to be, does     7           everybody have to decide at some point that minus L18, that     8           part of minus L18 becomes effective because it is blocked at     9           one spot?  Does this question show the technological lack of    10           aptitude of the question or, I mean --    11                    THE WITNESS:  No, I guess -- I think I understand    12           what your question is.    13                    JUDGE SLOVITER:  Thank you.    14                    THE WITNESS:  And we've got a lot of places in the    15           stream that we could essentially cut.    16                    JUDGE SLOVITER:  That's what you testified, yes.    17                    THE WITNESS:  And the answer is we could cut all of    18           them, we could cut any one of them.  I mean we're completely    19           free in terms of the software providers.  America On Line,    20           for example, which controls both the proxy server and the    21           client software in many cases could say, you know, I'll put    22           it at the proxy server or they could say well, I want to    23           provide you this service at my browser.  They could choose    24           anywhere they wanted if they felt they wanted to offer that    25           service to their customers.                                                                            80     1                    JUDGE SLOVITER:  Okay.  You mentioned that in order     2           to be effective under the CDA mentioned today and I think     3           Friday also, but I think mostly today, the question of this     4           potentially 40 percent of material and certainly this kind of     5           material, I gather, emanating from abroad and you suggested     6           well, if Surfwatch was --      7                    JUDGE SLOVITER:  Which is really a very new group     8           also and I recall it's been in existence --     9                    THE WITNESS:  Oh --     10                    JUDGE SLOVITER:  -- for about three months or six    11           months or --    12                    JUDGE DALZELL:  July, July of '95.    13                    THE WITNESS:  They're farther along than the PICs    14           labeling bureaus but, yes, they are quite new.    15                    JUDGE SLOVITER:  And PICs may be farther along than    16           minus L18, I guess.    17                    THE WITNESS:  Yes.    18                    JUDGE SLOVITER:  Okay.  So that what we're talking    19           about throughout this are proposals that have not yet been    20           effectuated and that we really don't, nobody sees really how    21           they would operate in actuality.  We know your testimony is    22           they can, but it was just a response to your -- but you    23           suggested that if Surfwatch or any of the blockers didn't    24           have to worry about the 60 percent or whatever amount comes    25           out emanates from this country, then they could concentrate                                                                            81     1           on the material that came from the book, is that --     2                    THE WITNESS:  That's correct.     3                    JUDGE SLOVITER:  -- that's a fair statement.  But     4           Surfwatch, as I recall, hopes to be a commercially viable     5           entity and I assume that most of these, unless some are run     6           by churches or the Boy Scouts or some group like that, I     7           think most of them in this country -- well, in this world you     8           get successful if you make money -- is it feasible that if     9           they didn't, if the blocker groups didn't have the income    10           from blocking the 60 percent that emanates here because there    11           would be mostly a different kind of system because they    12           wouldn't have to do it, as you suggested, but they could make    13           it commercially feasible by just existing on reviewing the    14           material that emanates from abroad?    15                    THE WITNESS:  Well, a little bit out of my area but    16           I think I can help you here.  That for someone like Surfwatch    17           or Net Nanny, the key to their market, the key to their    18           income is the level of concern that parents feel about the    19           availability of the material.    20                    So to the extent that parents suddenly feel less    21           concern because of PICs or L18 or something else and in    22           conjunction with the CDA because they now have some    23           confidence that a lot of people are going to label, to the    24           extent that their concern might be reduced then you have    25           potential customer base for Surfwatch is reduced.  To the                                                                            82     1           extent that Surfwatch can clearly market to these people that     2           there's still a lot of stuff in France or Germany or whatever     3           that you might want to protect your children from, then they     4           would still be successful.     5                    The size of their market doesn't change.  What does     6           change is the size of the perceived concern.     7                    JUDGE SLOVITER:  And the -- wouldn't it also change     8           the extent of what they have to do?  Because if they're not     9           busy, see, it was your answer that raised my question.  If    10           they are not busy with the 60 percent domestic material, then    11           they're not going to get income from whatever it is that    12           they're doing over the 60 percent.    13                    THE WITNESS:  No, what it means, it means that label    14           costs go down, assuming that their income stays -- they still    15           are selling the same number of subscriptions, if their label    16           costs go down it becomes more profitable.     17                    JUDGE SLOVITER:  Now, oh -- I want to go back to    18           something that you said, I'm finishing up, about pre-    19           screening.  You said in the central part of this, of course,    20           involves pre-screening the material before so that anything    21           L18 would be pre-screened by somebody.    22                    THE WITNESS:  Can you help me with pre-screened just    23           a little bit?    24                    JUDGE SLOVITER:  Well, I don't know because it's    25           your word, so I was going to ask you.  I had -- I wrote                                                                             83     1           that -- wrote it down.     2                    Your response --     3                    THE WITNESS:  There's two cases --     4                    JUDGE SLOVITER:  Yeah.     5                    THE WITNESS:  Yeah, there's two cases and maybe you     6           could clarify which one you're concerned about.  One's --     7                    JUDGE SLOVITER:  Tell me about both; tell us about     8           them.     9                    THE WITNESS:  Yeah, one is the transition case    10           proposed by Mr. Hansen which is, you know, by 6:15 I have     11           to--    12                    JUDGE SLOVITER:  Well, that's pretty unrealistic,     13           so --     14                    THE WITNESS:  But let's suppose within the next two,    15           three months I have to somehow do something with 14,000    16           pages.  So that's the transit -- and so one thing I said that    17           you might do is, you know, take an initial preliminary screen    18           that's fairly conservative.  So if that's not the case you    19           want--    20                    JUDGE SLOVITER:  No, I'm asking about Mr. Jensen, I    21           guess it was Mr. Jensen's supposed -- what was the issue?    22                    JUDGE DALZELL:  Mr. Hansen?    23                    JUDGE SLOVITER:  What was the -- Ennis, Mr. Ennis'    24           question.  What was -- there was an issue.  He asked you    25           today about what happens on the morning when the library puts                                                                            84     1           Vanity Fair out, wants to put Vanity Fair on line.     2                    JUDGE DALZELL:  And it has the picture of Demi Moore     3           on the cover.     4                    JUDGE SLOVITER:  Well, or something that it doesn't     5           really know.  You said well, at that point they could block     6           the whole thing until they pre-screened, was that the     7           response?     8                    THE WITNESS:  Oh, yeah, one of the possible     9           approaches is that I can sort of do this triage thing which    10           says, you know, there's a whole bunch of stuff that I just    11           know isn't going to be sexually explicit so I don't care, I    12           don't label it.  There is a whole bunch of stuff that I know    13           is, and so I just automatically label that.  And then I've    14           got this middle piece which might be on the border line, so    15           one possible thing to do is I'll just conservatively screen    16           it for now and let some people look at it a little more    17           carefully.    18                    JUDGE SLOVITER:  So that at the essence of your    19           proposal would -- is it true that at the essence of your    20           proposal you have screening and blocking of material in    21           advance of its dissemination that includes a great deal of    22           material that is not offensive to anybody, is that correct?     23                    THE WITNESS:  Uhm, well, I guess part of my answer    24           there is to the extent you feel you need to screen, if I was    25           running my department library electronically, for example, I                                                                            85     1           would never even look in communications to the ACM for     2           sexually explicit material and if by chance something got     3           through, I would just profusely apologize afterwards.     4                    JUDGE SLOVITER:  Yeah, but if you --     5                    THE WITNESS:  But a large amount of material, a     6           large amount of the 2500 magazines that Mr. Ennis pointed to     7           is that kind of material.     8                    JUDGE SLOVITER:  But if you were an anthropologist,     9           for example, or a library dealing with anthropology like the    10           university, you're at Philadelphia, like the Museum of the    11           University of Pennsylvania which has a lot of anthropological    12           material, some statues, might have magazines, it's a magazine    13           that has some other material.  You might have to pre-screen    14           or block to be safe, would you not?    15                    THE WITNESS:  Well --    16                    JUDGE SLOVITER:  At least for some period of time.    17                    THE WITNESS:  Yeah, I guess --    18                    JUDGE SLOVITER:  No matter how short?  I mean is    19           that, is that -- what I'm trying to find out is that part of    20           your scheme.    21                    THE WITNESS:  Yes.  I guess part of what I'd like to    22           point there is that libraries in any of this kind of    23           classification and this is a classification task, that's what    24           it is.  Any of these classification tasks they don't act    25           alone, they have consortia that they've created so that every                                                                            86     1           individual library doesn't have to go to the work of doing     2           this.     3                    And in some cases libraries have just pushed back on     4           the publishers and said: you do the screen or I don't want to     5           see your stuff.     6                    JUDGE SLOVITER:  But what I'm asking is whether in     7           essence this system, your scheme will house within it your     8           blocking of some material in advance -- well, material in     9           advance, period.  And can you think of any time in our    10           history when we have blocked access to material in advance?    11                    THE WITNESS:  Uhm, yes, every editor does this every    12           day on a newspaper.  I mean --    13                    JUDGE SLOVITER:  Oh, well, that we have done this in    14           an organized fashion in advance --    15                    THE WITNESS:  Oh, but, again every editor does this    16           on his newspaper.    17                    JUDGE SLOVITER:  -- because of the law.    18                    Do you think -- would your -- just answer one more    19           technological question then.  If minus L18 became the    20           prevalent response to the CDA and the Government became or--    21           well, the Government became dissatisfied with the pace at    22           which it was going, for one reason or another, would it    23           contain the seeds of the possibility that the Government    24           would do the blocking, technologically?    25                    THE WITNESS:  Speculating on what the Government                                                                            87     1           might or might not --     2                    JUDGE SLOVITER:  No, I'm just asking whether     3           technologically if one put minus L18 into effect as the     4           prevalent response, would it facilitate from a technological     5           standpoint the Government's doing the judgment call as to     6           what goes out?  Because everything would already be tagged.     7                    THE WITNESS:  Well, in other words, I guess there's     8           two questions.     9                    JUDGE SLOVITER:  In other words, once everything    10           gets tagged as minus 18, minus L18.    11                    THE WITNESS:   Mm-hmm.    12                    JUDGE SLOVITER:  Would it -- would that facilitate    13           any one entity, whether it's the Government or the church or    14           some other entity, saying this is material that should not go    15           out on the Internet?    16                    THE WITNESS:  If I can characterize this, does this    17           create, does it make it technologically easier for the    18           Government to overtly sensor material, if they chose to do?    19                    JUDGE SLOVITER:  Pre-sensor, yes.      20                    THE WITNESS:  Possibly.  I assume that you would do    21           something in your capacity to prevent that.    22                    JUDGE SLOVITER:  Thank you very much.    23                    JUDGE DALZELL:  May I just follow up on something    24           prompted by Chief Judge Sloviter's questions?  Just to recap    25           the testimony we have heard, the technical testimony we've                                                                            88     1           heard over five days here, we heard that Surfwatch came into     2           existence in July of 1995.  We heard that Microsoft, our     3           friend, Mr. Gates and his pals, announced that they were     4           going to go into PICs, I think it was February 28th, 20 days     5           after the CDA went into effect.  And one fine day about two     6           weeks ago I think you testified that you came up with your     7           colleagues with the minus L18, correct?     8                    THE WITNESS:  Mm-hmm.     9                    JUDGE SLOVITER:  Wait, he didn't -- there is no    10           answer on that --    11                    THE WITNESS:  Oh, yes, I'm sorry.    12                    JUDGE DALZELL:  Or just a minus L18.  So your    13           proposal is two weeks old, Surfwatch is less than a year old,    14           okay.  The PICs I take it we also agree is now a reality.     15           That is to say once, you said once Microsoft said we're in,    16           that PICs got its reality the moment that happened.    17                    THE WITNESS:  Well, to the extent that marketing    18           pitches by computer companies constitute reality.    19                    JUDGE DALZELL:  Well, that will do, won't it?    20                    THE WITNESS:  What?    21                    JUDGE DALZELL:  That will do for reality, won't it?    22                    THE WITNESS:  Well, with a minor quibble about what    23           marketing people say, yes.    24                    JUDGE DALZELL:  I mean I thought the testimony here    25           has been that PICs is not only a theory, PICs is being                                                                            89     1           adopted as we speak.  Is that not true?     2                    THE WITNESS:  But there is -- there is no actual     3           software on the market.  That's my -- that's my only quibble     4           is --     5                    JUDGE DALZELL:  But the testimony was -- and I want     6           to know if you disagree with it -- testimony was it will be     7           operation-- it will be operative in three to six months?     8                    THE WITNESS:  I believe that.     9                    JUDGE DALZELL:  Okay.  Is minus L18 -- if we said    10           today this is it, this is the safe harbor, could you be    11           operative in three to six months?    12                    THE WITNESS:  To the same level that PICs is, it    13           could be operative sooner, it's easier.    14                    JUDGE DALZELL:  Okay.  And so my final question to    15           you is this: we have Surfwatch since July of 1995, we have    16           PICs as baptized by Mr. Gates on February 28th, 1996, we have    17           minus L18 as brought into the world by Dan Olsen and his    18           pals, let's say -- let's say April 1, 1996, okay?  At any    19           point along that continuum of time would it have made sense    20           to freeze this process?    21                    THE WITNESS:  No.    22                    JUDGE DALZELL:  Would it make sense today to freeze    23           this process?    24                    THE WITNESS:  No.    25                    JUDGE DALZELL:  Okay, thank you.                                                                              90     1                    JUDGE SLOVITER:  Did our questions elicit questions     2           from counsel?     3                    MR. HANSEN:  If I might, your Honor, I have just a     4           couple.     5                            FURTHER RECROSS-EXAMINATION     6           BY MR. HANSEN:       7           Q   I'm Christopher Hansen, one of the lawyers for plaintiffs     8           in the ACLU case.     9                    JUDGE SLOVITER:  When you sit up here I thought you    10           get the last word, but that comes later.      11                    Go ahead.    12           BY MR. HANSEN:      13           Q   Good morning. I just want to ask a couple of questions    14           about news groups that were prompted by the Court's question.     15           Is it technologically true that if you post a message to a    16           news group today I have the ability to alter what is written    17           in your subject line?    18           A   I'm not sure how you would do that.  I would be reluctant    19           to say that it's completely impossible but, frankly, I don't    20           know how you'd do that.    21           Q   Let's assume that you posted a message to a news group    22           today and tagged it L18 in the subject line.  Just doing that    23           fact would not today prevent a single minor from reading your    24           message, correct?    25           A   Without screening software in effect, that is correct.                                                                            91     1           Q   And the screening software does not now exist, correct?     2           A   That is correct.     3           Q   So for the at least immediate future the only thing that     4           can be done in the context of news groups is  that all speech     5           has to be suitable for minors, is that correct?     6           A   That is correct.     7                    MR. HANSEN:  Thank you, I have nothing further.     8                    JUDGE SLOVITER:  Thank you.       9                            FURTHER REDIRECT EXAMINATION    10           BY MR. BARON:    11           Q   Dr. Olsen, you talked about statistical assurance in your    12           prior testimony.  Is it your testimony that if all the    13           browser--    14                    JUDGE SLOVITER:  Do you want to, just for the tape    15           because the person who writes this may not -- do you want to    16           again identify so that it will be clear?    17           BY MR. BARON:      18           Q   Dr. Olsen, you talked about statistical --    19                    JUDGE SLOVITER:  No, I mean with your name.     20                    JUDGE DALZELL:  Identify yourself.    21                    MR. BARON:  Oh, oh.  Jason R. Baron.    22                    JUDGE DALZELL:  Tag yourself.    23                    (Laughter.)    24                    MR. BARON:  I'll label myself from the Justice    25           Department, Jason R. Baron.                                                                            92     1           BY MR. BARON:       2           Q   In response to Mr. Hansen's last question you answered a     3           question about USNet groups.  Now, with respect to your prior     4           testimony about statistical assurance, if browsers in the     5           marketplace could be configured to look at a tag or a label     6           such as you proposed there would be a statistical assurance     7           with respect to restrictions on minors for USNet, correct?     8           A   To the extent that screening news readers were deployed,     9           yes, you'd have statistical assurance.    10           Q   All right.  There were a number of questions from the    11           judges here.  Judge Buckwalter asked you about economic costs    12           as opposed to technical costs, do you recall that question?    13           A   Yes.    14           Q   What are the economic costs to tagging or labeling with    15           four key strokes minus L18 to the content creator?    16           A   The technological costs are minimal, all costs that might    17           be associated are the judgmental costs.    18           Q   I asked about economic costs.    19           A   Yeah, I mean -- yes, I mean in terms of actually    20           performing the act of tagging it's how long does it take you    21           to type four key strokes.    22           Q   Now, on the other hand, what are the costs associated    23           with the use of Surfwatch on the consumer end?    24           A   The last time I looked at Surfwatch they wanted six    25           dollars a week, I mean six dollars a month with some discount                                                                            93     1           for a yearly subscription and that would go on for as long as     2           the Internet exists, I presume.     3           Q   In terms of business models is it conceivable that there     4           are costs to consumers for the use of third-party services in     5           terms of protecting children from inappropriate material?     6           A   My testimony characterized that the work required to be a     7           label bureau or a Surfwatch or some third party is     8           significant.  The only business model I've seen so far is     9           that the consumers would incur that cost.    10           Q   The matter of the Federal Communications Commission came    11           up in your responses to prior questions from the Court.  Do    12           you recall that?    13           A   Yes.    14           Q   Let me read, if the Court will indulge me, this is from    15           E-5-6 of the Communications Decency Act.  The sentences say    16           "The Commission," which is meant the Federal Communications    17           Commission, "may describe measures which are reasonable,    18           effective and appropriate to restrict access to prohibited    19           communications under Subsection D.  Nothing in this section    20           authorizes the Commission to enforce or is intended to    21           provide the Commission with the authority to approve sanction    22           or permit the use of such measures.  The Commission shall    23           have no enforcement authority over the failure to utilize    24           such measures.  The Commission shall not endorse specific    25           products relating to such measures."                                                                            94     1                    With respect to this, these sentences, I'm not     2           asking for a legal opinion but would your minus L18 proposal     3           be the type of proposal that could constitute something that     4           the FCC may discuss in response to this section of the     5           statute?     6           A   Certainly they could discuss that as a possibility.     7           Q   Am I correct that you are not relying on U.S. imposed     8           standards for the introduction of minus L18?     9           A   No.  I -- I said no to -- I am not relying on the    10           Government imposing standards, no.    11           Q   And you haven't by anything that you've written in this    12           action, your declaration or your prior testimony stated that    13           there must be a mandatory tag that represents minus L18?    14           A   No, I've tried to represent a range of things that people    15           could do not requiring a Government mandate.    16           Q   There could be multiple tags?    17           A   Yes.    18           Q   And there could be PICs compatible tags that rely on    19           self-labeling?    20           A   Yes.    21           Q   And there's nothing in your proposal that's inconsistent    22           with the self-labeling idea that's embodied in PICs?    23           A   No.    24           Q   In fact, you're leaving it up to the creative genius of    25           the Internet to come up with solutions that are consistent                                                                            95     1           with minus L18, is that your testimony?     2           A   Absolutely.     3           Q   Can I read you -- can I turn to the matter that Mr. Ennis     4           raised and the Court raised about blocking sites on the     5           Internet and transition rules.  Is it your testimony --      6           A   And transition --     7           Q   And transition rules.     8           A   Rules or costs?     9           Q   Costs.  I'll stick with transition costs.  What -- would    10           it be in your view a quicker solution for content creators to    11           have -- to go through their site even if it's a large site to    12           narrow down what might be sexually explicit material or    13           material within the CDA?  Would it be quicker for them to do    14           that or would it be quicker to rely on third-party rating    15           services to rate sites on the Internet in a PICs compatible    16           format, what would happen faster?    17           A   In terms of labor required, it is much easier for the    18           creator to have done this than to have the label bureau do    19           it.  As an example, I could go back to BYU right now and    20           label the department's entire site as none containing    21           sexually explicit material.  Mr. Bradner could do the same    22           for his data site.  Large numbers of universities --    23                    JUDGE SLOVITER:  That's cause your data sites deal    24           with computers and technical things, right?    25                    THE WITNESS:  Well, right, because -- it's because I                                                                            96     1           know what's on the site, but the point is that I was going to     2           get to is that a label bureau does not know.  They don't have     3           that prior knowledge that there is nothing there, so they     4           have to go look.     5           BY MR. BARON:       6           Q   Do you think it will take a long time for a majority of     7           the sites on the Internet to be rated by a PICs rating     8           service?     9                    JUDGE SLOVITER:  Do you know?  If you know.    10                    THE WITNESS:  I'm reluctant to characterize the    11           amount of time it would take all of them.  The caveat there    12           also being PICs and its availability.  Through the PIC L18 I    13           feel a little better about, I don't think it would take    14           anybody more than a couple of months unless they had a    15           particularly large collection.    16           BY MR. BARON:      17           Q   The Government doesn't control the Internet, correct?    18           A   That is correct.    19           Q   And your L18 scheme could not be immediately implemented    20           in the push of a button, somebody in Washington, to block all    21           sites on the Internet if minus L18 came out as a consensus    22           for screening, correct?    23           A   I know of no way to do that.    24           Q   You're not relying on the U.S. Government in any fashion    25           for mandating the minus L18 proposal?                                                                            97     1           A   I am not.     2                    MR. BARON:  I have no further questions.     3                    JUDGE SLOVITER:  Oh, would you stay there just for a     4           minute because it was -- you asked him a question and I think     5           he didn't get to answer the second half and I thought maybe     6           that would be appropriate.  Somewhere maybe your second or     7           third question dealt with costs and you said it wouldn't cost     8           very much to put in the four -- that it wouldn't cost very     9           much to put in minus L18 and he answered and you started to    10           say well, and you said well, to put in the four strokes and    11           he said no, that wouldn't be very expensive.  And I thought    12           you started to say in response but to go to the next step and    13           you went to the four strokes.  Do you recall that colloquy    14           and I think the question is somebody's got to -- and I    15           thought you were about to talk about the fact that somebody    16           will have to decide that this should go to minus L18 and that    17           there would be some costs associated with that.  Is that    18           correct?    19                    THE WITNESS:  I assume that there are always costs    20           associated with a human judgment, but the technical --    21                    JUDGE SLOVITER:  You started to say the judgment    22           part.    23                    JUDGE DALZELL:  And that's what was cut off.    24                    THE WITNESS:  I have not characterized those.    25                    JUDGE SLOVITER:  And --                                                                            98     1                    THE WITNESS:  Other than what I stated about a pre-     2           screen that you could do on images or text.     3                    JUDGE SLOVITER:  Oh, so we are talking pre-     4           screening.  And then the judgment cost would be similar,     5           would it be different in degree from the judgment involved     6           with PICs whether --     7                    THE WITNESS:  No, no, the judgment cost is going to     8           be the same either way.     9                    JUDGE SLOVITER:  Okay, thank you.     10                    MR. BARON:  Thank you, your Honor.    11                    (Witness excused.) Back to Hearing Transcripts index Back to Citizens Internet Empowerment Coalition Page WT02-B05-88IA095-001027-B014-238http://www.cdt.org:80/ciec/transcripts/April_15_conc.html 205.177.10.31 19970215013004 text/html 34204HTTP/1.0 200 OKDate: Sat, 15 Feb 1997 01:28:36 GMTServer: Apache/1.1.1Content-type: text/html Conclusion of April 15 hearing Conclusion of hearing April 15, 1996     12                    JUDGE DALZELL:  Mr. Coppolino?    13                    JUDGE SLOVITER:  Oh, all right, Mr. Coppolino, Judge    14           Dalzell has invited you up.    15                    MR. COPPOLINO:  I'm sorry?    16                    JUDGE DALZELL:  Didn't you want to -- did you have    17           anything else for us or --    18                    MR. COPPOLINO:  I think the only thing that's left    19           to do today before the hearing concludes is for the    20           Government to formally move into evidence its exhibits.    21                    I think this is going to be broken down in two    22           categories because I think plaintiffs have objections to the    23           exhibits or some of the exhibits.    24                    JUDGE SLOVITER:  Yes.    25                    MR. COPPOLINO:  I think that they can be safely                                                                            99     1           categorized as two main areas: one is the Howard Schmidt     2           exhibits of the sexually explicit material.  They may have     3           objections to some or all of those and I think that that's     4           one argument, if you will.     5                    In addition, we have extracted from the various     6           notebooks we have submitted to the Court over the last two     7           hearing days other exhibits which we would formally move into     8           evidence and there would be, I believe, some evidentiary     9           objections with respect to some of those.    10                    With respect to that grouping I would ask Ms.    11           Russotto to present those exhibits and to respond to any    12           objections that they may have and then deal separately with    13           any objections to the Howard Schmidt exhibits, or we could    14           reverse the order, if it please the Court.    15                    The only other point I would make preliminarily is I    16           don't know if the Court has those notebooks and if you wanted    17           to break and get them or whatnot, but that's really all that    18           has to be done before the hearing can conclude.    19                    JUDGE SLOVITER:  Do plaintiffs know now which you're    20           going to offer into evidence so that you have locked horns    21           already on those?    22                    MR. COPPOLINO:  Yes, I believe so.  So we could    23           start with the non Howard Schmidt exhibits, if you'd like.    24                    JUDGE SLOVITER:  I didn't bring any exhibits down at    25           all.                                                                           100     1                    JUDGE DALZELL:  Oh, I've got the books here.     2                    MR. COPPOLINO:  Or we could start -- whichever.     3                    JUDGE SLOVITER:  Well, why don't we just do it     4           before lunch?  Is that all right with you, Stewart?     5                    JUDGE DALZELL:  Yes.     6                    (Discussion off the record.)     7                    MR. BARON:  Excuse me, your Honor, could Dr. Olsen     8           be excused?     9                    JUDGE SLOVITER:  Oh, I think so, unless he wants to    10           rule on the exhibits.    11                    JUDGE DALZELL:  Thank you very much, Dr. Olsen.    12                    JUDGE SLOVITER:  Thank you.    13                    JUDGE DALZELL:  Have a good trip back.    14                    JUDGE SLOVITER:  We want to ask counsel a question    15           as to what difference it's going to make for the purposes of    16           our decisionmaking?  In other words, if the Government has    17           proffered the exhibits and we were to rule that some were not    18           relevant or appropriate, they would still have to go into the    19           record as proffered.  And we're not dealing with a jury, so    20           why don't we let it -- why would the plaintiffs want to    21           object to letting anything in for this purpose?    22                    MS. HEINS:  Thank you, your Honor, Marjorie Heins    23           for the ACLU plaintiffs.    24                    JUDGE SLOVITER:  Can you be heard on the -- can she    25           be heard on the tape?                                                                           101     1                    JUDGE DALZELL:  Yes.     2                    JUDGE SLOVITER:  Okay, go ahead.     3                    MS. HEINS:  A few -- well, to start with, the Court     4           should have our objections to the exhibits that we thought     5           the Government was proffering at a time before they narrowed     6           the field.     7                    The Government has not even moved the introduction     8           of some of those which are clearly hearsay or otherwise     9           inappropriate, so as to those --    10                    JUDGE SLOVITER:  Okay, well, they're now moving,    11           yeah.    12                    MS. HEINS:  You may have them but they're -- we are    13           agreed they are not part of any record to be considered in    14           connection with the preliminary injunction motion.    15                    As to the ones we still dispute, our main objections    16           fall into two categories: one is hearsay and that would    17           include, for example, the Meese Commission report.  It's    18           offered for the truth of the assertions in there.  We    19           vigorously dispute the truth of those assertions.    20                    JUDGE SLOVITER:  But if you want to write your    21           objections, unless you wanted to stand up and say that and we    22           have your objections and we have the -- I don't see how --    23           you agree that nothing that we could do would mean that these    24           exhibits don't get into the record, one way or the other.    25                    JUDGE DALZELL:  They're not going to be purged from                                                                           102     1           the record.     2                    MS. HEINS:  Well, they may be in the record but we     3           would like an opportunity clearly to state our hearsay     4           objections to some of them and, by the way, as to some of     5           them, the Government does not dispute that they are not     6           admissible for the truth of any assertions there.  And that     7           would be the other category of things like the Internet     8           Yellow Pages.  I think we're agreed that as to those, they     9           are relevant only for purposes of showing the Court that    10           there are books out there that purport to list sex.    11                    JUDGE DALZELL:  But that's exactly the point, Ms.    12           Heins, is that the Court surely knows that the statements in    13           the Meese report are hearsay, okay?  I mean we really know    14           what that is, we know it when we see it.    15                    (Laughter.)    16                    JUDGE DALZELL:  And that being the case, for the    17           life of me I just don't understand what your concern is.  We    18           know to go through this there are hundreds of exhibits here.     19           Do you really want us to go through them one by one now?    20                    MS. HEINS:  No.    21                    JUDGE DALZELL:  As though there were a jury here?    22                    MS. HEINS:  No, Judge Dalzell.  And in fact the    23           areas of dispute are fairly small at this point.  As long as    24           we are all agreed that the Meese Commission is hearsay and    25           none of the assertions in it can be considered for their                                                                           103     1           truth, then the fact that it is physically a piece of paper     2           in your chambers is irrelevant.  But I think that agreement     3           has to be quite clear.     4                    JUDGE SLOVITER:  In the record.     5                    JUDGE DALZELL:  It's in the record, it's in the     6           record.     7                    JUDGE SLOVITER:  And it would be in the record one     8           way or the other.  Remember, this is a preliminary injunction     9           hearing and for purposes of the preliminary injunction    10           hearing we just find it difficult to understand why we would    11           have to move, you know, strike any of this.    12                    MS. HEINS:  Well, it may be in the record but--    13                    JUDGE SLOVITER:  But we could accept it as subject    14           to your objections.    15                    JUDGE BUCKWALTER:  There's a lot of exhibits,    16           there's a lot of exhibits you object to here.    17                    JUDGE SLOVITER:  But it does seem to me that from an    18           appellate court standpoint, I always want to see what was    19           proffered and it might be error not to have accepted some    20           evidence or not, so it's got to be there.    21                    JUDGE BUCKWALTER:  Yeah, it seems to me you could    22           continue to argue in your briefs why we should not consider    23           certain exhibits in arriving at our decision, but all that we    24           think is that the exhibits ought to be part of the record in    25           any event for review by another court.                                                                           104     1                    MS. HEINS:  Well, they may be part of the record but     2           I do think we are entitled to a ruling or an agreement that     3           certain of them either are hearsay and therefore not to be     4           considered for any assertions that are in them or, in the     5           case of the Internet Yellow Pages, we are objecting simply     6           because, number one, the selected excerpts that the     7           Government has put in are obsolete, there is a new edition     8           and, number two, they have been very selective.  And we would     9           simply propose --    10                    JUDGE SLOVITER:  We are confident that you will so    11           argue in your post trial.  I think that what we're going to    12           do, we don't mean to deprive any of you of your 15 minutes in    13           the sun, you've had more than that, we will do as we have    14           done with all of the witnesses objections, we will accept the    15           exhibits for what they are worth.  You can argue that they    16           are worth nothing or they can argue that they are worth a    17           great deal, but we see no reason after this lengthy    18           preliminary injunction hearing with very lengthy exhibits and    19           having seen the displays and everything else, we see no    20           reason to go through seriatim these exhibits at this time.    21                    MS. HEINS:  Well, again, just to make the record    22           clear--    23                    JUDGE SLOVITER:  Yes.    24                    MS. HEINS:  -- we have a very small number of    25           disputes, we are not suggesting --                                                                           105     1                    JUDGE SLOVITER:  All right.     2                    MS. HEINS:  -- that the Court engage in any such     3           burdensome task, as to the Internet Yellow Pages, as you can     4           see, we have gone to the effort of buying the Court the     5           entire Internet Yellow Pages.  We simply think it is improper     6           for the Government to proffer obsolete copies of certain     7           selected portions.  And they're heavy, we didn't bring one     8           for each.  If I may  just --     9                    JUDGE DALZELL:  Yes, Mr. Coppolino?    10                    MR. COPPOLINO:  Well, she's made her argument three    11           times and you've responded three times and I think the points    12           are clear on both sides now.    13                    MS. HEINS:  Well, if I may --    14                    JUDGE SLOVITER:  Well, let her make it for the    15           record.    16                    MS. HEINS:  -- please finish my sentence.    17                    JUDGE SLOVITER:  Yes, go ahead.  I mean everybody    18           has been really very cooperative up till now so we're going    19           to continue in that vein.  Continue.    20                    MS. HEINS:  I will try to be extremely brief.    21                    JUDGE SLOVITER:  Okay.    22                    MS. HEINS:  We simply think it is more appropriate    23           for the Court to be aware that there are many books that call    24           themselves the Internet Yellow Pages, we have brought two.     25           We will offer them.  We hope that the Court could share one                                                                           106     1           as opposed to taking all three.     2                    JUDGE SLOVITER:  Oh, yes, we're in the same building     3           purposefully, we are in the same building.     4                    MS. HEINS:  I think that's more appropriate, these     5           are the current editions, again not offered for the truth of     6           the assertions in them.     7                    JUDGE DALZELL:  Are those the volumes right in front     8           of you there?     9                    MS. HEINS:  These are two different books purporting    10           to call themselves the Internet Yellow Pages.    11                    JUDGE DALZELL:  It looks to me like the Rules of    12           Civil Procedure on top.    13                    MS. HEINS:  That you don't get.     14                    JUDGE DALZELL:  Okay.    15                    (Laughter.)    16                    MS. HEINS:  We also, another exhibit they have    17           offered--    18                    JUDGE SLOVITER:  Having helped to draft them, I can    19           assure that they do not fall within the --    20                    (Laughter.)    21                    MS. KAPPLER:  Your Honor, if I may make a    22           suggestion?    23                    JUDGE SLOVITER:  No, let her finish.    24                    MS. KAPPLER:  I'm sorry.    25                    MS. HEINS:  Another exhibit they have proffered is a                                                                           107     1           selected portion of a book called Net.Sex.  I could only find     2           one of these in four New York book stores that I tried     3           yesterday, but again we think the entire book should be     4           considered by the Court and not just the section that the     5           Justice Department has --     6                    JUDGE SLOVITER:  Okay, now, wait a minute.  Mr. --     7           are you finished?     8                    MS. HEINS:  -- proffered and since I only have one,     9           what I would suggest in this case is to give us an    10           opportunity to go back to the office, Xerox it, the entire    11           thing -- it's short unlike these -- and submit it to the    12           Court afterwards.    13                    JUDGE SLOVITER:  Now, what we have right now is we    14           have the Government having gotten up and offered, proffered    15           into evidence, asked us to admit the Government's exhibits    16           into evidence.  We have your objections.  If you want to    17           proffer other things in purview of rebuttal, fine, but hold    18           on, let's deal with what is in front of us at the moment.    19                    Do you have anything that you want to add as    20           objections to what the Government has proffered?    21                    MS. KAPPLER:  Yes, your Honor, and two points I'd    22           like to make.  This is Ann Kappler for the ALA plaintiffs.    23                    First, just a suggestion for the Court's benefit, I    24           think it might be helpful if we submitted a narrowly tailored    25           essentially restatement of our objections because there are                                                                           108     1           now different documents that are being submitted.  They have     2           one piece of paper that just has the ones on which we object     3           to.     4                    JUDGE SLOVITER:  We absolutely will allow the     5           plaintiffs, having cut you off somewhat in oral argument, we     6           will certainly allow you to submit written objections to any     7           of the exhibits proffered by the Government.     8                    MS. KAPPLER:  Thank you, your Honor.  I have one--     9                    JUDGE SLOVITER:  Okay?  So that the record will be    10           clear.  Yes?    11                    MS. KAPPLER:  Excuse me, I have one second point and    12           that is this morning we were handed a new document which I    13           think is of a very different ilk and that is a second    14           declaration of Howard Schmidt.    15                    JUDGE SLOVITER:  Now that's a separate thing.  Let's    16           hold that out.  We don't know, at the moment we're talking    17           about exhibits.    18                    MS. KAPPLER:  Well, they are submitting this as an    19           exhibit, I mean that's how they denominate it, as an exhibit.    20                    JUDGE SLOVITER:  Well, we are dealing at the moment    21           not with declarations, we're going to deal with declaration    22           later.    23                    JUDGE DALZELL:  That's a separate issue, surely.    24                    JUDGE SLOVITER:  Yes.  So we agree that that's a    25           separate issue.                                                                            109     1                    MS. HEINS:  I have one other point, if I may.     2                    JUDGE SLOVITER:  Yes.     3                    MS. HEINS:  With respect to some of the exhibits     4           that have been proffered and these are in fact exhibits that     5           in Mr. Schmidt's original affidavit he attempted to     6           authenticate.     7                    JUDGE SLOVITER:  Well, Mr. Schmidt is a -- is a     8           separate -- Mr. Schmidt's documents I think are a separate     9           category.  Right now we're dealing with all of the other    10           exhibits separate from Mr. Schmidt.    11                    MS. HEINS:  The reason I raised it now is these were    12           exhibits that were not in Mr. Coppolino's book, but these    13           were exhibits that were in the original three sets of    14           Government cross-examination exhibits.  We were not given    15           notice that these were exhibits Mr. Schmidt had downloaded    16           and printed out, they were not produced to us at the    17           deposition as part of the materials that the Government was    18           telling us would be in what turned out to be the Coppolino    19           book.  Instead they were cross-examination exhibits with no    20           indication of where they came from or who downloaded them.    21                    Schmidt in his declaration in Paragraph 39 purported    22           to authenticate them in very vague terms.  We would object to    23           their going in.  These again are cross-examination exhibits    24           not in the Schmidt book, we would object to their going in,    25           they're not authenticated.                                                                           110     1                    JUDGE DALZELL:  Mr. Coppolino?     2                    MR. COPPOLINO:  First of all, can we change the name     3           of the book, your Honor?     4                    (Laughter.)     5                    MR. COPPOLINO:  Your Honor, let me just step back to     6           indicate that -- a couple of things.  First of all, I have a     7           pleading type document here which lists all of the exhibits     8           that we would offer into evidence from all of the materials     9           we have submitted over the past two weeks except for    10           declarations and I would -- that would give the Court and it    11           would give, as to the plaintiffs, we'd give you a full list.    12                    Now, as I understand what the Court's been    13           indicating then the weight of these exhibits, whatever    14           evidentiary objections there are to them or our response to    15           them would be handled in the briefing process.    16                    In other words, if they consider a particular    17           exhibit to be hearsay we could identify our response to that    18           in the brief.  We're prepared to argue every one of their    19           objections right now, the hearsay objections, whatever they    20           might be, or any other concern.    21                    If the Court prefers, however, we could simply deal    22           with that in the -- in the brief.  If they think it's    23           hearsay, if we think we've got a hearsay objection we could    24           identify it.    25                    JUDGE DALZELL:  One second.                                                                           111     1                    (Discussion off the record.)     2                    JUDGE SLOVITER:  I think what the Court would like     3           to do is that you -- all of these arguments can be made in     4           connection with your post-trial submission, and you can now     5           or later submit what you want, you can respond to it in     6           writing.  We will have an opportunity to actually see the     7           documents and see the -- you can then proffer your rebuttal     8           exhibits if you want.  And on the day that your -- well, and     9           in your writings, when you submit it with your post-trial    10           submissions, you can include this separately or encompassed    11           within it, and the Court will rule.  Okay?    12                    MR. COPPOLINO:  That sounds fine, your Honor.  We    13           would also --    14                    JUDGE SLOVITER:  Is that all right?    15                    JUDGE DALZELL:  As to everything.    16                    MR. COPPOLINO:  If it would assist the Court, we    17           could also do just a separate submission on evidentiary --    18                    JUDGE DALZELL:  You could.    19                    JUDGE SLOVITER:  You could, I think that would make    20           sense.    21                    JUDGE BUCKWALTER:  That makes a lot of sense.    22                    JUDGE SLOVITER:  That would clarify it.    23                    JUDGE DALZELL:  And do that at the time of the post-    24           trial briefing.    25                    MR. COPPOLINO:  Very well.                                                                           112     1                    JUDGE DALZELL:  That makes a lot of sense, Mr.     2           Coppolino.     3                    MR. COPPOLINO:  Well, I won't read the document, but     4           I will -- we will submit it and file it.  The plaintiffs have     5           it, it lists all of the things we would proffer, so rather     6           than reading it, it's here in writing.  I would indicate it     7           does include the Schmidt exhibits, as well as this additional     8           item that Ms. Kappler referred to -- did the Court want to     9           deal with that in the same manner or did it want to hear --    10                    JUDGE DALZELL:  Well, here's what I think you ought    11           to do is I would like you all, if possible, I'm sure my    12           colleagues will agree, in the next day or two to sit down and    13           try to narrow the areas of dispute, okay?  Bearing in mind    14           what we have said to you not once, not twice, but many times    15           throughout the five days of hearing here, what we're doing,    16           and to take an intensely practical approach.  But if each    17           side believes that there is a narrow universe of documents as    18           to which admissibility is a truly significant issue and you    19           can't agree on it then at the time of the post-trial    20           submissions you can identify those exhibits for us, all    21           right?  Does that make sense?    22                    MR. COPPOLINO:  I think it does and I --    23                    JUDGE DALZELL:  Is that all right with you,    24           Colleagues?    25                    JUDGE SLOVITER:  Yes, yes --                                                                           113     1                    JUDGE BUCKWALTER:  No, that's fine.     2                    JUDGE SLOVITER:  -- fine.     3                    MR. COPPOLINO:  Yes, it does make sense and we have     4           I think tried to do that... we have narrowed it down to about     5           a dozen already.     6                    JUDGE BUCKWALTER:  Maybe you can further narrow it     7           down.     8                    JUDGE SLOVITER:  Now, what about the Schmidt     9           declaration?    10                    JUDGE DALZELL:  There's a new declaration?    11                    MS. KAPPLER:  Yes, your Honor.    12                    MR. COPPOLINO:  No.  Could I explain that?    13                    JUDGE DALZELL:  Yeah, let's hear Mr. Coppolino    14           first.    15                    MR. COPPOLINO:  We were going to of course proffer    16           the Schmidt -- all of the Schmidt exhibits, the one    17           additional item which I was going to offer to the Court was    18           in the course of Mr. Schmidt's cross-examination and    19           questioning by the Court and redirect by me he went into an    20           issue which was not present in his direct testimony    21           concerning a key-word search, I think it was women pictures    22           with Surfwatch running.  The issue came up as to whether or    23           not Surfwatch would block sexually-explicit sites, and we    24           described the tests he undertook by identifying specific    25           sites.  Then under questioning he went into an issue of would                                                                           114     1           sites be identified through a key-word search and he     2           specifically talked about women pictures.  He also indicated     3           that he had downloaded that particular result.  What I was     4           going to offer to the Court was that specific download with     5           the declaration, which only authenticates it and says that I     6           did it and this is what I did, and that's all that this is.      7           Now, I realize it is a new exhibit, it is --     8                    JUDGE SLOVITER:  It is very problematic also.     9                    MR. COPPOLINO:  It is not a part of the direct    10           testimony, because that was not part of his direct testimony,     11           the door onto this subject was opened if you will on the    12           cross-examination.  Now, if the Court considers it    13           prejudicial we don't have to offer it.  He referred to it and    14           I thought that the Court might want to see it.    15                    JUDGE SLOVITER:  Do you object?    16                    MS. KAPPLER:  Yes, your Honor.    17                    JUDGE SLOVITER:  Okay, we sustain the objection.  I    18           do --    19                    MR. COPPOLINO:  That only leaves the rest of the    20           Schmidt notebook then to talk about, if there is anything to    21           talk about.    22                    JUDGE SLOVITER:  Well, you're going to do the same    23           thing with the rest of the Schmidt notebook as you do with    24           all of the other exhibits and they will father objections,    25           and they may follow to all of the material, they may want to                                                                           115     1           object to part of it --     2                    JUDGE DALZELL:  But first you're going to meet and     3           try to resolve as much as possible.     4                    MS. HEINS:  Would it be appropriate at this point to     5           proffer the Internet yellow pages?     6                    JUDGE SLOVITER:  Yeah, I think you should proffer     7           them, except there's no wit -- is there anybody who --     8                    JUDGE DALZELL:  Well, there could be a stipulation     9           though.    10                    JUDGE SLOVITER:  Will you stipulate to the Internet    11           yellow pages?    12                    MR. COPPOLINO:  We have no objection if they want to    13           submit the whole volume.    14                    JUDGE SLOVITER:  Okay.    15                    JUDGE DALZELL:  Admitted.    16                    JUDGE SLOVITER:  And you can take it back --    17                    MR. COPPOLINO:  I'd like to know what volume it is.    18                    JUDGE SLOVITER:  -- and bring it back.  I don't know    19           what --    20                    MS. HEINS:  I'd rather not have to take it back --    21                    (Laughter.)    22                    MS. HEINS:  -- so I'd rather give it to you now.     23           And let me just point out that one of --    24                    JUDGE DALZELL:  Take it up to Room 2609.    25                    MS. HEINS:  -- one of them has a CD-Rom, which                                                                           116     1           purports to be a Web Browser; I haven't tried it, but --     2                    JUDGE SLOVITER:  I don't know how one would do --     3           use it, so --     4                    MS. HEINS:  -- it comes --     5                    JUDGE SLOVITER:  -- this is not -- well, okay.       6                    Is that it?  Okay.  I want to thank -- yes, you're     7           going to all see Judge Dalzell about the scheduling in 15     8           minutes, but -- Mr. Ennis?     9                    MR. ENNIS:  I believe that's the close of the    10           Government's case, the Government has no further witnesses?    11                    MR. COPPOLINO:  The Government rests.    12                    MR. ENNIS:  We appreciate that the Court gave us the    13           opportunity to call rebuttal witnesses for the plaintiffs,    14           but as the Court has been informed we have waived calling any    15           live rebuttal witnesses.  The only thing left that I am aware    16           of for plaintiffs is we are -- we have filed these    17           supplemental declarations of the non-trial affiants and that    18           has been set aside for separate briefing.  I simply wanted to    19           remind the Court that we will be relying on those    20           supplemental declarations as well.    21                    MR. COPPOLINO:  We are aware that they filed it and    22           Judge Dalzell has allowed us an opportunity to object to that    23           and he has given us dates for that, and that's what we'll be    24           doing.    25                    JUDGE SLOVITER:  I do want to thank -- I think on                                                                           117     1           behalf of the entire Court, we do want to thank counsel for     2           the expeditious manner in which they have handled this very     3           lengthy, very long, very complex technologically and     4           otherwise record.  I think that the cooperation is a credit     5           to you as members of the profession and the Court is very     6           grateful to all of you, and we will try to reciprocate.     7                    JUDGE DALZELL:  And I'll see you in 15 minutes.     8                    (Court adjourned at 12:20 o'clock p.m.)     9                                       * * * Back to Hearing Transcripts index Back to Citizens Internet Empowerment Coalition Page WT02-B05-89IA095-001027-B015-20http://www.cdt.org:80/ciec/transcripts/April_15_index.html 205.177.10.31 19970215013013 text/html 951HTTP/1.0 200 OKDate: Sat, 15 Feb 1997 01:28:56 GMTServer: Apache/1.1.1Content-type: text/html Index of Testimony - 15 April 96 Index of Testimony - April 15, 1996                                                                            118     1                                     I N D E X     2           DEFENDANTS' WITNESS         DIRECT  CROSS  REDIRECT  RECROSS     3           Daniel Olsen     4             By Mr. Baron                              3, 91     5             By Mr. Ennis                                          34     6             By Mr. Hansen                                         90     7                                       * * * Back to Hearing Transcripts index Back to Citizens Internet Empowerment Coalition page WT02-B05-90IA095-001027-B015-64http://www.cdt.org:80/ciec/transcripts/April_12_Schmidt.html 205.177.10.31 19970215013031 text/html 249959HTTP/1.0 200 OKDate: Sat, 15 Feb 1997 01:29:06 GMTServer: Apache/1.1.1Content-type: text/html Testimony of Howard Schmidt Testimony of Howard Schmidt -- Special Agent, Director of the Air Force Office of Special Investigations, Computer Crime Investigations April 12, 1996                               IN THE UNITED STATES DISTRICT COURT                            FOR THE EASTERN DISTRICT OF PENNSYLVANIA                                             - - -                 AMERICAN CIVIL LIBERTIES      :  CIVIL ACTION NO. 96-963-M                 UNION, et al                  :                                   Plaintiffs  :                                               :                             v.                :  Philadelphia, Pennsylvania                                               :  April 12, 1996                 JANET RENO, in her official   :  9:38 o'clock a.m.                   capacity as ATTORNEY GENERAL  :                 OF THE UNITED STATES,         :                                   Defendant   :                 . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .                 AMERICAN LIBRARY ASSOCIATION, :  CIVIL ACTION NO. 96-1458                 et al                         :                                    Plaintiffs :                                               :                               v.              :  Philadelphia, Pennsylvania                                               :  April 12, 1996                 DEPARTMENT OF JUSTICE, et al  :  9:38 o'clock a.m.                                    Defendants :                 . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .                                        HEARING BEFORE:                               THE HONORABLE DOLORES K. SLOVITER,                          CHIEF JUDGE, UNITED STATES COURT OF APPEALS                                     FOR THE THIRD CIRCUIT                               THE HONORABLE RONALD L. BUCKWALTER                                 THE HONORABLE STEWART DALZELL                                  UNITED STATES DISTRICT JUDGES                                             - - -                 APPEARANCES:                 For the Plaintiffs:  CHRISTOPHER A. HANSEN, ESQUIRE                                      MARJORIE HEINS, ESQUIRE                                      ANN BEESON, ESQUIRE                                      American Civil Liberties Union                                      132 West 43rd Street                                      New York, NY  10036                                             -and-                                      STEFAN PRESSER, ESQUIRE                                      American Civil Liberties Union                                      123 S. 9th Street, Suite 701                                      Philadelphia, PA  19107                                                                             2                 APPEARANCES:  (Continued)                 For the ALA          BRUCE J. ENNIS, JR., ESQUIRE                 Plaintiffs:          ANN M. KAPPLER, ESQUIRE                                      JOHN B. MORRIS, JR., ESQUIRE                                      Jenner and Block                                      601 13th Street, N.W.                                      Washington, DC  20005                                             -and-                                      MICHAEL TRAYNOR, ESQUIRE                                      Cooley Goddard Castro Huddleson & Tatum                                      One Maritime Plaza, 20th Floor                                      San Francisco, CA  94111-3580                 For the Defendant:   ANTHONY J. COPPOLINO, ESQUIRE                                      PATRICIA RUSSOTTO, ESQUIRE                                      JASON R. BARON, ESQUIRE                                      THEODORE C. HIRT, ESQUIRE                                      MARY KUSTEL, ESQUIRE                                      CRAIG M. BLACKWELL, ESQUIRE                                      Department of Justice                                      Federal Programs Branch                                      901 E. Street, N.W., Room 912                                      Washington, DC  20530                                             -and-                                      MARK KMETZ, ESQUIRE                                      U.S. Attorney's Office                                      615 Chestnut Street, Suite 1250                                      Philadelphia, PA  19106                                             - - -                 Also Present:         MICHAEL KUNZ                                       Clerk of the Court for the                                       Eastern District of Pennsylvania                                             - - -                 Deputy Clerks:        Thomas Clewley                                       Matthew J. Higgins                 Audio Operator:       Andrea L. Mack                 Transcribed by:       Geraldine C. Laws                                       Grace Williams                                       Tracey Williams                                       Laws Transcription Service                 (Proceedings recorded by electronic sound recording;                 transcript provided by computer-aided transcription service.)                                                                             3     1                    (The following occurred in open court at 9:38     2           o'clock a.m.:)     3                    CLERK OF COURT KUNZ:  Oyez, oyez, oyez, all persons     4           having any matters to present before the Honorable Delores K.     5           Sloviter, Chief Judge of the United States Court of Appeals     6           for the Third Circuit; and the Honorable Ronald L. Buckwalter     7           and the Honorable Stuart Dalzell, Judges of the United States     8           District Court for the Eastern District of Pennsylvania, may     9           be present and appear and they shall be heard.  God save the    10           United States and this Honorable Court.  Court is now in    11           session, please be seated.    12                    JUDGE SLOVITER:  Good morning.    13                    JUDGE DALZELL:  Good morning, everyone.    14                    ALL COUNSEL:  Good morning, your Honors.    15                    JUDGE SLOVITER:  We will resume in ACLU v. Reno, et    16           al.  I believe that we're to begin with the Government's    17           case?    18                    MR. COPPOLINO:  Good morning, your Honor.  At this    19           time the Government calls Howard Schmidt.    20                    HOWARD SCHMIDT, Defendants' Witness, Sworn.    21                    THE COURT CLERK:  Thank you, please be seated.     22           Please state and spell your name.    23                    THE WITNESS:  My name is Howard A. Schmidt,     24           S-c-h-m-i-d-t, first name is H-o-w-a-r-d.    25                    MR. COPPOLINO:  Good morning, your Honor.  For the                                                                             4     1           record, I will identify myself again as Anthony Coppolino     2           with the Justice Department.  Your Honor, at this time I     3           offer into evidence the direct testimony/declaration of     4           Howard Schmidt and all of the exhibits that are attached     5           thereto, which has been provided to the Court.  Thank you.     6                    JUDGE SLOVITER:  Oh, I think that they're having an     7           offer of proof on that -- he's offering into evidence --     8                    JUDGE DALZELL:  Are you offering the exhibits right     9           now?    10                    MR. COPPOLINO:  Well, I had planned to because I    11           thought he might refer to them initially in his    12           demonstration.    13                    JUDGE DALZELL:  Well, they're for identification    14           right now.    15                    MR. COPPOLINO:  Okay.    16                    JUDGE DALZELL:  Okay?    17                    MS. HEINS:  We have an objection, your Honor.    18                    JUDGE DALZELL:  Right, we understand.    19                    JUDGE SLOVITER:  Let's hear it.    20                    MS. HEINS:  Marjorie Heins for the ACLU plaintiffs.    21                    JUDGE SLOVITER:  You better come before the...    22                    MS. HEINS:  Marjorie Heins for the ACLU plaintiffs.     23           We object to the introduction into evidence of Mr. Schmidt's    24           declaration to the extent he purports to be an expert in any    25           of the five separate subject-matter areas that are referenced                                                                             5     1           on Page 4, Paragraph 5 of the declaration.       2                    JUDGE DALZELL:  Well, do you want to do voir dire on     3           that?     4                    (Discussion held off the record.)     5                    JUDGE SLOVITER:  No, the Court has considered it and     6           we believe that he is as much an expert in this as the     7           plaintiffs' witnesses were on the matters which they were     8           called.  We're going to check each ruling on this -- do you     9           agree with that?    10                    JUDGE DALZELL:  Yes, we agree with that, sure.    11                    MS. HEINS:  If I can just state briefly for the    12           record, Mr. Schmidt is undoubtedly an expert in computer    13           forensics and investigatory techniques, law enforcement    14           investigatory techniques connected with computers.  However,    15           the five subject-matter areas on which he purports to be an    16           expert are not within his area of expertise.  To start from    17           the top, since he is such an expert -- he can certainly    18           testify as to what he did on the computer and the Court can    19           take into consideration and make its own judgment whether    20           it's easy or difficult to access the materials that Mr.    21           Schmidt accessed, but since he is such a computer expert we    22           don't think he's really in a position to testify as to how    23           easy it would be for a child to access these materials,    24           that's fact --    25                    JUDGE SLOVITER:  Well, we're not going to have --                                                                             6     1                    MS. HEINS:  -- not opinion.  I'm sorry.     2                    JUDGE SLOVITER:  -- we're not going to have a child     3           up here testifying and we have been very lax with all of the     4           parties with respect to expertise, we have said throughout     5           that we will take the witness and the witness' expertise for     6           whatever it's worth to us and we see no reason to treat one     7           party differently than another for this purpose.  That of     8           course is not the same as saying that any of the material is     9           or isn't relevant, an entirely different issue.    10                    MS. HEINS:  I understand.    11                    JUDGE SLOVITER:  So, I believe that the panel    12           believes that for this purpose we will accept the witness as    13           an expert to the extent and for what it's worth.    14                    MS. HEINS:  I understand, but if I just may briefly    15           complete my statement?  I think each witness is different,    16           the expertise of each witness is different and this witness'    17           expertise does not go to any of the subject-matter areas that    18           he describes on Page 4.  And just briefly to conclude that,    19           his opinions as to the pervasiveness or the -- what    20           percentage or what quantity of sexually-explicit or    21           pornographic material is available, again, we don't think    22           that's a matter that he has expertise in; he's not a    23           sociologist of the Internet, he has no studies, it's simply    24           impressionistic.  And finally, with respect to his claims of    25           expertise as to the ability of parents to supervise their                                                                             7     1           children using computers or the availability or feasibility     2           of so-called adult identification and password systems, as to     3           the first he is not expert or knowledgeable in particular in     4           parent-child relationships, he has no knowledge of how many     5           households with children have computers, how many children     6           use them, all he has told us at his deposition is some     7           anecdotes about parents expressing concerns; and with respect     8           to the adult-identification ideas, his testimony has been     9           quite clear and I think the Government will agree, he has    10           absolutely no expertise in that area.  His total knowledge of    11           the adult password systems is based on what he has read on    12           Web screens, which the Court can make judgments about as well    13           as he.      14                    So, we don't object to his factual testimony except    15           to the extent we have already set forth in our motion in    16           limine, but with respect to expert opinions we simply don't    17           think that his expertise corresponds to what he is claiming.    18                    JUDGE SLOVITER:  Thank you.  The panel, we will    19           accept it for what it's worth.    20                    MS. HEINS:  Thank you.    21                    JUDGE SLOVITER:  Thank you.    22                    MR. COPPOLINO:  Your Honor, I'm not going to respond    23           on that point since I think you have ruled.    24                    JUDGE SLOVITER:  No, because we've ruled.    25                    (Laughter.)                                                                             8     1                    JUDGE DALZELL:  You won the argument.     2                    MR. COPPOLINO:  I just -- I neglect --     3                    JUDGE DALZELL:  You want to say that we're really     4           right?     5                    (Laughter.)     6                    MR. COPPOLINO:  I neglected to indicate that, as we     7           had conferred with Judge Dalzell earlier in the week, the     8           witness will be presenting a brief demonstration on -- of     9           various sources and sites on the Internet.    10                    JUDGE SLOVITER:  Yes.  Well, are you going to tell    11           us before you put it -- all right.  Well, we'll take this    12           testimony slowly, so that we understand what it is.  There is    13           some concern by some members of the panel at least as to the    14           relevance of some of this material, but let's proceed and    15           we'll see.    16                    MR. COPPOLINO:  Thank you.    17                                 DIRECT EXAMINATION    18                    THE WITNESS:  Good morning, your Honors.    19                    JUDGE DALZELL:  Good morning.    20                    THE WITNESS:  Am I okay on the microphone?    21                    JUDGE DALZELL:  Yes.    22                    THE WITNESS:  What I'd like to do, as Mr. Coppolino    23           pointed --    24                    JUDGE SLOVITER:  Wait a minute, has a question been    25           asked to you?  I mean, I think -- is there --                                                                             9     1                    MR. COPPOLINO:  I'm sorry --     2                    JUDGE DALZELL:  Well, he's going to do a     3           demonstration and it was going to be done in narrative form.     4                    JUDGE SLOVITER:  Okay, that's all right, but I     5           didn't know that he had been asked to start.  Okay, go ahead,     6           Mr. Schmidt.     7                    THE WITNESS:  Thank you.     8                    JUDGE SLOVITER:  We can't see you on the monitors, I     9           certainly can't.  Go ahead.    10                    THE WITNESS:  As Mr. Coppolino stated, what I'd like    11           to do is give you a demonstration to show you some of the    12           features of the Internet and some of the workings of the    13           Internet, as stated before.  What I'm going to use is the    14           Netscape Web Browser as kind of the single tool to do the    15           demonstration, as I believe you have seen before during    16           previous testimony.  The Netscape Web Browser when first    17           activated by double clicking on a particular icon, you have    18           the ability to determine what home page or what Web site it    19           initially goes to upon startup.  In this case I have selected    20           through one of the options the Web site of Netscape    21           Corporation, which is the manufacturer of this particular    22           piece of software that's in popular use today.  As you can    23           see by the screen in front of you, there's some graphics    24           involved and as I move the mouse pointer across the screen,    25           as it changes from a pointer into a hand, this indicates to                                                                            10     1           me that there is some sort of a link that I can select by     2           clicking the mouse button and go to another location.  Across     3           the bottom of this top graphic there's items such as     4           exploring the Net, companies and products, general store, et     5           cetera, as I move across you can see I could select any one     6           of those areas to determine which part of the Web page and     7           which link I want to go to from here.  Additionally, there     8           are some other menu selections that are built in this     9           particular area, such as what's new, what's cool, handbook,    10           Net search, Net directory, which give you some of the same    11           capabilities, but instead of looking through the document    12           itself you can select it as you would from a menu position.    13                    One of the first ones I'd like to demonstrate is the    14           Net search capability.  By putting my mouse pointer over the    15           word Net search, I click it once, and as you'll notice    16           there's a red, sort of a stop-sign-looking icon appear up    17           here, which indicates that it's currently going out to    18           retrieve a document from a server somewhere.  As the document    19           becomes displayed on the screen you see it is partially is    20           drawn, and it goes back to the server and retrieves bits and    21           pieces of the document to draw the screen in its total    22           format.    23                    Now, as we have the screen in front of us, you can    24           see once again by moving the cursor, I can select certain    25           aspects of it.  From previous testimony I believe there was                                                                            11     1           discussion about some of the search routines, such as Lykos,     2           Magellan, Yahoo, Infoseek, these are all here, these are     3           multiple-search engines that I could select from this     4           particular position in the menu.  Also, if your Honors will     5           notice, on the right-hand side of the screen there is an up     6           arrow and a down arrow down at the bottom, which is referred     7           to as the elevator bar.  There is more text or more substance     8           below what's currently on the screen, so by scrolling down,     9           by clicking on the down arrow on the right-hand side you'll    10           see in addition to the links that I can select by moving the    11           cursor around, I also can select by a narrative certain    12           search engines that are available here.  For example, the    13           first one that comes up is a search engine, which is part of    14           the Lykos engine called A to Z.  This is similar to some of    15           the other search engines we have seen and what I'd like to do    16           at this point is select that one.    17                    JUDGE SLOVITER:  Why do you take that one, from the    18           -- because it says from the "Best Kid's Page," what is there    19           about that one?    20                    THE WITNESS:  This one has a lot of different    21           subject categories that you could search from by    22           subcategories, as I'll be demonstrating to the Court in just    23           a moment.  The other ones would do similar things, your    24           Honor, as it just so happened that one was the first one that    25           was available under that particular search routine -- as well                                                                            12     1           as I have prepared this demonstration, that's the one that I     2           would use in the process of doing that.     3                    As you can see, once again, as I move the mouse     4           cursor around I have the ability to select particular images     5           that might click and link to me another site.  I also have in     6           this box here, which we will demonstrate in a little bit,     7           where I could click in there and type in a particular phrase     8           or some search routine that I would like to use, or I have     9           the broader spectrum of different types of subjects down here    10           that one might be interested in.      11                    Now, obviously since we're in a Court, in a Federal    12           Court, Government would be of interest I believe to most of    13           the members here, and I'd like to select at this time the    14           Government as a subcategory.  At this point it went out, read    15           some information off of the server in which this information    16           is actually stored, and came back, identified that I have    17           selected Government as the primary category, here are some    18           subcategories under the Government phase, which are also    19           listed in the center portion of the screen.  Over here, since    20           we're in a court of law, I would like to select at this time    21           law, which may be of interest to us as well.  And it    22           immediately goes out and shows me that I'm under the category    23           of Government, subcategory of law, and now the screen changes    24           a little bit in composition from what we saw before.  As I'm    25           slowing clicking it up for the Court to be able to see, I now                                                                            13     1           have an alphabet out here that I could select and jump to any     2           particular character beginning -- for example, if I selected     3           the letter P, it might start with some legal aspects with the     4           letter P in the first character.  I also could search, as I     5           started to do on the right-hand side by clicking down,     6           specific text-related things, as I move the cursor down here     7           it changes to a hand, I could click and go to advertising     8           law, a firm based in Washington, D.C., et cetera, as I go     9           down those links A through Z as well.    10                    In this case I want to, with the Court's permission,    11           move back over to -- as I mentioned earlier, to the box where    12           it says "find."  By clicking my mouse and moving into there,    13           you notice it changes from a pointer to sort of an iron-bar-    14           looking icon.  The cursor is now flashing in there and since,    15           once again, we are in a Federal Court I would like to type in    16           Federal Courts.  And instead of perusing by viewing each one    17           of the narratives in there I can just tell it by clicking on    18           the words "go get it" to go out to a site and give me    19           anything related to Federal Courts.  As the Court can see,    20           once again we've come back with the search results, the A to    21           Z search.  Under the words of Federal Court it says that 152    22           documents were located containing the words federal,    23           federally or courts.      24                    The first one we could scroll down and see a number    25           of the selections we have here... and at any time, if the                                                                            14     1           Court would like, please, I would be more than happy to stop     2           as well.  And for the purpose of the demonstration I have     3           selected the Federal Judicial Center, which I have reviewed     4           and thought might contain some interest -- some items of     5           interest for the Court.  Once again I move to that particular     6           link, click one time, it goes back out to that particular     7           computer system, retrieves that information, retrieves the     8           graphics, retrieves some text and basically repaints the     9           screen on our monitor for us to see.  Down here, as the Court    10           has already seen a few times, we have links, as I move across    11           these particular links it changes to a hand, I could go to    12           them.  Either that or I could select one of the graphic    13           images here and go to one of the areas that are listed about    14           the FJC publications, other Worldwide Web servers or    15           telephone directory.    16                    Through the preparation of this demonstration I went    17           to the publication, which I would like to do at this time.     18           And at this juncture it brings me a list of different    19           publications from the Federal Judicial Center publications,    20           and it talks about their formats and different publications    21           that are available for one to look through.  Clicking down    22           through some of them you can see some of them address the    23           areas of appellate courts, bankruptcy courts, civil    24           litigation, and some of the subdocuments involved in those    25           categories that are available for one to go out and link to.                                                                             15     1           In this case I'll select, if it's okay with the Court,     2           stalking, the increase -- the rate of Federal civil appeals,     3           I'll link to that particular document.  Now, it's going out     4           and it's retrieving that information and making it available     5           for my review.  And it gives a brief narrative of what the     6           document is about, and it says a 32-page report, et cetera.      7           And it also gives me the option, if you'll notice just     8           underneath the paragraph of text here, it says, "download a     9           PDF version of this document," which is kind of a universal    10           formatting language.  We can actually go to the site,    11           retrieve the actual document itself and transfer it from    12           where it's located at the Federal Judicial Center to our    13           computer here for later review, and all we would have to do    14           is one click and bring that document back.    15                    At this time, your Honor, what I'd like to do is go    16           back to some of the previous pages we have and there's a    17           couple ways I can do that.  I believe you saw an earlier    18           demonstration, there's what appears to be like a VCR button    19           up here in the upper left-hand corner, as the mouse cursor    20           sits over it the word "back" appears, that means I can click    21           and go back through previous pages in the sequence in which I    22           have viewed the pages or the user has viewed the pages.  I    23           can also, if I didn't want to scroll back or go back through    24           a number of pages, go up to this menu selection where it    25           says, "go," and I can then see the pages that I have selected                                                                            16     1           previously, as I move the mouse pointer across them it     2           highlights those.  So, I can go back to a specific page in     3           particular and go back and find a document that I reviewed     4           earlier without clicking two, three, four times to get back     5           to the starting point.     6                    Okay, at this point I'd like to go back to the A to     7           Z home page and I click that, it brought us back to there.      8           One of the other areas that I have prepared for the     9           demonstration was the area I have selected under arts and    10           leisure.  Once again, as I did with the Government, I go over    11           to that particular menu selection, click once on the mouse...    12           noticing the Court's attention to -- entertainment/leisure    13           being the menu selection.  Once again, it has a number of    14           different subcategories that one might select by a click of a    15           mouse to get certain areas of information that might be of    16           interest to them.   Once again, for this particular    17           demonstration I have selected the subcategory of travel, I    18           click on travel.  And as we have seen in the previous screens    19           for the courts and for the Government and law we have the    20           narrative by -- in alphabetical order, we can also select by    21           the alphabet up here.  And in this case what I'd like to do    22           is select the letter P for Philadelphia, which is the town    23           that I grew up in.  Using the right mouse I can go down and    24           click, an area of interest would be Philadelphia history.  As    25           you can see I move over to that link of Philadelphia history,                                                                            17     1           click once with the mouse and it clicks to -- or it's in the     2           process of retrieving information from a Website known as     3           libertynet.org, and I can tell that because up in the open     4           blank space up here it says the http information, Worldwide     5           Web, libertynet.org is the name of the computer system, which     6           is information stored, and it's stored in a subfile or a     7           subdirectory as it were IHA.  The screen has now been redrawn     8           with the information that I have requested to be transferred     9           to my display here and, once again, I can move across and    10           click on certain areas such as historic mile, Betsy Ross,    11           Valley Forge, places to eat, various nightlife, et cetera.     12           As the Court can see as I move across, all of these    13           particular images on here would link me to another location    14           on a computer server that may contain some information I    15           might be interested in.    16                    JUDGE SLOVITER:  Does the location -- is the    17           location shown throughout?    18                    THE WITNESS:  Yes, it is, your Honor.    19                    JUDGE SLOVITER:  Always?    20                    THE WITNESS:  Yes.  It will show in the link, if    21           you'll notice in the lower left-hand corner, which may be    22           difficult, I know even with my glasses --    23                    JUDGE SLOVITER:  No, we can see it.    24                    THE WITNESS:  -- it's relatively small text, but as    25           I move from one of the icons to another down in the lower                                                                            18     1           left-hand corner it points to the link in text format that     2           I'm over -- that my hand is over now on the screen.  For     3           example, this one says philfood.html, it's still at the same     4           domain, libertynet.org, even though it would not have to     5           necessarily be stored on that same domain, and it's under     6           that same filing cabinet or that same subdirectory, IHA,     7           except this document is called philfood.html.  I can move     8           over here to nightlife and it says philnight.html, which is     9           the same as just -- almost similar to a word processing    10           document by naming a word processing document differently for    11           different things that you might have in that document.    12                    JUDGE SLOVITER:  And what is always the relationship    13           between the location showing up on the left-hand top and at    14           the bottom?    15                    THE WITNESS:  The left-hand top is the current site    16           that we're viewing, the current Webpage that we're viewing at    17           this time, the bottom is the one that that particular item,    18           in this case I currently have it over nightlife, that's -- if    19           I were to click that I would link to this particular site as    20           it's indicated in the lower left-hand corner.  Once    21           successfully accomplishing that link, that particular name    22           that is currently in the lower left would replace what's    23           currently in the upper left, so that would indicate that I'm    24           now at that site as well.  And if the Court like I'll    25           demonstrate that as --                                                                            19     1                    JUDGE SLOVITER:  No, that's all right -- is that all     2           right with you?     3                    JUDGE DALZELL:  That's all right.     4                    JUDGE BUCKWALTER:  That's all right.     5                    JUDGE SLOVITER:  But who decides, is there some way     6           that the... I'm not sure I know the right word... whoever is     7           responsible for naming this, is that organization or entity     8           able to name it in any way or to put something in that name     9           that will designate it in one way or the other?    10                    THE WITNESS:  That's correct, your Honor.  This,    11           just like any word-processing document that one of us may    12           generate, we can choose to name it any name that we like in    13           with the normal naming conventions of that particular    14           computer system.  For example, in the Unix environment, which    15           a lot of this data is stored on, you could have a rather    16           lengthy name and a very descriptive name as to what that    17           particular document would be,    18                    JUDGE SLOVITER:  But can you add a header for --    19           which is what you might call it in regular word processing,    20           for any material or group of material as you choose?    21                    THE WITNESS:  Yes, your Honor, and I'll give you    22           that in a two-part answer, if I may.  For example, if you'll    23           notice in the name up here in the open box where it says IHA,    24           that is a subdirectory equivalent for example, say, to a file    25           drawer within a file cabinet.  That can be named anything we                                                                            20     1           want, for example, it just could have easily been named     2           history instead of IHA, we can name that and identify     3           anything related to this particular series of documents would     4           be stored in that particular file drawer.     5                    Accordingly, on the other side where we were     6           pointing back to the nightlife and down at the bottom, where     7           it says philnight.html, we could once again name that     8           document.  And it's oftentimes done in -- say for example in     9           my own work, if I'm doing some statistical analysis of    10           computer crimes during a particular period, I may preface a    11           number of documents with the word -- with the letters APR,    12           indicating April, and 001, 002, et cetera, or Week 1, Week 2,    13           so I can identify specifically what those documents relate    14           to.    15                    JUDGE SLOVITER:  Before they go on?    16                    THE WITNESS:  Before they -- as I create the    17           document I then create the title once I save it as well.    18                    JUDGE SLOVITER:  And is it possible to pick out or    19           is there some way in which you can say pick me out all    20           documents that say APR up in the header?    21                    THE WITNESS:  Yes, your Honor, there is.    22                    JUDGE SLOVITER:  Okay, thank you.    23                    THE WITNESS:  You're welcome.    24                    JUDGE SLOVITER:  I'm sorry to interrupt, but if this    25           is to educate us I guess it has to come down to our level.                                                                            21     1                    THE WITNESS:  My pleasure, your Honors.  Thank you.     2                    JUDGE SLOVITER:  Go ahead.     3                    THE WITNESS:  What I'd like to do at this time is     4           once again scroll down the list by using the elevator on the     5           right-hand side.  And having spent many childhood class     6           trips, one of my favorite spots downtown here is Elfreths     7           Alley.  I can then select by moving the mouse cursor over     8           that particular area, and bringing the Court's attention once     9           again to the lower left-hand corner, this is now a document    10           called underscore elfreths.html, which could indicate to the    11           user the contents of this particular link that I'm going to,    12           this particular document.  I click that on one time, it goes    13           out and redraws the page for me, and very nicely there is a    14           beautiful photograph of one of my favorite spots, Elfreths    15           Alley.  Also a narrative related to Elfreths Alley as I    16           scroll down the scroll bar on -- the elevator bar on the    17           right-hand side, giving some of the background of that    18           particular street.  And another link which is relative to,    19           say, maybe a visitor to the area that may not be that    20           familiar with Philadelphia in preparation of a trip out here    21           and looking for some information, I could then move the    22           cursor over to the map of Philadelphia, where it says right    23           here toward the bottom, click there one time.  And now I have    24           gone out and retrieved this document that is the map of the    25           Philadelphia area for this particular region.  And of course                                                                            22     1           I believe the court is somewhere over in this area where I'm     2           pointing to now.  Now, if I would like, obviously it would be     3           difficult if I was a traveler to carry my computer with me, I     4           can at this point by clicking on the right mouse button, over     5           this image with this particular browser, I can then save this     6           image onto my computer system to where later on I could print     7           it out on a printer, whether it's a nice color printer,     8           whether it's a black and white printer, I can actually bring     9           this image from the site where it is, bring it on my computer    10           so I can use it later on as a map to carry around with me.     11           In this case I'm going to cancel that and go back.  And using    12           the back video control, the VCR control as I referred to    13           earlier, I can go back to the previous page and that's where    14           we started from a moment ago.  And I can go back one more    15           time and there is my selection list once again of items    16           within the Philadelphia historic district.    17                    And for the last portion of this one I'd like to    18           once again go over and click at something of great interest,    19           that's of course Independence Hall.  The image is immediately    20           drawn to the screen and it gives you some of the history of    21           Independence Hall as I click through there.  Obviously, your    22           Honors, if there is any point if you'd like to have me stop    23           and read this, I'd be more than happy to.    24                    JUDGE SLOVITER:  I'm sorry, we didn't hear -- I    25           didn't hear you.                                                                            23     1                    THE WITNESS:  Yes, at any point if you'd like me to     2           stop to give you a chance to review the text.     3                    JUDGE DALZELL:  I think we're familiar with the     4           area.     5                    JUDGE SLOVITER:  No -- yeah.     6                    (Laughter.)     7                    THE WITNESS:  Thank you, your Honors.  And also,     8           once again, it brings me down to where it has that same link     9           to the map of historic Philadelphia.  Should I have elected    10           to select this page other than Elfreths Alley first I still    11           can select and go to the map of historic Philadelphia and    12           view that particular map again.  And by using the back arrow    13           I can go back to the beginning of the search engine here.     14           And I'm scrolling up fast, so nothing is wrong with your    15           monitor, I'm doing that rapidly.    16                    At this time what I'd like to do, the Court has    17           heard some previous testimony about news groups and I'd like    18           to go into some of the news groups, show you what's in there.     19           And areas that are non-sexually-explicit, just some graphic    20           images that are currently on some of the news groups.  Before    21           I do that I'd like to point out to the Court, if I may, that    22           the information on this entire Internet system as well as in    23           particularly the news groups changes dynamically.  So, some    24           of the things that I may have found on there within the past    25           hour may have already been changed or deleted by the people                                                                            24     1           that control those news servers.     2                    JUDGE SLOVITER:  Independence Hall?     3                    THE WITNESS:  Ma'am?     4                    JUDGE SLOVITER:  Independence Hall?     5                    THE WITNESS:  Independence Hall, they could     6           conceivably have renamed that and done something like that,     7           yes --     8                    (Laughter.)     9                    THE WITNESS:  -- very simply.  In this case I'm    10           going to use another feature of the Netscape Browser, go up    11           here to the windows.  And it has the ability to display    12           Usenet groups or news groups with its own independent part of    13           its computer system by clicking on that, it will go out and    14           connect to a news site.  I'm going to bring this up full    15           screen, so it's easy to read, by clicking this one box over     16           here.  And this is the interface or this is the part of the    17           computer software that allows me to interact between the    18           user, the end user here at the keyboard and the news groups.     19           One of the things I'd like to do is show that right here is    20           the news server that I'm connected to and that's the server    21           out there that has been provided by the Court for us to be    22           able to retrieve some of these news groups and information.     23                    So, in order to go out there I'll go up and select    24           the options menu... identify to the server that I would like    25           to see all of the news groups that are out there... at which                                                                            25     1           point it goes out, as you can see, it appears, some different     2           categories of news groups that are available and their     3           titles.  I also would like to go back up to options and show     4           all of the messages, because I do have the option of showing     5           all of the messages that are currently available or only the     6           ones that I have not read at this point.  That's a matter of     7           ease, because oftentimes there's literally hundreds and     8           hundreds of messages in a news group and you may read some at     9           one sitting, come back later on, the next day and read some    10           more, so you wouldn't have to go through all of the piles of    11           already read postings, just go to the ones that you already    12           have not read.    13                    At this point I clicked on "show all unread    14           messages."  As the Court can see, I can scroll down.  Some of    15           the names of the news groups are pretty identifiable, such as    16           AZ Jobs, it would indicate that's probably a news group    17           related to Arizona jobs; BLT Jobs, one would think that might    18           be related to jobs in Baltimore.    19                    (Pause.)    20                    THE WITNESS:  As you can see as I scroll through,    21           there are some things in there that might not identify    22           specifically what's in those news groups and one would    23           actually have to go in those news groups to see what they're    24           about.  At this point, keeping with our theme of    25           Philadelphia, what I'd like to do is a little bit more                                                                            26     1           rapidly move down to one that I looked at.  There are some     2           sub-news groups of Pennsylvania, presumably Pittsburgh, and     3           in this particular instance Philadelphia.  Now, at this     4           point, unlike the previous documents up here, for example the     5           one I have referenced at AZ Jobs, presumably indicating     6           Arizona jobs, these have a plus sign out here, which indicate     7           that there are further subgroups within this group, as has     8           been discussed with previous testimony about some of the     9           types of racing cars that one might be interested in.  And it    10           also indicates that under this group there's 23 different    11           groups that are available, and the way to get that is very    12           simply going over here to the file-folder-looking area,    13           clicking on that, and I'll raise that up to where that's    14           primarily what we see on the screen.  And you can see that    15           there is -- out of those 23 news groups there's these    16           subcategories out of here, and there's also some additional    17           news groups as we see out -- in this area here, there's a    18           plus sign, and under Philadelphia Jobs, there's two more    19           subgroups underneath that.  We'll select the first one under    20           "announce," if I may.    21                    (Pause.)    22                    THE WITNESS:  And on the right-hand side of the    23           screen now indicates those postings which are currently    24           available through this one server, through these -- and on    25           this news server and in this particular subcategory of the                                                                            27     1           news group of phl.announce.  Now, for example, one of the     2           documents I looked at last night was a pretty generic     3           description of some of the previous court proceedings in this     4           matter that someone had written and posted on here, and I     5           printed that out.  Well, that's no longer on there, that was     6           about a -- a little over a two-week-old message, so either on     7           an automated manner or someone selected going out there, they     8           removed that message from this particular news group.  It     9           could have been the computer itself through like, as I said,    10           an automated matter, it says once something gets to be two    11           weeks old it automatically would remove it, or someone could    12           have gone and said, okay, these messages are old enough, I'm    13           going to change it.    14                    At this point I'll go to the next one and, for    15           example, something like the blood drive on March 26th, which    16           presumably was an announcement related to that.  I click    17           there and underneath in the bottom half of your screen is    18           displayed that particular message that someone has posted.     19           This one appears to be posted by a person by the name of    20           Monica Moll (ph.), and I apologize for not pronouncing that    21           properly, at a computer system address that this person was    22           using at Dolphin, apparently at the University of    23           Pennsylvania, as indicated by the edu or an educational site,    24           and it says underneath University of Pennsylvania.  And it    25           talks about just a message that indicates that there's an                                                                            28     1           emergency blood shortage, they need some assistance.     2                    JUDGE SLOVITER:  Could you back up just for a     3           minute?  Now, all someone needs to have this, is this     4           correct, is a computer and access to the Internet and a modem     5           in the word processor or the computer, right?     6                    THE WITNESS:  A modem or a network connection of     7           some sort, which are very similar, your Honor, yes, and also     8           the software by which to view this, such as in this case     9           we're using Netscape, because Netscape can do a lot of    10           different things.    11                    JUDGE SLOVITER:  And that's all, so that my little    12           laptop that's here that is -- that they did put it on    13           Netscape just for purposes of this case, no E-mail, but just    14           -- if I could figure out how to get it off and on, which I    15           haven't been able to do today, I could follow you on this    16           with -- or anyone, any of the judges or any of the lawyers    17           could follow what you are doing, anybody in the courtroom if    18           they had a connection could follow you, right?    19                    THE WITNESS:  Yes, your Honors, that's correct.  And    20           particularly if they're reading the information from the same    21           server that I'm reading it from it would be identical, absent    22           the fact that if someone was on there before and checked off    23           a message of being read, that message would not necessarily    24           be displayed if they've already read it.  So, there may be a    25           little bit of a difference between what I see and what you                                                                            29     1           see had you been before.     2                    JUDGE SLOVITER:  I see nothing, but that's all right     3           at the moment.     4                    THE WITNESS:  I'm sorry, if you were to see it.     5                    JUDGE SLOVITER:  Yes, if I were to see it.     6                    THE WITNESS:  Okay.  So, as you can see those are     7           different announcements related presumably to the     8           Philadelphia area and this case was one related to an     9           emergency blood shortage which might be out there.    10                    Okay, at this time, as I mentioned to the Court a    11           few moments ago, what I'd like to do is display a beautiful    12           graphic image, in this particular case I want to go back up    13           to the news group alt.  Now, alt has been mentioned a few    14           times in previous testimony, which stands for an alternative    15           news group, which basically is a category which you can fit a    16           lot of different subjects of information in that particular    17           news group.  I'm going to scroll up there a little bit    18           quicker...    19                    (Pause.)    20                    THE WITNESS:  And as I mentioned before to the    21           Court, in this particular subcategory of news group, alt, it    22           shows that there's 1,978 subcategories within this particular    23           alt heading.  By double clicking on this the folder opens up,    24           which sort of indicates opening up the drawer of a filing    25           cabinet.  And as you can see as I scroll down here, there's a                                                                            30     1           number of different categories, there's a number of subgroups     2           that might be available in there, and the one I'm moving down     3           to is alt.pictures.       4                    (Pause.)     5                    THE WITNESS:  What I'll do to expedite this, your     6           Honor, is I'll just grab this elevator bar here and just move     7           down a little bit quicker, because there are quite a few out     8           there, as you can see.     9                    (Pause.)    10                    THE WITNESS:  Oops, I beg your Honors' pardon, I was    11           going to go to alt.binaries, if I'm -- let me check my list    12           here, I think I got off -- yes, I did.  I was going to go to    13           alt.binaries, which has the subcategory of pictures.  Let me    14           go back up --    15                    JUDGE SLOVITER:  Why would you pick that?    16                    THE WITNESS:  Well, in this case I was out on the    17           site last night and looked at alt.binaries, because    18           alt.binaries generally refers to some of the graphic images    19           or actual computer applications that might be out there,    20           because there's subcategories that I know from using this,    21           there's alt.binaries.pictures, and then you have different    22           subcategories underneath there.    23                    JUDGE SLOVITER:  Well, does binaries have a sexual    24           connotation or --    25                    THE WITNESS:  No, it doesn't, your Honor --                                                                            31     1                    JUDGE SLOVITER:  No, it doesn't, okay.     2                    THE WITNESS:  -- no, it's strictly a generic     3           computer term.     4                    JUDGE DALZELL:  Binary simply means two media,     5           right, two or more media?     6                    THE WITNESS:  That's correct, yes.     7                    JUDGE DALZELL:  All right.     8                    (Pause.)     9                    JUDGE DALZELL:  There, stop.    10                    THE WITNESS:  Okay.  As you can see, the    11           alt.binaries has 78 different groups in there, and I can    12           double click on this and bring me to the subcategories    13           underneath alt.binaries.  And in this case there is once    14           again sub-subcategories, documents, postings related to    15           there, and I'm going to the one alt.binaries.pictures, which    16           has 47 subgroups underneath there.  And I'll double click on    17           that, and of course the first one that comes up is    18           alt.binaries.pictures.animals.  And it says that there's 69    19           unread postings in that particular news group and to make    20           sure that I have all the ones, since I looked at the duck one    21           earlier, I want to go back here and make sure that I show all    22           messages irrespective of whether or not I have read them,    23           which I have that selected, I click on this at this time.     24           And over on the right-hand side of the screen there's all the    25           different postings there that are listed on this particular                                                                            32     1           news group and a brief subject line that the individual that     2           posted this message has the opportunity to post it under what     3           category and actually type into the line what it is that they     4           want to identify this particular posting to mean.     5                    JUDGE DALZELL:  Now, "cute racoon," okay?     6                    THE WITNESS:  Yes, your Honors.     7                    JUDGE DALZELL:  Now, presumably "Who knows," which     8           is the identifier there, has put a picture of a cute racoon,     9           is that what we're to believe?    10                    THE WITNESS:  That's what it indicates, your Honors,    11           yes.  If your Honor would like I may -- I could select that    12           and see if --    13                    JUDGE DALZELL:  Sure, I like cute raccoons.    14                    (Laughter.)    15                    THE WITNESS:  I don't know that that's...    16                    JUDGE DALZELL:  I don't know how cute he is.    17                    (Laughter.)    18                    JUDGE DALZELL:  Or she.    19                    THE WITNESS:  What I'd like to do is go down the    20           ones that I know I --    21                    JUDGE DALZELL:  Ducks, I like ducks.    22                    THE WITNESS:  Ducks?  And go to the ducks.    23                    JUDGE DALZELL:  I think everyone agrees, that's a    24           cute duck.    25                    (Laughter.)                                                                            33     1                    THE WITNESS:  And as you can see there are a number     2           of different postings on here --     3                    JUDGE SLOVITER:  When you say it's posted or unread,     4           does that -- once you have looked at it does it become read?     5                    THE WITNESS:  That's correct, your Honor, it would     6           be just like marking -- putting a bookmark in a publication     7           you were reading that previous to here I have read this or     8           you can select a particular page, I would do it oftentimes by     9           folding over the corner, indicating to myself later on I read    10           that page, this does it electronically for you.    11                    JUDGE DALZELL:  Now, Mr. Schmidt, just one thing I'm    12           not clear about, which is whoever put -- I guess this person    13           put his or her E-mail address, the person who put this photo    14           of this cute duck, I'm just looking at the top half of the    15           screen there it says, "ducks, ducks and more ducks," and to    16           the left there it has an E-mail address, do you see where    17           you're showing with the pointer?    18                    THE WITNESS:  Yes, your Honor.    19                    JUDGE DALZELL:  Now, that person, I assume -- let's    20           assume that's an actual person, how did he or she load this    21           into the system, this -- it's not a photograph of a duck,    22           it's clearly a drawing or a painting or --    23                    JUDGE SLOVITER:  Illustration.    24                    JUDGE DALZELL:  -- illustration that some human made    25           of it, not a photo, how did that get on there?                                                                            34     1                    THE WITNESS:  What would happen, your Honor, in this     2           particular case this is a direct posting.  They could have     3           responded to an earlier posting, say someone said I would     4           like to see some pictures of ducks they have the opportunity,     5           just like in an E-mail system which we might be familiar     6           with, to reply to that particular posting and attach a file.      7           In this case they have attached a file named duck1.jpb, which     8           indicates that it's a graphic image, and they have attached     9           that to their E-mail.  And this particular Browser does both,    10           it allows you to read the message or the E-mail in that case    11           or the posting that was there as well as displays the image    12           for you at the same time, they would just simply attach it.    13                    JUDGE DALZELL:  But -- perhaps I'm not clear -- how    14           physically, the person who posted this illustration of this    15           duck, how did he or she do that from -- let's assume it's a    16           person that is at his or her home, how is it done?    17                    THE WITNESS:  Okay, they would go over there and    18           select the ability -- as you notice across the icons here    19           across the top, you'll see this one where it says "reply" --    20                    JUDGE DALZELL:  Yes.    21                    THE WITNESS:  -- they would go, select reply, and    22           I'll select this particular document here, select reply.  And    23           I have not specified my E-mail address in there, which is why    24           that error message came up, but had I done that in    25           configuring this application it would pop up with a window                                                                            35     1           and ask me to type in the message that I would like to post     2           to this board, and I would type it in just like I was typing     3           in any other document.  And then it would also have the     4           ability to attach, when I go to select to send that response     5           I would have the ability from that screen, oftentimes it's     6           represented by a paper clip, to attach a file.  In this case     7           conceivably there would be a file, this image residing on my     8           computer system somewhere, duck1.jpb, I can tell it to attach     9           it with that posting and then it sends it together through    10           the Internet.    11                    JUDGE SLOVITER:  Well, for example, if Judge    12           Buckwalter wanted to send Judge Dalzell something, Judge    13           Buckwalter mentioned to him, let's say, that, gee, I saw a    14           great ad for some shoes that you might like to see, how --    15           could he without anything except for E-mail and Judge Dalzell    16           without anything other than E-mail communicate that to Judge    17           Dalzell through this mechanism?    18                    THE WITNESS:  Well -- and I use the term E-mail,    19           because are most familiar with that, but that's a one-to-one    20           transmission, this is available to numbers of people    21           obviously.  And, yes, it would be very similar, because you    22           could just attach that information, say an ad that you might    23           have had scanned using a scanner or something that was    24           residing on your --    25                    JUDGE BUCKWALTER:  So, you would need a scanner, you                                                                            36     1           would need a scanner to scan the image that Judge Sloviter     2           just mentioned?     3                    THE WITNESS:  If it was an advertisement, as the     4           Judge mentioned, yes, you would need some way to get that off     5           of a piece of paper into your computer system if it didn't     6           already exist there as an image.     7                    JUDGE SLOVITER:  Or what would be maybe more true to     8           life, suppose Judge Dalzell is in -- well, Judge Buckwalter     9           is in the country and Judge Dalzell is in the city, and Judge    10           Buckwalter says there's a great -- I think we ought to read    11           XYZ book next time and there's a great review of it in this    12           local paper, and Judge Dalzell doesn't have the local paper,    13           could -- how easy would it be for Judge Buckwalter to    14           transmit that to Judge Dalzell and how much sophistication    15           does he need -- more than I have, but how much sophistication    16           does he need to be able to do that?    17                    THE WITNESS:  Yeah, it would take a bit of    18           understanding about the way the computer systems work.  You    19           would need to understand, for example, taking it from a    20           newspaper if it was, say, a number -- a three or four-    21           paragraph review, you would of course have to clip it out if    22           it didn't fit into a -- if you had a small hand scanner, clip    23           it out so it would fit into that particular size, scan it    24           into your computer system by -- once again, in most cases, by    25           clicking on an icon that indicates scan.  You would click it                                                                            37     1           in there, have to save it as a file, and then attach that     2           file as well.  So, you would have to pretty well know what     3           you were doing to attach a file to an E-mail message like     4           that or to a posting.     5                    JUDGE SLOVITER:  Thank you.     6                    THE WITNESS:  You're welcome, your Honor.     7                    JUDGE DALZELL:  That's very helpful.     8                    THE WITNESS:  And as you can see, your Honors,     9           there's a couple more photographs, at least this appears it    10           could be a photograph here of a duck...    11                    (Pause.)    12                    THE WITNESS:  And there's this last one, which I    13           think was one of the more beautiful ones.    14                    JUDGE DALZELL:  Nice ducks.    15                    (Laughter.)    16                    THE WITNESS:  I also like ducks.    17                    JUDGE SLOVITER:  All right, I think we've seen    18           enough cute ducks.    19                    (Laughter.)    20                    THE WITNESS:  Okay.  What I'd like to do, your    21           Honors, with your permission of course, is to -- my next part    22           of the demonstration what I'd like to do is do some of the    23           demonstrations related to some of the items that I have    24           prepared in my declaration.  And I would advise the Court at    25           this time, some of them do contain some things that are                                                                            38     1           sexually explicit, and if the Court would like I can show you     2           some of the steps I took to achieve some of these documents.     3                    JUDGE SLOVITER:  I think you should be able to show     4           us how you get to it, how --     5                    THE WITNESS:  Yes, your Honor.  In this case, once     6           again using --     7                    JUDGE SLOVITER:  I assume that there's no objection     8           to him showing us how he gets to those materials, before he     9           shows us the materials?    10                    MS. HEINS:  We have stated an objection in our    11           conference call with Judge Dalzell earlier in the week both    12           on the basis of the motion in limine argument --    13                    JUDGE SLOVITER:  Are you on the mike?    14                    MS. HEINS:  I'm sorry.    15                    JUDGE SLOVITER:  No, you can come -- you can come    16           just --    17                    JUDGE DALZELL:  Just turn that mike a little bit and    18           it will pick you up.    19                    MS. HEINS:  In our conference call earlier this week    20           with Judge Dalzell we stated an objection to the live    21           demonstration on two grounds; one of them is to the extent    22           it's hard-core pornography and could be prosecuted under    23           obscenity laws, it's not relevant here; and the second is    24           simply that our understanding was that all direct testimony    25           other than the Surfwatch demonstration was going to be by                                                                            39     1           affidavit and not by live demonstration.     2                    JUDGE SLOVITER:  Well, you had a demonstration and     3           obviously it is relevant for the panel and to make a record     4           as to the facility with which someone relatively     5           unsophisticated, under 18, can reach the material, before we     6           get to the material itself we may want to see, but certainly     7           we will not stop him from -- it's the defendants' case to     8           show that it's easy.  I'm proceeding on the assumption that a     9           child can do it, I can't, but that's all right.    10                    MR. COPPOLINO:  Your Honor, I just would indicate, I    11           would ask the witness to advise the Court before he actually    12           clicked on the image if you didn't want him to and also to    13           cite the exhibit in his book as to the image he's going to    14           click on.    15                    JUDGE DALZELL:  Oh, oh, well, that would be very    16           helpful --    17                    JUDGE SLOVITER:  That's fine.    18                    JUDGE DALZELL:  -- that would be very helpful --    19                    MR. COPPOLINO:  He will do that before he --    20                    JUDGE DALZELL:  -- Mr. Coppolino.  Thank you --    21                    MR. COPPOLINO:  -- clicks it on, he'll get you that    22           link.    23                    JUDGE DALZELL:  -- that's a very constructive    24           suggestion.    25                    JUDGE SLOVITER:  Thank you, Mr. Coppolino.                                                                            40     1                    JUDGE DALZELL:  Go ahead.       2                    THE WITNESS:  In this case I'm going to go back to     3           the A to Z home page, which is actually where I started the     4           previous search on the courts in Philadelphia from.  If the     5           Court will notice, on this page here --     6                    JUDGE SLOVITER:  Let me say for the record, I assume     7           that when you show us the facility with which one can read     8           this, the same facility would be relevant whether the     9           material was obscene, clearly obscene as some of this is, or    10           was arguably -- fell within the categories of the statute,    11           i.e. indecent.  So, the actual demonstration of how one gets    12           to it is clearly relevant.    13                    JUDGE DALZELL:  Oh, absolutely, yes.    14                    THE WITNESS:  In this case, if your Honors remember,    15           I started out by going to the Netsearch icon on the Web    16           Browser up here.  And by going to that area, if the Court    17           remembers, I was able to either search directly up here or go    18           to some of the other search routines that are available.  For    19           the purpose of my declaration one of the search routines I    20           used was the Yahoo search engine, at which point I'd like to    21           click on the word Yahoo.      22                    (Pause.)    23                    THE WITNESS:  And provided that site is up and    24           running it should go out and brings me to the Yahoo screen    25           here.  Now, this is very similar to what we just saw moments                                                                            41     1           ago by clicking on Netsearch.  Netsearch, as many of the     2           search routines do, give you the capability of not only using     3           that particular search program, but also give you the ability     4           to use other search programs, because each one of them     5           handles the way they compile their data differently.  I     6           believe in previous testimony it was discussed about some of     7           them have computer robots that go out there and compile the     8           data, some of them do, you know, human input, and some of     9           them do a combination of the two.  So, you would get    10           different search results using different search engines.  In    11           this case Yahoo is one of the more popular ones, which is    12           what I have used.  Also if you notice under Yahoo, there's a    13           little line here that states options, by selecting options I    14           can delineate in some form or fashion some of the search    15           routines I'm doing.  For example, I can search everything    16           within Yahoo, I could search the different Usenet groups, I    17           could search different E-mail addresses.  I can search    18           certain delimiters such as at least one of the keys that are    19           -- the search phrase as I use it or all of the keys, that it    20           must appear in both of it, and also whether they have to be a    21           part of a word or complete words, I can delineate in certain    22           areas some of my search routines.  In this case I'm asking    23           for it to display 25 searches at a time on the screen.  There    24           may be a number of results of the searches, but in this case    25           I would only like to see 25 at a time.                                                                            42     1                    And pointing the Court to... I believe it's Exhibit     2           2 in my declaration.  Now, what I did to obtain this document     3           in Exhibit 2, I just typed in the three characters XXX into     4           this window down here --     5                    JUDGE SLOVITER:  How did you know to do that, did it     6           tell you?     7                    THE WITNESS:  No, your Honors, no, that was just     8           from my own experience --     9                    JUDGE DALZELL:  You just made it up?    10                    THE WITNESS:  Not just made up, I did it because I -    11           - from my experience in doing these type of investigations    12           this is one of the things that would generally give me    13           listings of sexually-explicit materials.    14                    JUDGE SLOVITER:  I see.    15                    THE WITNESS:  And what I'll --    16                    JUDGE SLOVITER:  And is that general known, from    17           your expertise is that -- is it generally known that anybody    18           who was looking for this kind of material would know to put    19           in XXX?    20                    THE WITNESS:  To the extent that triple X-rated    21           material --    22                    JUDGE SLOVITER:  They will now, but go ahead.    23                    (Laughter.)    24                    THE WITNESS:  I'm educating a broader audience, your    25           Honor?                                                                            43     1                    JUDGE SLOVITER:  Yes, but go ahead.     2                    THE WITNESS:  To the extent that one searching for,     3           as you'll see in a moment in the search, anything -- to the     4           extent that someone would know XXX is something related to     5           sexually-explicit information or the fact that the word sex     6           or porn, to the extent -- that would be seem to be a     7           reasonable answer, yes.     8                    JUDGE SLOVITER:  It would be fair to say, would it,     9           that it is as well known to people who use this media as X-    10           rated films are to people who go to films?    11                    THE WITNESS:  Yes, your Honor, I believe that would    12           be fair to say.    13                    JUDGE SLOVITER:  Okay, that's...    14                    THE WITNESS:  Okay.  At this point, your Honors, by    15           typing in the search string that I'm looking for, I click on    16           the word search over here with one click of the mouse, and    17           immediately you can see there's some search results.  I'll    18           point out a couple things on the screen as it also appears    19           similarly in my declaration -- I say similarly, because if    20           you'll notice on the declaration, on Exhibit 2, it says there    21           that there's 112 matches found, in this case there's 120.     22           So, evidently there have been some additional sites that have    23           been added since I did this initial search which contain the    24           characters XXX.    25                    JUDGE DALZELL:  Including, for the record, Superbowl                                                                            44     1           Roman numeral 30.     2                    THE WITNESS:  That's correct, your Honor.     3                    (Laughter.)     4                    JUDGE SLOVITER:  Is that the one that just was?  I     5           mean, is that a current Superbowl, I mean, is that the last     6           one?     7                    JUDGE DALZELL:  That's the last one, wasn't it?     8                    THE WITNESS:  I believe so, your Honor.     9                    JUDGE DALZELL:  Yes.    10                    THE WITNESS:  And, as the Court pointed out as I was    11           about to, the first listing that it comes up hitting on is    12           under a category of recreation, sports and football,    13           Superbowl XXX or Superbowl 30.  And I could click just by    14           going to anywhere along this line here, as I did in the    15           previous demonstration, to the site that's associated with    16           this.    17                    JUDGE SLOVITER:  Now, Mr. Schmidt, let's go back to    18           my other question.  I don't see XXX, unless it's very small,    19           in either the header where it says location or the -- let's    20           call it the footer for this purpose, down at the bottom -- is    21           it there?    22                    JUDGE DALZELL:  There it is.    23                    JUDGE SLOVITER:  No, that says football.    24                    THE WITNESS:  The reason -- your Honors, if I may,    25           the reason you see that at the bottom at this time is because                                                                            45     1           I have the pointer over that particular site, if I move it     2           away from there you'll notice that will go away and the words     3           "document done" will appear.  That's just showing that's the     4           name of the link that this is going to.  And in this     5           particular instance for the Superbowl the XXX or the 30,     6           Roman numeral 30, appears within the naming convention that     7           someone has elected to name this document that they have     8           chosen to put in there.     9                    JUDGE SLOVITER:  But if you're looking for XXX there    10           would be no way in which -- if I have the same computer in    11           another room and I were a parent I wouldn't be able to know,    12           you're saying, that you're looking at XXX, you, my child, are    13           looking at XXX material, could I?    14                    THE WITNESS:  Well, there's a couple things that    15           would clue you in, your Honor.  One of the first things    16           you'll notice up here under the search results, it indicates    17           that I have found 120 matches containing the characters XXX.     18           So, if I was to look at the screen I could see, yes, that's    19           what the search was that I had performed.    20                    JUDGE SLOVITER:  I'm sorry, I had just -- I'm just    21           trying to understand another point that's going to -- that    22           may or may not come later, and I had understood that it would    23           be possible at all times to see what you were viewing or at    24           least it would reveal it, and you're saying it really doesn't    25           reveal it, is that right?                                                                            46     1                    THE WITNESS:  I'm still not quite sure I understand     2           what your Honor means by revealing it at what time.     3                    JUDGE DALZELL:  That the URL is displayed.     4                    THE WITNESS:  Okay, yes.  In the display of the URL,     5           for example, we'll go down here to this particular one under     6           arts and humanities literature, published fiction, adult     7           fiction, if you'll notice on the footers as you have pointed     8           out, your Honor, that particular title contains nowhere near     9           the words XXX.    10                    JUDGE SLOVITER:  That's right.    11                    THE WITNESS:  That's correct.  And in this    12           particular search routine, what this has responded to is the    13           fact in the narrative, somewhere in the description that    14           someone has put on the Yahoo search engine, it contains    15           something related to XXX that the computer itself has    16           interpreted by seeing it somewhere within that Website.    17                    JUDGE SLOVITER:  But, as an expert, would it be    18           possible as far as you know that any time you ask for XXX --    19           this may be a very unsophisticated question, but would it be    20           possible any time that you display an XXX material or ask for    21           XXX material it immediately has to show on the location, or    22           is that just not in the technology?    23                    THE WITNESS:  No, your Honor, it's very much so,    24           because you can put whatever words or characters you want in    25           the naming convention, as we discussed earlier, I believe it                                                                            47     1           was your earlier question about who decides how these things     2           get named, these items get named, that is the individual that     3           actually creates that item, they determine what name they     4           want to put in there.  For example, if I -- what I have     5           elected in this particular document, instead of using the     6           word adult underscore fiction, to type in XXX underscore     7           fiction, I could elect to do that and using that naming     8           convention through anything out -- just as I did with the APR     9           for April, and that would always appear in that URL address,    10           as the Judge mentioned.    11                    JUDGE SLOVITER:  But it's your option, in other    12           words?    13                    THE WITNESS:  That's correct, your Honors, yes.    14                    JUDGE SLOVITER:  And it's not the option of anyone    15           higher up on the scale of getting into the document?    16                    THE WITNESS:  You as the creator of that document    17           would be the one that determines the name of that document.    18                    JUDGE SLOVITER:  Thank you.    19                    THE WITNESS:  Yes, your Honor.    20                    Okay, as you can see, your Honors, in addition to    21           the Superbowl XXX category that's being displayed there, and    22           I'll scroll up just below that, so you may see some of the    23           rest of them, as much as we can get on the screen at one    24           time, there's -- once again, it relates to the Host Marriott    25           gamewear, some Superbowl XXX hats and T-shirts.  Someone has                                                                            48     1           elected in their description of that particular Website to     2           include the XXX, which indicates the 30, that this appears in     3           that description of that site, so that's why the Yahoo search     4           engine picked up and displayed this text.     5                    The next one down in the subcategory of business and     6           economy, the XXX adult software, et cetera.  As you can see,     7           your Honors, you have a large selection out of the first 25.      8           And notwithstanding the blue links, which are actually the     9           links to the sites that are associated with this information,    10           in the narrative side, going down the right-hand side in the    11           black text, you can see why this particular search routine    12           selected on the XXX even though, if you'll notice, as I go    13           over One Superhot Adult Mall, in the lower left-hand, the    14           footers you would call it, the characters XXX do not appear    15           in that name, because someone has elected not to use that    16           title.    17                    Now, continuing on, if I may, your Honors, with the    18           information as it is contained in my declaration.  I'd like    19           to go down to the link here --    20                    JUDGE SLOVITER:  Would anybody have the authority,    21           as far as you know -- I'm not talking about legal authority,    22           but technical ability to require that any material that goes    23           on or is found through a Yahoo search must accurately    24           designate with XXX or adult or whatever designation might be    25           used to access this kind of material?                                                                            49     1                    THE WITNESS:  The descriptions, your Honor, that are     2           associated with this are put in -- for example, I have my own     3           Website, I can list that as a Yahoo site and I -- I elect to     4           type into the description whatever characters I elect to     5           describe my Website.  So, in -- yes, you could go in there     6           and type XXX on every site that's related to this if you put     7           that description in the search engine itself.     8                    JUDGE SLOVITER:  Okay, thank you.     9                    THE WITNESS:  You're welcome, your Honor.  And going    10           down here, which is reference to Exhibit 3 in my declaration,    11           I'll click on Las Vegas showgirls and it has a description    12           alongside there... it's going out and reading that document.    13                    (Pause.)    14                    THE WITNESS:  And this document is being displayed,    15           as it was very similar to the day on April the 3rd when I    16           printed this document for my declaration.    17                    JUDGE DALZELL:  Just for the record, this is the    18           page that is headed "WARNING, WARNING, WARNING," in all caps.    19                    THE WITNESS:  And as you can see by some of the    20           black text it has the warnings, as the Judge pointed out.  It    21           also has a statement in here, it says if you're under the age    22           of 18 or offended by adult-oriented material you are not    23           authorized to access this site.  It also has, down below    24           you'll notice it has a direct link, if you watch the cursors    25           I place it over, a direct link to the Surfwatch home page,                                                                            50     1           which I believe we saw a demonstration of a few weeks ago, or     2           moving down below that it also has a direct link to the     3           Cyberpatrol home page.  So --     4                    JUDGE BUCKWALTER:  Now, at this point you're not     5           going to display the picture though that's already in our     6           exhibit book?     7                    THE WITNESS:  That's correct, your Honor.     8                    JUDGE BUCKWALTER:  You're not going to, okay.     9                    THE WITNESS:  At this point I'm not prepared to do    10           that.    11                    JUDGE BUCKWALTER:  Very well.    12                    JUDGE DALZELL:  That's the next click, right?    13                    THE WITNESS:  That would be the case, your Honor.     14           At this point, if I elected to do so and if the Court so    15           chose, I could go up here to where it says, yes, I am over 18    16           years old, which I am, and I could click on this.  And as you    17           can see down in the lower left-hand corner again is the    18           footer, that would then connect me to a site called    19           www.sexvision.com/main.htm.  And main.htm is actually the    20           name of the document that this would then connect to, which    21           would be the one in the next page of my declaration.    22                    JUDGE SLOVITER:  And we would know that and it's    23           identified because on the right-hand side of the -- right-    24           hand top side of the document itself it has precisely what    25           you just read?                                                                            51     1                    JUDGE DALZELL:  It has the Website address?     2                    THE WITNESS:  Yes, your Honor.  Netscape, when I     3           print this up, puts that information in there for you, which     4           is very good for tracking where these things --     5                    JUDGE DALZELL:  And that's why it's on the exhibits     6           that you all prepared for us?     7                    THE WITNESS:  That's correct, your Honors, yes.      8           Netscape did that automatically, put all that information --     9                    JUDGE DALZELL:  Well, you didn't have to do anything    10           to make it do that?    11                    THE WITNESS:  No, your Honor, it did that    12           automatically with the date and time, the description as the    13           site user has placed in there, for example, in the upper    14           left-hand corner of the second part of that exhibit, which    15           actually has the graphic image, it says, "Sex vision.  Sexy    16           live nude adult video teleconferencing."  That's actually put    17           on there by reading it from the site, those are not things    18           that I typed on there.    19                    JUDGE SLOVITER:  And that is obscene, is it not,    20           that picture is obscene?    21                    THE WITNESS:  That would be something -- a    22           determination for the Court, your Honors.  It does display    23           some sexually-explicit materials you can see on the next page    24           or, if the Court would like, I could click over there.    25                    JUDGE SLOVITER:  Well, you don't have to click on                                                                            52     1           there, we've seen it.     2                    JUDGE DALZELL:  Because we -- because if you clicked     3           we would have Exhibit 3, right?     4                    THE WITNESS:  You would have the second page --     5                    JUDGE DALZELL:  The second page of --     6                    THE WITNESS:  -- of Exhibit 3.     7                    JUDGE DALZELL:  -- Exhibit 3?     8                    THE WITNESS:  Yes, your Honor.     9                    JUDGE DALZELL:  Okay, so we don't need to do that.    10                    THE WITNESS:  Okay.  At this point, your Honors, if    11           I may, I'd like to go back for a moment to the search --    12                    JUDGE SLOVITER:  How many -- all right, well, you'll    13           tell us later how many clicks it took you to get to that.    14                    THE WITNESS:  I may answer that question right now,    15           if you'd like, your Honor, because it's --    16                    JUDGE SLOVITER:  Well, I think it's part of your    17           direct test -- your testimony, so I'll wait, you'll get    18           cross-examined on that.  Go ahead, you do what you want.    19                    THE WITNESS:  Thank you, your Honor.  Okay, at this    20           time, your Honor, what I'd like to do is go back to the    21           search results that we started from a moment ago.  As you can    22           see the fact that I went to the Las Vegas showgirls, that    23           text is a little bit different color and that's something    24           that I set up within the Web Browser myself.  So, if I was    25           doing some research for something and accessed a hundred                                                                            53     1           links I could go back, instead of having to remember or write     2           down which one I went to, I could just go back and see the     3           fact by the different color that I had already been at that     4           link, that's one of the features built into the browser.     5                    In this instance what I'd like to do is go to the     6           next 25 matches, which relate to Exhibit Number 10 in my     7           declaration.  And as you can see, your Honors, there is -- it     8           says it's displaying matches 26 through 50 and I will scroll     9           up to see all of the different choices I have of the search    10           results there.  So, I have clicked from the search, the next    11           25 over to here with one click.  Now, going on to -- that was    12           Exhibit 10, your Honors.  Going on to Exhibit 11, which I am    13           not going to click to --    14                    JUDGE DALZELL:  Right.    15                    THE WITNESS:  -- I can go down here to the    16           selection, the Honey.  And once again, your Honors, pointing    17           to your earlier question, on the lower left-hand or the    18           footer, so to speak, it now says down there www.bolero.com,    19           that's because I have the pointer over that site called the    20           Honey.  I'd like to bring the Court's attention, if I may, to    21           the fact that you had mentioned earlier about the Website    22           address on the upper right-hand corner of my document in the    23           declaration, which says WWW.APPEALO.COM (ph.).  At some point    24           since I was at that site they have changed the link to a new    25           domain name, instead of appealo it's now bolero, and that's                                                                            54     1           been since -- April the 3rd is when I prepared that document     2           for my declaration and now it's changed to another site name.     3                    JUDGE SLOVITER:  Mr. Schmidt, to get the hard copy     4           did you simply print?     5                    THE WITNESS:  Yes, your Honor, I would --     6                    JUDGE SLOVITER:  I mean, to prepare the exhibits, if     7           somebody wanted to see one of these pictures and then get a     8           hard copy as you have given us would they just print or it     9           doesn't work that way?    10                    THE WITNESS:  Yes, your Honors.  For example, the    11           information we have currently displayed on our screen, the    12           results of the Websearch --    13                    JUDGE SLOVITER:  Yes.    14                    THE WITNESS:  -- all I would have to do is to print    15           that out as I have for my declaration, is go up here to where    16           it says print, this little icon right here --    17                    JUDGE SLOVITER:  Yes.    18                    THE WITNESS:  -- select print by clicking the mouse    19           once.    20                    JUDGE SLOVITER:  Yeah, well, like you do in a word    21           processor.    22                    THE WITNESS:  Exactly, your Honors, exactly.  And it    23           would come up with a print window and ask me if I wanted to    24           print and what printer I would like to use if I had more than    25           one printer selected.  And that's the way I have prepared the                                                                            55     1           rest of the document, I would click -- say, for example, if I     2           were to click to the Honey for the purpose of the Court, then     3           I could -- when said image is displayed on my screen I could     4           go up to the print icon and then print that -- print that     5           image just as it appears in the declaration.     6                    Now, in preparation for my demonstration, in     7           reviewing this, the image that currently is in my declaration     8           under Exhibit Number 11 no longer exists, not only is that     9           same site not the name off of the site, the Honey, but the    10           image itself is not the same.  As I viewed it last night,    11           there are now some blue splotches on appropriate places on    12           the image that would effectively cover up certain portions of    13           that image now that are currently on that site.    14                    If your Honors like, I would continue on.  And what    15           I'll do is go to another match and this is related to Exhibit    16           37.    17                    MR. COPPOLINO:  Your Honor, if I may --    18                    THE COURT:  Yes, Mr. Coppolino?    19                    MR. COPPOLINO:  -- the revision of the image he just    20           referred to is also that Exhibit 50, that image, the Honey,    21           we have the revised image.    22                    JUDGE DALZELL:  Okay, Exhibit 37.    23                    (Pause.)    24                    THE WITNESS:  And what I have done is I have clicked    25           on the next 25 sites, indicating up at the top -- I haven't                                                                            56     1           done that yet, have I?  I've clicked on the next, which     2           indicate matches 51 through 75.  And the Court will notice     3           the -- let me make sure I've got this exhibit correct -- I'm     4           sorry, your Honors, it's -- Exhibit 37 is the search results,     5           which is not the same as what I currently have on the screen     6           once again, because I mentioned earlier that the number of     7           sites have increased since I initially did the search, so,     8           therefore, the page numbering system is changed over.  So, in     9           this case I'll actually have to go to the next 25 matches...    10           displaying 76 to 100, to get to the areas as I have noticed    11           in my declaration in Exhibit Number 38, which is the BBS    12           portion, the bulletin board system portion of the search    13           results.  The document in my declaration at Exhibit Number 38    14           is the Website from the Southshore Secrets BBS.  And, once    15           again, the Court may take notice at the lower left-hand    16           corner, that's the name of the site that this particular    17           Southshore Secret BBS link is linked to.    18                    Now, your Honors, I'd like to go ahead and click to    19           this next site.  As of last night it did not contain any    20           sexually-explicit material in the next click, but I'll warn    21           the Court, sometimes these things change and --    22                    JUDGE SLOVITER:  Why do you have to click to it?  I    23           mean --    24                    THE WITNESS:  Because what happens on the next page,    25           your Honor, since I originally printed this document for the                                                                            57     1           declaration, they have changed the name of the location of     2           this site.  So, what they have done, and with the Court's     3           permission --     4                    JUDGE SLOVITER:  Well, I don't know, let me...     5                    (Discussion held off the record.)     6                    JUDGE SLOVITER:  Mr. Coppolino, what is the point of     7           -- what is the point he's trying to show by this specific     8           point?     9                    MR. COPPOLINO:  This is the last example, but I    10           believe the next click will show that the particular site    11           name changed and the screen -- the next screen will show that    12           it changed and it will give you the hypertext link to the new    13           site.  So, it shows the Court, A, that they can change the    14           name of the site itself and, B, that you can click on and get    15           to it after they change the name, that's what the next screen    16           would show.    17                    JUDGE SLOVITER:  Isn't that what he just showed us    18           with his prior testimony when he had a different name --    19                    MR. COPPOLINO:  Very similar to that, exactly.    20                    JUDGE SLOVITER:  -- and then they put the two black    21           dots?    22                    JUDGE DALZELL:  So, when you click on this is there    23           going to be that same picture or is there just going to be    24           text?    25                    THE WITNESS:  No, your Honors, it will just be text,                                                                            58     1           presumably, as what I saw last night was strictly just text.     2                    JUDGE DALZELL:  I'd like to see it, thank you, I'd     3           like to see it.     4                    THE WITNESS:  Okay, clicking on here... and it     5           indicates that this site has been moved from what I have --     6           the site location was included in my declaration, it also     7           provides the link to the new site, which is a different URL     8           address than the previous one, a different name included in     9           there.  And the reason being, it's stated by whomever put    10           this page on there that due to overwhelming response the site    11           has been moved to its own Webserver, it's own computer    12           system.    13                    JUDGE DALZELL:  Does that statement, based on your    14           experience, does that statement, A, make sense; B, strike you    15           as credible?    16                    THE WITNESS:  Very much so, your Honor, yes.  That's    17           one where one would -- in order for its users or its fans, so    18           to speak, to be able to follow the links they put that on    19           there and it says, okay, here's -- I'm no longer at this    20           location, here's where I am now, click here to go to it.    21                    JUDGE DALZELL:  And that's because the new server    22           can take more traffic, if you will?    23                    THE WITNESS:  Apparently, based on the way it    24           appears here, yes, your Honor.    25                    JUDGE DALZELL:  Okay, fine, that's interesting.                                                                            59     1                    THE WITNESS:  Then if I were to --     2                    JUDGE SLOVITER:  And that would be true as to     3           anything?  For example, if all of a sudden an event was     4           coming to Philadelphia, going back to what you had said     5           before, which got a lot of traffic, people wanted to know     6           whether tickets were available, is it that kind of site also     7           that they would move to a --     8                    JUDGE DALZELL:  A server with more capacity?     9                    THE WITNESS:  Yes, your Honors, that's quite    10           correct, but if I may explain.  What one may find out that we    11           have -- for example, the Federal Judicial Center may have a    12           lot of different Websites on that one particular server and    13           through the course of the day are being accessed, they elect    14           at one point to put something else.    15                    JUDGE SLOVITER:  Well, they would be delighted, but    16           I would be surprised, there might be other things.    17                    (Laughter.)    18                    JUDGE DALZELL:  No, but you're -- but to follow your    19           example --    20                    JUDGE SLOVITER:  The point is --    21                    JUDGE DALZELL:  -- to follow your example, if their    22           Website on court-annexed arbitration, a subject near and dear    23           to this Court, that there was so much traffic on it that they    24           moved that to a new server because they were getting so many    25           requests at the same time, is that what you're saying is                                                                            60     1           happening here?     2                    THE WITNESS:  That's correct, your Honor, yes.     3                    JUDGE DALZELL:  Okay.  So, it's just reflecting     4           demand?     5                    THE WITNESS:  That's -- the demand, your Honor, yes,     6           and also the ability to meet that demand without the     7           hesitation and delays that we have seen through some of the     8           sites once they get real busy, it may slow down the traffic.      9           So, you move it off to where there is only a singular    10           function on there instead of multiple people coming in.    11                    JUDGE DALZELL:  Okay, very helpful --    12                    JUDGE SLOVITER:  Thank you.    13                    JUDGE DALZELL:  -- thank you.      14                    THE WITNESS:  And if I --    15                    JUDGE DALZELL:  Did you say that was it on the    16           demonstration?  I'm sorry.    17                    THE WITNESS:  Just to conclude, your Honor, if I    18           were to click on that site there then it would be the -- go    19           to the page that's --    20                    JUDGE DALZELL:  Then we would see Exhibit 38 for    21           identification?    22                    THE WITNESS:  Yes, your Honor, that's correct.    23                    At this time, that would conclude the formal    24           demonstration, your Honors, and I would be happy to entertain    25           any questions you might have.                                                                            61     1                    JUDGE SLOVITER:  Well, I think at this point --     2                    JUDGE DALZELL:  Well, I think there is cross-     3           examination first.     4                    JUDGE SLOVITER:  But it might be a good point to     5           break.     6                    JUDGE DALZELL:  Yes, yes.     7                    (Laughter.)     8                    JUDGE SLOVITER:  Okay, we'll take a five-minute     9           break -- is that what we've been taking?    10                    JUDGE DALZELL:  Ten.    11                    JUDGE SLOVITER:  Ten.    12                    (Court in recess; 10:54 to 11:08 a.m.)    13                    THE COURT CLERK:  Please be seated.    14                    JUDGE DALZELL:  Okay, I think we're ready for cross-    15           examination.    16                                 CROSS-EXAMINATION    17           BY MS. HEINS:      18           Q   Good morning, Mr. Schmidt.    19           A   Good morning again.    20           Q   Nice to see you again.    21           A   Nice to see you, thank you.    22           Q   Mr. Schmidt, you are highly expert in the use of    23           computers, are you not?    24           A   Yes, I am.    25           Q   And you've, over the years of your law enforcement                                                                            62     1           career, you've engaged in many different sophisticated     2           computer searches for pornographic materials?     3           A   Yes, I have.     4           Q   So that it's fair to say you can get around the Internet     5           pretty quickly?     6           A   That's correct, yes.     7           Q   Now, the materials, the large stack of materials that you     8           supplied to the Court today, you accessed some of these     9           materials originally on a home computer, is that right?    10           A   That's correct, yes.    11           Q   And this was a 60 megahertz pentium-based computer that    12           you built yourself?    13           A   That's correct, yes.    14           Q   And in fact this is one of approximately ten computers    15           that you have in your home, is that right?    16           A   That is correct, yes.    17           Q   Now, a pentium base is a state-of-the-art, most advanced    18           computer system available, is it not?    19           A   Depending upon the speed, pentium is the most recent    20           series.  The speed of mine is not the state of the art.    21           Q   Can you explain what you mean by the speed?    22           A   Yes, I can.  I mentioned or you mentioned there or the    23           question was about a 60 megahertz which relates to the clock    24           speed of the central processing unit or the computer itself.     25           Currently under the pentium series of chips that's produced                                                                            63     1           by Intel Corporation they go as high as up to 200 megahertz     2           which are significantly faster processing computers.     3           Q   And does faster processing mean that you would be able to     4           call up an image faster once you click on your screen?     5           A   That would be one part of it, yes.     6           Q   Are there also computers which have much slower than 60     7           megahertz processing?     8           A   Yes, there are.     9           Q   And some of  the images that you supplied to the Court    10           today you also accessed on a computer at your work site at    11           Boeing Air Force Base?    12           A   That's correct, yes.    13           Q   And what's the speed of that computer?    14           A   That particular computer is a 486 DX-100 which is the    15           previous series of central processing unit chips.    16           Q   And in comparison to the 60 megahertz that you have at    17           home, what's the memory of that computer at work?    18           A   The one at work has 16 megabyte of memory in it which is    19           the same as I have in my system at home.    20           Q   Now, when you first start working on finding pornographic    21           images for this case you also brought a brand new color laser    22           printer for home use, isn't that right?    23           A   No, it's not.    24           Q   Didn't you buy a brand new color laser printer on the day    25           that you started searching for pornographic pictures in this                                                                            64     1           case?     2           A   No, I did not.     3           Q   When did you -- okay, what -- what laser printer did you     4           use at home to print out some of the pictures when you began     5           investigating pornography on the Internet for purposes of     6           this case?     7           A   I did not use a laser printer at home, I use an ink jet     8           printer.     9                    JUDGE SLOVITER:  Is a laser printer color or is it    10           just the ink jet printer that's color?    11                    THE WITNESS:  Both of them could be either black and    12           white or color, your Honor.    13           BY MS. HEINS:      14           Q   Okay, you bought on the day you began working on the    15           investigation in this case you bought a Canon 610 color    16           printer?    17           A   That's correct, yes.    18           Q   And that's an ink jet and a laser printer?    19           A   That's correct, yes.    20           Q   Okay.  And one of the purposes of that purpose was to    21           print out pictures in connection with this case, isn't that    22           right?    23           A   Yes, it was.    24           Q   Now, at work you also printed out some pictures that have    25           been supplied to this Court as exhibits, is that right?                                                                            65     1           A   Yes.     2           Q   And your color printer at work is a laser printer, is it     3           not?     4           A   That is correct, yes.     5           Q   It's a QMS LX color laser printer, correct?     6           A   Yeah.     7           Q   And that printer is even more elaborate than the new     8           printer you bought for home use for purposes of this case,     9           isn't that right?    10           A   Yes, that's correct.    11           Q   Now, the time it takes to print out an image varies with    12           the speed of the printer, does it not?    13           A   That's one of the factors, yes.    14           Q   And not everybody, it's fair to say, has a QMS LX color    15           laser printer in their home, do they?    16           A   That's correct, yes.    17           Q   Now, you also used, I think you told me at your    18           deposition a 28.8 baud modem with your computer in order to    19           call up sites on the Internet?    20           A   That's correct, yes.    21           Q   And this is a state-of-the-art speed modem, is it not?    22           A   To the extent that it's -- the speed of it is state of    23           the art, yes.    24           Q   And there are similar modems in existence, are there not?    25           A   Yes, there are.                                                                            66     1           Q   For example if you had used a 14 baud modem it would take     2           longer for an image to appear on the screen?     3           A   That would be correct, yes.     4           Q   And if you used a nine baud modem it would be even     5           slower, wouldn't it?     6           A   I'm not familiar with the term a nine baud modem.     7           Q   Are there modems slower than 14 baud?     8           A   Yes, there are, 14.4, yes.     9           Q   If you used one slower than 14 baud would the image    10           appear on the screen more slowly?    11           A   That's correct, yes.    12           Q   Do you have any knowledge of how many homes in the United    13           States that have computers have 28.8 baud modems as opposed    14           to slower ones?    15           A   No, I don't.     16           Q   Have any knowledge of how many homes in the U.S. have    17           QHS-LX color laser printers?    18           A   No, I don't.    19           Q   Now, of course, you also need a Webbrowser such as    20           NetScape to find the Web sites that you've demonstrated to    21           the Court, don't you?    22           A   That's correct, yes.    23           Q   You also need at least one search engine such as Yahoo or    24           Lykos?    25           A   Access to one of those search engines, yes.                                                                            67     1           Q   So without a Webbrowser you couldn't find any of the     2           sites that you've demonstrated, any of the Web sites?     3           A   That would be fundamentally correct, yes.     4           Q   And without at least one search engine you also would     5           have a very hard time finding Web sites whether pornographic     6           or any other kind?     7           A   It would make it more difficult, yes.     8           Q   Do you have any idea how many homes that have computers     9           in the United States have Webbrowsers?    10           A   No, I do not.    11           Q   Have any idea how many of them have search engines?    12           A   No, I do not.    13           Q   Now, some computers don't even have sufficient memory to    14           tell a printer to print an image at all, do they?    15           A   That would be correct, yes.    16           Q   Do you have any idea how many homes in the United States    17           have computers with sufficient memory to tell a printer to    18           print?    19           A   No, I -- no, I don't.    20           Q   Now, every time you make a connection on the Internet to    21           a different site it can take minutes as opposed to just    22           seconds to access that site, to actually call it up on the    23           screen, depending on modem speed and how busy the Internet    24           is, among other factors, isn't that right?    25           A   That is correct, yes.                                                                            68     1           Q   By the way, in the course of your searches you accessed a     2           number of sites that had an overseas as opposed to a domestic     3           United States origin, didn't you?     4           A   Yes, I did.     5           Q   But you can't quantify the percentage of pornographic     6           sites that you accessed -- or let me rephrase that.  You     7           can't quantify the percentage of pornographic sites on the     8           Internet that have overseas origins, can you?     9           A   No, I cannot, no.     10                    MS. HEINS:  Excuse me, pagination problem.    11                    (Pause.)    12           BY MS. HEINS:      13           Q   Now, Mr. Schmidt, your expertise is in computer    14           forensics, is it not?    15           A   That's one of the areas, yes.    16           Q   And that includes, for example, securing computer    17           documents during criminal investigations?    18           A   That's correct.    19           Q   It includes finding files that may be disguised somewhere    20           in cyberspace?    21           A   That's correct, yes.    22           Q   It includes the ability to extract files, to extract    23           documents from computer files without their being altered?    24           A   That's correct, yes.    25           Q   Now, you've claimed some expertise in your declaration as                                                                            69     1           to the, quote, "widespread," unquote, availability of what     2           you described as sexually explicit sites on the Internet,     3           correct?     4           A   That is correct, yes.     5           Q   By the way, by sexually explicit sites are you really     6           referring to pornographic sites as opposed to other types of     7           sexually explicit information such as safer sex information     8           or sexually explicit descriptions that may appear in     9           literature?    10                    MR. COPPOLINO:  Your Honor, I object to the question    11           as ambiguous.    12                    JUDGE SLOVITER:  You can answer.    13                    THE WITNESS:  I'm sorry, what was the question,    14           please?    15           BY MS. HEINS:      16           Q   When you talk in your declaration about sexually explicit    17           sites you really mean that sub-category of sexually explicit    18           sites that are pornographic in nature, don't you?    19           A   The category I referred to was the entire gamut, I    20           believe, of sexually explicit graphic material that was out    21           there.    22           Q   Well, what I'm asking you is wasn't your search really    23           confined to the sub-category of pornographic material, adult    24           sites basically?    25           A   Adult sites, yes.                                                                            70     1           Q   Okay.  Now, you haven't conducted any formal studies,     2           have you, of the amount of pornographic or adult material     3           that's available on line?     4           A   No, I haven't.     5           Q   And you can't quantify what the percentage of that     6           material is in relation to the entire spectrum of content on     7           the Internet, can you?     8           A   No, I cannot.     9           Q   And the opinion you express in your declaration that the    10           number of what you call sexually explicit sites are growing    11           is not based on any quantitative analysis, is it?    12           A   No, it's not.    13           Q   It's really just your impression, isn't it?    14           A   No, it's my experience, not an impression.    15           Q   Now, your experience is based on being a law enforcement    16           officer investigating sexually explicit materials that might     17           be illegal, isn't that right?    18           A   My experience involving that type of thing is one part of    19           it, yes.    20           Q   Okay.  And in this case when you were conducting your    21           search, for the most part you typed in key words that you    22           knew were going to lead you to adult sites, didn't you?    23           A   That's correct, yes.    24           Q   You were not looking for other sexually explicit sites,    25           for example, that might concern safer sex, were you?                                                                            71     1           A   No, I was not.     2           Q   You were not looking for sites that might have sexually     3           explicit material relating to reproduction --     4           A   No, I was not.     5           Q   -- birth control?     6           A   No, I was not.     7           Q   And in fact you didn't even look for sites that might     8           contain one of the seven -- the seven dirty words which you     9           understand to be the basis of the Federal Communications    10           Commission's indecency definition, did you?    11           A   That's correct, I did not.    12           Q   Now, Mr. Schmidt, on Page 4 of your declaration you say    13           you believe you are qualified to offer expert opinion on,    14           among other things, the existence of mechanisms that are    15           being offered by certain Web sites to restrict access by    16           minors.  That's on Page 4 of your declaration, Paragraph 5,    17           Subparagraph Roman numeral IV.    18           A   That's correct, yes.    19           Q   And you maintain you are an expert on the subject of    20           existence of mechanisms offered by certain Web sites to    21           restrict access by minors?    22           A   To the extent that they exist, yes.    23           Q   In fact, your knowledge of these mechanisms, these adult    24           identification or screening mechanisms is limited to what    25           you've read on Webpages, isn't it?                                                                            72     1           A   That is correct, yes.     2           Q   In fact you don't know if so-called adult verification,     3           that's a term that's reflected in some of your exhibits, is     4           different from a system of user ID password or the so-called     5           First Virtual system; you don't know if they're all different     6           or if they're in fact the same thing, do you?     7           A   That's correct, I do not know that.     8           Q   And you have no knowledge of what software is involved     9           with any of these systems, adult verification or First    10           Virtual, correct?    11           A   That's correct, yes.    12           Q   And as to credit card verification, your knowledge of how    13           that works is limited to what you've picked up perusing Web    14           sites, isn't that right?    15           A   That plus experience in previous investigations in    16           bulletin board systems and people requiring credit card    17           access for those.    18           Q   You have no knowledge of the cost that would be involved    19           in instituting a credit card verification system, do you?    20           A   No, I don't.    21           Q   You don't know whether it's possible, whether it's even    22           possible to institute such a system if there's no financial    23           transaction taking place, do you?    24           A   No, I do not.    25           Q   And you don't really know what the First Virtual is, do                                                                            73     1           you?     2           A   Other than what I've read, no.     3           Q   And what you've read has been limited to the Web site     4           screens that you showed us in your exhibits?     5           A   That's correct, yes.     6           Q   The most in fact that you can say about First Virtual      7           is that you think it appears to be a service that's a sort of     8           verification of authenticity, is that right?     9           A   That's based on reading what's on the screen, yes.    10           Q   And you've never talked with any person involved with any    11           of the adult sites that you've visited that uses an adult    12           verification system to find out how they manage that system,    13           have you?    14           A   No, I did not.    15           Q   And you have no knowledge of whether any adult    16           verification system that you've mentioned in your declaration    17           is usable outside the context of Web sites or bulletin    18           boards, for example, whether it would be usable for news    19           groups, do you?    20           A   That's correct.    21           Q   You don't know whether any of these adult verification    22           systems would be usable for list exploders, do you?    23           A   No, I do not.    24           Q   Mail exploders, excuse me, or list serves, and you don't    25           know whether any adult verification system would be usable or                                                                            74     1           feasible for on-line chat rooms, do you?     2           A   That's correct, I do not.     3           Q   And you have no idea whether any of these adult     4           verification systems would be feasible for nonprofit     5           organizations that run largely or totally on volunteer labor,     6           do you?     7           A   No, I do not.     8           Q   Now, finally, Mr. Schmidt, I think you also claim     9           expertise with respect to looking at Page 4 of your    10           declaration, Paragraph 5, Subsection Roman numeral V, the    11           practical ability of parents to deal with the easy    12           availability of sexually explicit material on their own, you    13           claim expertise in that area?    14           A   That's correct, yes.    15           Q   Now, your knowledge of whether parents either in general    16           or any particular parents have the ability to control their    17           children's access to the Internet is basically anecdotal,    18           isn't it?    19           A   Through my teachings, yes.    20           Q   Through  your interactions with parents asking informal    21           questions at conferences that you've attended?    22           A   That's correct, yes.    23           Q   You haven't done any formal study of the ability of    24           parents to supervise their children while using computers,    25           have you?                                                                            75     1           A   No, I have not, no.     2           Q   You don't have any formal training in family psychology     3           or child psychology, do you?     4           A   No.     5           Q   In fact you have no knowledge of how many minors use     6           computers, do you?     7           A   Not specifically, no.     8           Q   You don't know of any specific statistics regarding     9           households with minors that have computer systems, do you?    10           A   I know of one study that recently was publicized in one    11           of the period-- periodicals regarding number of households    12           with computers and number where children use them but I don't    13           know the specifics from it.    14           Q   You don't know the specific statistics, do you?    15           A   No, I do not.    16           Q   Now, a number of the adult sites you visited, and I think    17           this is reflected in the exhibits, had notices and links to    18           various parental software blocking products that are offered    19           on the market, didn't they?    20           A   Yes, they did.    21           Q   Now, in fact when parents at these conferences have    22           informally asked you for your advice about how they can    23           prevent their children from accessing sexually explicit    24           material on line you've told them about the availability of    25           just these products, haven't you?                                                                            76     1           A   Not the specific products, the availability of products     2           similar to that, yes.     3           Q   And when parents ask you these questions you also advise     4           them that what they should do is become knowledgeable about     5           what their kids are doing on line?     6           A   That's correct, yes.     7           Q   And you also advise them to take appropriate classes and     8           learn what's on the computer system that they own and make     9           sure they're aware of what's going on before they turn their    10           kids loose, haven't you?    11           A   Yes, I have.    12                    MS. HEINS:  Nothing further.    13                    JUDGE SLOVITER:  Mr. Coppolino?    14                    MS. HEINS:  I think Ms. Kappler has a few questions.     15           I'm sorry.    16                    JUDGE SLOVITER:  Fine.    17                    MS. KAPPLER:  Thank you, your Honors, Ann Kappler    18           for the ALA plaintiffs.    19                                 CROSS-EXAMINATION    20           BY MS. KAPPLER:    21           Q   Good morning, Mr. Schmidt.    22           A   Good morning again, nice to see you.    23           Q   Before turning to a couple questions regarding your    24           declaration in this I'd like to go over a few points that    25           came out during the questioning by the Court during your                                                                            77     1           demonstration.     2                    Judge Sloviter asked you a question regarding the     3           creation of the names in the URL to the Webpage addresses and     4           I believe you indicated to the Court that the person who     5           creates the Webpage or the Web name actually types in and     6           decides what the name of the page is going to be, is that     7           accurate?     8           A   The document associated with that, yes.  The creator of     9           that page would be the one that names that document as well,    10           be it an individual or a corporate.    11           Q   Okay.  Now, in the universe of cyberspace there is no    12           central control mechanism that assigns names or Web    13           addresses, is there?    14           A   There is an organization called the Internik which has    15           been discussed before in the Court which basically controls    16           to keep any redundancy from occurring a master list of domain    17           names and Internet protocol or IP addresses.    18           Q   Well, all they do is simply make sure that there aren't    19           duplicative names that are assigned, is that correct?     20           A   That's correct, yes.    21           Q   They don't actually assign what the names are, is that    22           accurate?    23           A   That is also accurate, yes.    24           Q   And so t here is no central control which orders that    25           material of certain content should be labeled in a certain                                                                            78     1           way, is that accurate?     2           A   That is accurate, yes.     3           Q   Now, you indicated during your demonstration that the     4           South Shores Secrets BBS had changed its server or at least     5           that's what it indicated on them on screen, is that correct?     6           A   That's correct, yes.     7           Q   Isn't it possible, technically possible that that new     8           server was located overseas?     9           A   Yes, it is, that's correct.    10           Q   Turning to your declaration, Mr. Schmidt, you indicated    11           and you indicated in your answers to Ms. Heins' questions    12           that you have had conversations with parents in which they    13           have expressed some concern about their children's access to    14           sexually explicit materials on line, is that correct?    15           A   That is correct, yes.    16           Q   And in your experience parents concern in this record has    17           no relevance to the origin of the material, that is whether    18           it comes from abroad or whether it is of domestic origin, is    19           that correct?    20           A   That is also correct, yes.    21           Q   All they care about is what it -- what the content    22           actually is, not its geographic origin, is that accurate?    23           A   That is accurate, yes.    24           Q   Now, in the course of your work on this case you tried    25           several different kinds of blocking or screening software, is                                                                            79     1           that accurate?     2           A   I -- yes, I loaded up three different sites, yes, or     3           three different types, yes.     4           Q   Now, Cyber Patrol was not one of those softwares that you     5           tried, is that right?     6           A   That is correct, yes.     7           Q   You didn't try Cyber Patrol at all, is that accurate?     8           A   No, I did not.     9           Q   And with regard to Cyber Sitter is it accurate that you    10           installed that on your machine but that you never used it?    11           A   That's correct, yes.    12           Q   So you never on any searches while Cyber Sitter was up    13           and running, is that accurate?     14           A   That is accurate.    15           Q   And is it also accurate that with regard to Net Nanny,    16           you installed Net Nanny on your machine but that you never    17           connected with the Internet while Net Nanny was up and    18           running?    19           A   That's also correct, yes.    20           Q   So you never conducted any Internet searches while Net    21           Nanny was operating on your machine, is that accurate?    22           A   That is correct, yes.    23           Q   In fact, the only blocking or screening software you    24           actually ran, that is performed searches while the software    25           was running is Surfwatch, is that correct?                                                                            80     1           A   Yes, it is.     2           Q   So you don't have any knowledge of how effective any     3           blocking software other than Surfwatch is in blocking     4           sexually explicit materials on line, is that correct?     5           A   Not totally correct, no. And may I explain?     6           Q   Please.     7           A   There recently has been some on-line studies of net     8           blocking software conducted by some independent organizations     9           in which the results have been posted on the Internet.  I    10           recently looked at one and reviewed eight different packages    11           and their relative strengths and weaknesses as displayed by    12           the researchers that did that, that study on there.    13           Q   But you have no personal experience, is that correct?    14           A   That's correct.    15           Q   Now, you have an AOL account, is that correct?    16           A   Yes, it is.    17           Q   But you have not tested the parental control mechanisms    18           that AOL offers, is that correct?    19           A   That's also correct, yes.    20           Q   So you have no opinion on the -- no personal opinion    21           based on your experience as to the effectiveness of AOL's    22           parental control systems, is that correct?    23           A   That's correct, yes.    24           Q   And you either have or have had a Compuserve account as    25           well, is that accurate?                                                                            81     1           A   Yes, it is.     2           Q   However, you have not tested Compuserve's parental     3           control mechanisms, is that correct?     4           A   That's also correct.     5           Q   And so based on your experience you have no opinion based     6           on the effectiveness of Compuserve's parental control     7           systems, is that correct?     8           A   Yes, it is.     9           Q   Turning to the exhibits that are attached to your    10           declaration, Tab X, I believe, marks all of the exhibits and    11           it's Exhibits 43 through 52 that based on your declaration    12           you testify you were able to access while Surfwatch is    13           running, is that correct?  And I'll give you a chance to take    14           a look at it.    15                    (Pause.)    16                    JUDGE DALZELL:  Except for Exhibit 42, you mean.    17                    MS. KAPPLER:  Correct, your Honor, that's why I said    18           43 through 52, in fact 42 --    19                    JUDGE DALZELL:  Oh, you said it -- okay.    20                    MS. KAPPLER:  In fact, Exhibit 42 is -- is not an    21           on-line print at all.    22                    JUDGE DALZELL:  42 is the first one in Section X,    23           that's why I say that.    24                    MS. KAPPLER:  Correct, your Honor.    25                    THE WITNESS:  Yes, from 43 on out, yes.                                                                            82     1           BY MS. KAPPLER:       2           Q   And these are locations which you accessed on April 5th,     3           1996 while software was running on your machine, is that     4           correct?     5           A   I'm sorry, while what was running on the machine?     6           Q   While -- excuse me, while Surfwatch was running on your     7           machine, is that correct?     8           A   That's correct, yes.     9           Q   Okay.  Now, of all the other on-line images that are    10           included as exhibits to your declaration, all of the others    11           were accessed while Surfwatch was not running, is that    12           correct?    13           A   Yes, it is, that's correct.    14           Q   And in fact no blocking or screening software was running    15           while you accessed any of those other exhibits, is that    16           correct?    17           A   Yes, that's correct.    18           Q   Now, turning to Paragraph 51 of your declaration --    19                    MS. KAPPLER:  Which is on Page 43, your Honors.    20                    JUDGE DALZELL:  Thank you.    21           BY MS. KAPPLER:      22           Q   You indicate there, Mr. Schmidt, in your -- in the last    23           sentence of that paragraph that in this limited check I    24           simply look, I took the list of Web sites found in my prior    25           unrestricted search and sought to find a few examples that                                                                            83     1           were not blocked by Surfwatch, correct?     2           A   That is correct.     3           Q   Now, by unrestricted search here you were referring to     4           the fact that neither Surfwatch nor any other blocking or     5           screening mechanism was running at the time, is that correct?     6           A   That is correct, yes.     7           Q   So is it correct to say that with regard to the searches     8           that were conducted while Surfwatch was running, what you did     9           was take Web addresses that you had found in prior searches    10           and typed them in to see whether Surfwatch would block those    11           specific sites, is that accurate?    12           A   That is accurate, yes.    13           Q   And the way in which you found these Web addresses was    14           while doing searches while Surfwatch was not running, is that    15           correct?    16           A   That's also correct, yes.    17           Q   And you already knew these addresses when you typed them    18           in, correct?    19           A   Yes, that's correct.     20           Q   And in fact you knew they contained sexually explicit    21           material, correct?    22           A   That is also correct, yes.    23           Q   Because you had viewed them at some prior time?    24           A   Correct.    25           Q   Turning to Paragraph 47 of your declaration which is on                                                                            84     1           Page 40 and turning as it carries over onto Page 41, is it     2           accurate to say that this location came up, and it's     3           reflected I believe in Exhibit 44, by typing in that full     4           name that applies on the third line from the top there on     5           Page 41?  I don't know how many actual characters it is, but     6           it starts with HTTP://PILOT.MSU on and on.     7           A   Can I have a moment to read the entire paragraph in     8           context?     9           Q   Sure, certainly, excuse me.    10           A   Thank you.    11                    (Pause.)    12           A   Yes, that is correct.    13           Q   So you had to type in this entire name in order to reach    14           the site, is that accurate?    15           A   Yes, it is.    16           Q   And this is  a name that you knew because you had found    17           it in a prior search that you had done when Surfwatch was not    18           running, is that accurate?    19           A   That is correct, yes.    20           Q   Now, looking at this name there is nothing in the name    21           for the words in the name that connotes sexually explicit    22           content, is there?    23           A   No, there's -- it does not appear to be, no.    24                    JUDGE DALZELL:  In fact the domain name suggests    25           that it's an educational institution, does it not?                                                                            85     1                    THE WITNESS:  That is correct, your Honor, yes.     2                    JUDGE DALZELL:  Sorry.     3           BY MS. KAPPLER:       4           Q   But you knew that this site contained sexually explicit     5           material because you had viewed it before, is that correct?     6           A   Yes, yes, I had.     7           Q   At that time you viewed it Surfwatch was not running,     8           correct?     9           A   Correct.    10           Q   Turning to Paragraph 48 in which you indicate another    11           site that you checked while Surfwatch was running that has    12           that common name called, quote, "Steamy erotic links," close    13           quote.  And if I can give you a chance to look over this    14           paragraph and would you tell me if I'm accurate that this is    15           the same location that you explain in Paragraph 19 of the    16           declaration as to how you originally found this search?    17                    And Paragraph 19 is on Page 17, looking back to Page    18           17.    19           A   That is correct, yes.    20           Q   Okay.  And as explained in Paragraph 19, the way in which    21           you found this site was you began by running the Lykos search    22           engine and searching for the terms "XXX SEX," is that    23           correct?    24           A   Yes, it is.    25           Q   And that's, just for the benefit of the Court and                                                                            86     1           everyone here, that would have been the similar type search     2           that you were demonstrating using the Yahoo search only it     3           would have been used -- a search engine only we're using     4           Lykos and typed in XXX SEX to see what kind of listing of     5           various Web sites would come up, is that accurate?     6           A   Yes, it is.     7           Q   And as explained in Paragraph 19, through linking through     8           several sites off of that search engine result you came,     9           finally came to steamy erotic links, is that correct?    10           A   Yes, that is correct.    11           Q   Now, Surfwatch was not running when you did this Lykos    12           search, was it?    13           A   The one referenced in --    14           Q   Paragraph 19.    15           A   That's correct, it was not running.    16           Q   Okay.  And in fact if Surfwatch had been running when you    17           did that search your entire results would have been blocked,    18           is that correct?    19           A   It would not have allowed the search, correct.    20           Q   That is to say Surfwatch, if you had typed in XXX SEX    21           while the -- on the Lykos search engine, a message would have    22           come up saying "blocked by Surfwatch" and you would have    23           gotten no listings whatsoever, is that correct?    24           A   That's correct, yes.    25           Q   So you would have got nothing in which to link off to to                                                                            87     1           find steamy erotic links, is that correct?     2           A   Yes, it is.     3           Q   Turning back to Paragraph 49 in which you talk about some     4           of the other sites in which you typed in specific names for     5           in order to see whether Surfwatch would block them, and     6           Paragraph 49 is broken down into Subparagraphs A, B, C, D and     7           E, and for the benefit of the Court I'm --     8                    JUDGE SLOVITER:  Sorry what page?     9                    JUDGE DALZELL:  Page 42.     10                    MS. KAPPLER:  I'm sorry?  It's on Page 42.    11           BY MS. KAPPLER:      12           Q   And just for the benefit of the Court and for you, Mr.    13           Schmidt, what I'm going to try to do is go through the same    14           exercise we just did to see where you found these links.  And    15           I'm going to try to group them because I think it's easier to    16           do that way.    17                    Looking first at Subparagraph A and Subparagraph E,    18           Subparagraph A, this is the subparagraphs of Paragraph 49,    19           Subparagraph A you refer to a site designated as, quote, "PIX    20           Previews," close quote, is that correct?    21           A   Yes, it is.    22           Q   And as you explain it there, you first found this site by    23           linking off the Cyber Babes Web site, is that correct?    24           A   Yes, it is.    25           Q   And looking then down at Subparagraph E on that same page                                                                            88     1           you talk about a site called, quote, "The Alternative Page,"     2           close quote?     3           A   Yes, that's correct.     4           Q   And -- excuse me -- and similarly that is another site     5           you found by linking off of the Cyber Babes Web site, is that     6           accurate?     7           A   That is, yes.     8           Q   Now, if you would turn, please, to Paragraph 25 of your     9           declaration and that's at Page 22 and if you would take a    10           look at it and just tell me if that is a description as to    11           how you originally came to the Cyber page Web site or located    12           the Cyber Babes Web page?    13           A   I'm sorry, you said Page 22, which paragraph?    14           Q   25.    15           A   Thank you.      16                    (Pause.)    17           A   That is correct, yes.    18           Q   Okay.  And similarly here you did the search for Cyber    19           Babes while Surfwatch was not running, that is when it's    20           referred to in Paragraph 25, is that correct?    21           A   That is correct, yes.    22           Q   And while Surfwatch was not running that's when you    23           located the Cyber Babes home page, is that accurate?    24           A   Yes, it is.    25           Q   And it was while Surfwatch was not running that you were                                                                            89     1           able to link from the Cyber Babes home page into both the PIX     2           Previews and the alternative page, is that correct?  The     3           other one isn't mentioned, excuse me.     4           A   I'm sorry, I lost you somewhere and I apologize.     5           Q   It was while Surfwatch was not running, as referred to on     6           Paragraph 25, that you first located the Cyber Babes Web     7           page, correct?     8           A   Yes.     9           Q   And it was while Surfwatch was not running that you were    10           first able to link from Cyber Babes to the two locations that    11           are then later referenced in Paragraph 49, is that correct?    12           A   Yes, it is.    13           Q   Okay.  Now, can you -- I don't think you can tell from    14           your declaration but if you will look at Exhibit 23, doesn't    15           that indicate that in fact the way in which you found the    16           Cyber Babes Web page was through use of the Lykos search    17           engine and typing in Cyber Babes?    18           A   That is correct, yes.    19           Q   And again the Surfwatch was not operating when you used    20           this Lykos search engine, is that correct?    21           A   Correct, yes.    22           Q   Now, if Surfwatch had been operating you would not have    23           been able to access this listing, would you?    24           A   I don't know.    25           Q   You don't know whether Surfwatch would have blocked Cyber                                                                            90     1           Babes, is that correct?     2           A   That's correct, I do not know that.     3           Q   If Surfwatch had blocked Cyber Babes you would not have     4           gotten any listing when you typed in Cyber Babes, is that     5           correct, you would have just come up blocked, you'd get no     6           listing at all?     7           A   That would seem correct, yes.     8           Q   Okay.       9                    JUDGE SLOVITER:  Excuse me. Why didn't you know,    10           cause you didn't try it?    11                    THE WITNESS:  That's correct, your Honor, I did not.    12           BY MS. KAPPLER:      13           Q   Turning back to Paragraph 49 on Page 42 and looking now    14           at the other three subparagraphs -- I'm sorry, I'll wait till    15           you get there.    16           A   Okay.    17           Q   The other three subparagraphs, that's Subparagraphs B, C    18           and D, you refer to three different sites there, one which    19           are called Honey Page, that's Subparagraph B, the second one    20           is referred to as Amateur Hard Core and the third one as the,    21           quote, unquote, "Fun Palace," close quote, correct?    22           A   Yes, it is.    23           Q   And in Subparagraph D you explain at least as to the Fun    24           Palace, that's a site that you first found by using the Yahoo    25           search engine for the term, quote, unquote, XXX, correct?                                                                            91     1           A   That is correct, yes.     2           Q   And that's the search you had started to demonstrate with     3           the Court at least briefly this morning, is that accurate?     4           A   That is correct, yes.     5           Q   Now, when you did this Yahoo XXX search as with this     6           morning, Surfwatch was not running, is that accurate?     7           A   That is also correct, yes.     8           Q   Okay.  Now, turning your attention to Paragraph B, the     9           Honey Page, you note that the exhibit that you produced by    10           printing out Exhibit 50 is the same as identified as Exhibit    11           11.  And I'll ask you to turn to Paragraph 14 which is at    12           Page 12 and just confirm for me that that is an explanation    13           as to how you originally found the Honey Page Web site?    14           Page 12, Paragraph 14.    15           A   Thank you.    16                    (Pause.)    17           A   That is correct, yes.    18           Q   Okay.  And as described there and as demonstrated this    19           morning, you found that site also by using the Yahoo search    20           engine and typing in XXX, is that correct?    21           A   Yes, it is.    22           Q   And it was off links off of that search engine results of    23           that search that you were able to find this Web page, is that    24           correct?    25           A   Yes, it is.                                                                              92     1           Q   Okay.  Now, turn--     2                    JUDGE DALZELL:  Excuse me.  If you had just, without     3           using the site address, if you had just typed in with     4           Surfwatch running, if you had just typed in "Honey Page" or     5           did you do that?     6                    THE WITNESS:  No, I did not, your Honor.     7                    JUDGE DALZELL:  Okay.  So we don't know what would     8           happen if you did that?     9                    THE WITNESS:  No, I don't.    10                    JUDGE SLOVITER:  Could I ask -- is it --    11                    MS. KAPPLER:  Certainly, your Honor.    12                    JUDGE SLOVITER:  Just to follow this line, is there    13           any instance referenced in your declaration when you came    14           across what some of us might consider hard core pornography    15           or material inadvertently without know-- without either    16           putting in something like "adult" or "XXX" or without knowing    17           in advance that you would get there by a link that went    18           through some of this pornographic, sexually explicit    19           material?    20                    THE WITNESS:  Yes, there are, your Honor.    21                    JUDGE SLOVITER:  And in your declaration?    22                    THE WITNESS:  Yes, your Honor.    23                    JUDGE DALZELL:  But that's the business with Jasmine    24           and Beauty and The Beast, right?    25                    THE WITNESS:  Yes, your Honor, that's correct.                                                                            93     1                    JUDGE DALZELL:  And Little Women?                   2                    THE WITNESS:  And Little Women, yes, your Honor.     3                    JUDGE SLOVITER:  With those exceptions, all the     4           other material you -- there was a -- was there always a     5           warning or something maybe even there, I'd have to go back,     6           that told you, that gave your viewer, a surfer the knowledge     7           in advance that this material might be unsuitable for     8           children?     9                    THE WITNESS:  Yes, your Honor.  In most cases there    10           was, as you say, some sort of a banner that --    11                    JUDGE SLOVITER:  Well, that's why I asked, yes.  Go    12           ahead, finish.    13                    THE WITNESS:  Yes, there would generally be a    14           banner.  In some cases the banner would be underneath an    15           image, a graphic image, and other cases would be strictly    16           text on that page.  It depended upon the site which would be    17           the case.    18                    JUDGE SLOVITER:  But it was always -- it would give    19           warning just as when you walk into what's called an adult    20           book store that certain kinds of material is displayed there,    21           is that right?    22                    THE WITNESS:  That is correct, your Honor, yes.    23                    JUDGE SLOVITER:  Okay.      24           BY MS. KAPPLER:      25           Q   Turning back, if we might, to Subparagraph C of Paragraph                                                                            94     1           49 which is on Page 42 which talks about the quote, unquote,     2           "amateur hardcore site," and would you turn to Paragraph 17     3           of your declaration which is on Page 16 and please indicate     4           as to whether that explains how you originally found this     5           amateur hardcore site?     6           A   I'm sorry, which page was that?     7           Q   It's Page 16, Paragraph 17.     8           A   That is correct, yes.     9           Q   And this Amateur Hardcore site like the Honey Page and    10           like the Fun Palace, you originally found this Amateur    11           Hardcore site by starting with Yahoo XXX search, is that    12           correct?    13           A   Yes, it is.    14           Q   Okay.  So for each one of these sites you found a    15           specific Web site address by doing a search without Surfwatch    16           running, using the Yahoo XXX search engine, is that correct?    17           A   That is correct, yes.    18           Q   Had Surfwatch been running when you did the Yahoo XXX    19           search you would not have been able to get any of these    20           listings, isn't that correct?    21           A   That is correct, yes.    22           Q   Surfwatch would have totally blocked your search under    23           Yahoo for XXX, is that correct?    24           A   Yes, it is.    25           Q   And then you would not have gotten any of these URL                                                                            95     1           addresses, is that accurate?     2           A   Yes, it is.     3           Q   Turning to the one instance paragraph you have in the     4           section where you talk about images you were able to reach,     5           able to find other than based on your earlier on-line     6           searches, I believe that is, as Judge Dalzell was referring     7           to, the ones that started at least with the Playboy Magazine.      8           And looking at Paragraph 46 of your declaration and it's on     9           Page 40, that's where you discussed this magazine?    10           A   Which paragraph was that?    11           Q   Paragraph 46.    12           A   Thank you.    13           Q   Now, just so it's clear for everyone, it was certainly    14           not clear to me when I first looked at these, Exhibit 42 are    15           color Xerox copies of the April '96 edition of Playboy    16           Magazine, the hard copy of the magazine, is that correct?    17           A   That is correct, yes.    18           Q   Okay.  This is the same magazine you can buy in some    19           convenience stores or book stores or other places, is that    20           correct?    21           A   Yes, it would.    22           Q   Okay.  These are not images that were downloaded from a    23           computer, they did not come off line?    24           A   That is -- well, let me qualify that.    25           Q   Sure.                                                                            96     1           A   To the extent that whoever the author of this article put     2           it together whether or not they had downloaded those images     3           and the backdrop where it appears to be a computer thing     4           whether they superimpose that or it's just screen shots, I     5           have no knowledge of.  But these were the actual pages from     6           that issue as depicted in the declaration here.     7                    JUDGE SLOVITER:  And if one of my colleagues, cause     8           I wouldn't want to go and buy Playboy --     9                    (Laughter.)    10                    JUDGE SLOVITER:  They would have this magazine,    11           right?    12                    THE WITNESS:  That's correct.    13                    JUDGE SLOVITER:  Okay.    14           BY MS. KAPPLER:      15           Q   At least one feature of this April '96 edition of Playboy    16           Magazine, the hard copy of the magazine and the one that is    17           excerpted in your Exhibit 42, is a pictorial of nude or    18           partially clothed women who have some kind of presence on the    19           Internet, is that correct?    20           A   Yes, it is.    21           Q   And in the text that accompanies the pictorial it gives    22           the URL or Web addresses of some of these, at least some of    23           these women, is that correct?    24           A   Yes, it is.     25           Q   And you took the addresses that were printed in Playboy                                                                            97     1           Magazine in this feature and typed them into the computer     2           with Surfwatch running to see if they were blocked, is that     3           correct?     4           A   Yes, that's correct.     5           Q   Okay.  And you were -- you typed in three different     6           addresses, two of them were blocked by Surfwatch but one you     7           were able to access even with Surfwatch operating, is that     8           correct?     9           A   Yes, it is.    10           Q   Okay.  Turning to Exhibit 42 which is the actual magazine    11           of Playboy and the fifth page, it's a page that has no text,    12           has a pictorial, there's a blue background a woman who is --    13                    JUDGE DALZELL:  Page 5?    14           BY MS. KAPPLER:      15           Q   It's the fifth page --    16                    JUDGE DALZELL:  Counted as, the cover counts as the    17           first page?    18                    MS. KAPPLER:  Yes, I believe so, your Honor.  It's    19           the one that has a dark blue background, there is no text.    20                    (Pause.)    21           BY MS. KAPPLER:      22           Q   Now, this is the Playboy pictorial image of the model    23           whose Homepage or Web address you typed in, is that accurate,    24           and were able to access using while Surfwatch was still    25           operating, is that correct?                                                                            98     1           A   May I clarify we're on the same page?     2           Q   Sure.     3           A   The one with the chain on the left-hand side of the page,     4           is that correct?     5           A   Correct, this woman has long dark hair, she's standing up     6           facing the camera.     7           A   Yes, correct, yes, that is the one.     8           Q   Okay.  Now, turning to Exhibit 43 and there's only one     9           graphical image or pictorial image in Exhibit 43, that is the    10           image of this model that you could access on line while    11           Surfwatch was running, is that correct?    12           A   Yes, it is.    13           Q   Okay.  And you would agree, would you not, that these are    14           virtually the same photographs, are they not?    15           A   It appears to be the same individual in a different pose,    16           yes.    17           Q   Okay, but it's the same setting, same clothing, is that    18           correct?    19           A   Yes.    20           Q   And there are bare breasts in both --    21           A   Yes.    22           Q   -- pictures, is that correct?  Okay.  So the way in which    23           you found this Web site was to have a copy of Playboy    24           Magazine in front of you in which there were these pictorial    25           images and then -- then also Web sites listed and then type                                                                            99     1           in the Web site and see a virtually identical image on the     2           screen while Surfwatch was running, is that correct?     3           A   Yes, it is, that's correct.     4                    JUDGE DALZELL:  Just so I'm clear, so if Surfwatch     5           is running and you have typed in "Natasha, Sex Goddess,"     6           would it have blocked that image or don't you know?     7                    THE WITNESS:  I did not try that, your Honor.     8                    JUDGE DALZELL:  Okay.     9                    JUDGE SLOVITER:  Does Surfwatch block material that    10           has the word "sex" in it?    11                    THE WITNESS:  It appears that it does, your Honor.    12           BY MS. KAPPLER:      13           Q   So just so I understand relative to your testimony for    14           this Court today, the concern is that a child would get a    15           copy of Playboy Magazine and see these visual images and Web    16           addresses and could type them in with Surfwatch running on    17           the machine but still get access to virtually the same image    18           on line, is that correct?     19           A   I'm not sure that that's my characterization.  My    20           characterization is that this is what was advertised in the    21           Playboy Magazine and this is what Surfwatch did not block.     22           As far as anything regarding a child having access, that was    23           not part of what this is about.    24           Q   But the only way in which you had access to that Web    25           address was by the fact that it was in the Playboy Magazine,                                                                           100     1           is that correct?     2           A   That is correct, yes.     3                    MS. KAPPLER:  No further questions, your Honor.     4                    JUDGE SLOVITER:  Can I take you back?  I know you     5           want to get up but I just want to take you back, before I     6           forget your response to my question a while back.  And we     7           don't have a -- well, we do have a reporter, but I think that     8           I asked you because while I am keeping my finger in these     9           pages, I had asked you whether there was any material that    10           you came across inadvertently without explicitly looking for    11           XXX or et cetera, any warning.  I think the warn -- leave the    12           warning out.  And you said you did through the Jasmine, was    13           it through that series of pictures that seems to be based on    14           cartoon movie characters, is that -- is that what?  You got    15           me into the Jasmine through that?    16                    THE WITNESS:  Yes, your Honor, that was one of the    17           sites, yes.    18                    JUDGE SLOVITER:  And those sites are primarily in    19           your Exhibit 33, is that right?  Is that the material?    20                    I don't have a young child anymore so I don't go to    21           these movies anymore.  Okay, is that right, Mr. Schmidt, 33?    22                    THE WITNESS:  That's correct, your Honor.  It    23           actually starts at Exhibit 28 which is the results of a    24           Webcrawler search for the phrase "Little Women" and just goes    25           through that entire section in there.                                                                           101     1                    JUDGE SLOVITER:  Now, so while you were answering     2           other questions, I went back to the text accompanying that     3           and that appears on 33, appears about Page 29, your Paragraph     4           33.  But I wondered when you were going to that, they were     5           denom-- is it correct that they were denominated "Chips     6           Erotic Tune" and "Adam" page, is that correct?     7                    THE WITNESS:  That's the description in the upper     8           left-hand corner, yes, your Honor.     9                    JUDGE SLOVITER:  Well, no, I mean -- oh, yes, you    10           click back to the page and so that somebody looking for    11           erotic pictures in the guise of children's movie characters    12           would have either looked for it or would have known, that    13           person would have known pretty promptly that this wasn't    14           going to be the kind of picture that they show in school,    15           that this was going to be a picture of a different ilk, is    16           that right, by the word "erotic"?    17                    THE WITNESS:  I'm sorry, your Honor, I'm not quite    18           sure I follow the question you asked.    19                    JUDGE SLOVITER:  Well, I'm trying to figure out how    20           inadvertent it was or how without warning.  What concerns us,    21           I think, certainly me, is whether indeed one inadvertently    22           comes, a child might inadvertently, really looking for -- not    23           designed to look for this kind of hardcore material but who    24           was just surfing looking for material that young children    25           might look for, having seen the movie, wants to enjoy it, how                                                                           102     1           inadvertent would it be for that child to come across these     2           pictures in the guise of cartoon characters.  And so I'm     3           trying to get, to find out how inadvertent, did you just     4           happen to be surfing and look for these?     5                    THE WITNESS:  As far as the name, I specifically     6           went on search for things that I think a child would be     7           interested in, as pointed out.  If I may, your Honor, and--     8                    JUDGE SLOVITER:  Yeah, but before you got to these,     9           the child might have been interested but before you actually    10           got to these, at that point was there something that let you    11           know that this was material of a different ilk?    12                    THE WITNESS:  Other than the description in where it    13           says No. 25, "Chip's Erotic Tune and Adam E Page," you can    14           see by the descriptions that some of the other responses on,    15           looks like Exhibit No. 32, those search results do not    16           specify, other than this one here, very much, the content of    17           that particular page prior to going there.    18                    For example, you'll notice -- and it's not an    19           exhibit attached here, your Honor -- a number where it says    20           37, there's a Jasmine?    21                    JUDGE SLOVITER:  Mm-hmm.    22                    THE WITNESS:  Which would be the name I searched    23           for.  That link is indeed a link that goes to an adult    24           content Web site and that was one of  the ones that I saw by    25           the search through this.  And there, other than the word                                                                           103     1           "Jasmine" you have no knowledge, clicking on Jasmine, what's     2           behind there.     3                    JUDGE BUCKWALTER:  See, I'm having the same, maybe     4           part of the same concern that Judge Sloviter is expressing.      5           You said sexually explicit sites, you gave the opinion, can     6           easily be found even if one is not looking for them.  Isn't     7           it true that it's highly unlikely that you'll come across out     8           of all the information out there that you're going to come     9           across a sexually explicit site by accident?  I mean aren't    10           the odds pretty slim on that?    11                    THE WITNESS:  The odds, the odds are slim, your    12           Honor, yes.    13                    JUDGE BUCKWALTER:  Yes, really.    14                    THE WITNESS:  If I may give you an example, this    15           weekend on my own personal, I was looking for some movies on    16           the computer to put as part of one of my teaching things.  I    17           searched for the word "M-peg" which is the type of movies    18           that are on a computer system.  The first site that came up    19           said, you know, "M-peg videos," clicked on that and the first    20           thing that popped up was a graphic image of two naked women    21           engaged in a sexual activity and said "For more movies, click    22           here."  And I was looking for something totally unassociated    23           with that.    24                    JUDGE BUCKWALTER:  Well --    25                    JUDGE DALZELL:  And didn't you just say to Judge                                                                           104     1           Sloviter that if you type in "Jasmine" and we get what's     2           Exhibit 32 and then you keep pursuing cause you want to see     3           Jasmine, you're a kid is your hypothesis and you want to see     4           Jasmine, you just go into where it says just "Jasmine," your     5           testimony is that that is a sexually explicit site?     6                    THE WITNESS:  That's correct, your Honor.     7                    JUDGE DALZELL:  Okay.  And I take it on the same     8           exhibit, what's "Mermaid Mania?"  Is that sexually explicit?      9           Second page.  The third to the last.    10                    THE WITNESS:  I did not click to that site, your    11           Honor, so I don't know.    12                    JUDGE DALZELL:  Okay, so we don't know.    13                    THE WITNESS:  I don't know.    14                    JUDGE SLOVITER:  Which one are you on?  I'm still on    15           Jasmine.    16                    JUDGE DALZELL:  No, 32.  32, you see Jasmine, and    17           then on the second page, the third to the last.    18                    (Discussion off the record.)    19                    JUDGE DALZELL:  32, just so the record is clear, 32    20           is what appears on the screen, correct?    21                    THE WITNESS:  That's correct, your Honor, that's the    22           search results.    23                    JUDGE SLOVITER:  And is it your -- are you telling    24           us that all of these sexually explicit adult --    25                    THE WITNESS:  No, your Honor, I'm not, no.                                                                           105     1                    JUDGE SLOVITER:  Oh.  Well, how did you -- I mean     2           like "Jasmine's Lace Brokers," is that sexually explicit?      3           It's one, two, the third one down.     4                    THE WITNESS:  I did not check that site, your Honor,     5           so I don't know.     6                    JUDGE SLOVITER:  You just happened to come across,     7           not knowing at all, is it your testimony that without knowing     8           that you just happened to pick the one that happened to be     9           adult?    10                    THE WITNESS:  No, your Honor, I'm not.    11                    THE COURT:  The euphemism for "adult?"    12                    THE WITNESS:  No, your Honor.  If you'll notice,    13           what I did was I clicked on one above it, "Jasmine's Home    14           Page" and selected that.      15                    JUDGE BUCKWALTER:  You answered it, go ahead.    16                    THE WITNESS:  And I clicked on Jasmine's Home Page    17           and took a sampling of some of the things.  Obviously, the    18           one that said "Erotic Tune," that one drew my attention    19           immediately.    20                    The other ones, for example, the other Jasmines    21           listed there, I had saw a demonstration during one of the    22           previous testimony about a search for a -- information on    23           Fragile X, I believe it was.  I went and did a search similar    24           to that and came up with a Jasmine which is what caused me to    25           think about this Jasmine.                                                                           106     1                    JUDGE SLOVITER:  All right, well, let me go back to     2           my initial question because now I really am confused.  I said     3           to you in all of this did you ever inadvertently come across,     4           would a child sort of inadvertently or did you inadvertently     5           come across any of this material.  And you said yes, there     6           were some instances, and you took me to Jasmine.     7                    But now I understand that you knew that there was     8           within Jasmine something that might uncover Erotic Tunes, so     9           that clearly how -- I go back to Judge Buckwalter's question,    10           how inadvertent is this?  I mean there might be but how    11           inadvertent from your standpoint, in your experience?    12                    THE WITNESS:  It is possible, your Honor.  To the    13           extent how many times --    14                    JUDGE SLOVITER:  No, not it is possible, your --    15           your testimony.    16                    THE WITNESS:  Right, to my experience I have --    17                    JUDGE SLOVITER:  Your experience, yes.    18                    THE WITNESS:  I have --    19                    JUDGE SLOVITER:  And in all of these exhibits was    20           any of them truly inadvertent?    21                    THE WITNESS:  Yes, your Honor.    22                    JUDGE SLOVITER:  And which ones?  Where you didn't    23           know it was going to be erotic or --    24                    JUDGE DALZELL:  Well, I understood your testimony    25           that all these searches, Jasmine, Little Women and Sleeping                                                                           107     1           Beauty you selected because they were child-oriented titles,     2           you had your suspicions, I suspect, based on your experience,     3           but my understanding of your testimony is that you typed     4           those in because those are things that a kid might -- might     5           type in and see what comes out.  Do I understand your     6           testimony correctly?     7                    THE WITNESS:  That's correct, your Honor, yes.     8                    JUDGE DALZELL:  Okay.     9                    JUDGE BUCKWALTER:  We're really talking about the    10           person who is on this without any suspicions, he's just    11           searching geography in South America or something, it's    12           unlikely he's going to come across --    13                    THE WITNESS:  In that context, in geography South    14           America, it's unknown, your Honor.    15                    JUDGE SLOVITER:  Okay, well, we'll have our turn.     16           I'm sorry, Mr. Coppolino, but we had asked him that question    17           before.      18                    MR. COPPOLINO:  Your Honor, your Honors, if I may,    19           I'd like to try and press on through and get this redirect    20           done.    21                    JUDGE SLOVITER:  Sure.    22                    MR. COPPOLINO:  It may take as long as 20 minutes.    23                    JUDGE SLOVITER:  We're in no hurry, okay.    24                    (Laughter.)    25                    JUDGE BUCKWALTER:  Speak for yourself.                                                                           108     1                                REDIRECT EXAMINATION     2           BY MR. COPPOLINO:       3           Q   Mr. Schmidt --     4                    JUDGE SLOVITER:  But we may have questions after     5           you, so I mean I'm not saying that we'll necessarily be     6           finished with Mr. Schmidt this morning.     7                    MR. COPPOLINO:  I understand.  I know I'd asked the     8           clerk to indicate a scheduling difficulty he has.     9                    JUDGE DALZELL:  He has to get to National Guard duty    10           or something, right?    11                    MR. COPPOLINO:  Right.  We can continue on Monday.    12                    JUDGE DALZELL:  This afternoon?    13                    THE WITNESS:  That's correct, your Honor, yes.    14                    JUDGE DALZELL:  What time is your plane?     15                    THE WITNESS:  My plane leaves National about --    16           National Airport in DC at 4:30, sir.    17                    JUDGE DALZELL:  So you have to leave here when?    18                    THE WITNESS:  1:30, sir.    19                    JUDGE SLOVITER:  They don't feed you on planes    20           anymore.  Go ahead.    21                    JUDGE DALZELL:  Well, you get peanuts.    22                    (Laughter.)    23           BY MR. COPPOLINO:      24           Q   Mr. Schmidt, you recall when Ms. Heins asked you if you    25           were highly expert in sophisticated computer searches in                                                                           109     1           connection with your work.  Do you recall that question?     2           A   Yes, I do.     3           Q   Did the searches that you undertook in this case that are     4           reflected in this notebook require highly expert     5           sophistication that you utilize in your forensics     6           investigations?     7           A   No, they do not.     8           Q   Do they require much expertise at all?     9           A   No, they do not.    10           Q   Are key word searches a common means of finding    11           information on a computer, to your knowledge?    12           A   Yes, they are.    13           Q   Ms. Heins also asked you a couple of questions about    14           various equipment.  My first question is are most computer    15           monitors nowadays color monitors?    16           A   Yes, they are.    17           Q   And as we saw this morning, do the images on these    18           monitors appear in color, is that correct?    19           A   Yes, they do.    20           Q   And to show the Court an accurate depiction of what was    21           on the screen would you need a color printer in your opinion?    22           A   No, you would not.    23           Q   Now, to show the Court an accurate depiction of what    24           showed up on a color -- on a color monitor would you at least    25           need a color printer to show the Court what the colors were?                                                                           110     1           A   As far as the printed version of it?     2           Q   The printed version.     3           A   Yes, you would.     4           Q   Do you know what the cost of a 28.2, 28.8 modem is,     5           approximately?     6           A   Yes, I do.     7           Q   Could you give the Court approximately what the cost is?     8           A   Anywhere from 95 to upwards to $300 but generally the     9           average price about $159.    10           Q   You had mentioned that you'd used a pentium computer to    11           do these searches, is that correct?    12           A   Yes, I did.    13           Q   I believe you indicated that pentium is considered    14           somewhat of a state of the art, is that correct?    15           A   That's also correct.    16           Q   Was a pentium computer necessary to do these kinds of    17           searches on the Internet?    18           A   No, it was not.    19           Q   In fact could you have used a computer of the 386    20           generation to do searches on the Internet, is that correct?    21           A   Yes, I could have.    22                    JUDGE SLOVITER:  Which generation, 358?    23                    MR. COPPOLINO:  386.    24           BY MR. COPPOLINO:      25           Q   And about how old is the 386 generation, do you recall?                                                                           111     1           A   Oh, it's probably three to four years back.     2                    JUDGE DALZELL:  i.e. ancient.     3                    (Laughter.)     4           BY MR. COPPOLINO:       5           Q   You also indicated to Ms. Heins in terms of your     6           forensics expertise that you were -- you had expertise for     7           example in extracting files from computers that had been     8           erased, is that correct?     9           A   Yes, I did.    10           Q   And you also had expertise in examining files on a    11           computer that had been altered, is that correct?    12           A   That's correct.    13           Q   Did you utilize any of that expertise at all in doing    14           this investigation and making this presentation to the Court?    15           A   No, I did not.    16           Q   Ms. Heins also asked you some questions about the    17           quantity of sexually explicit materials that are available on    18           the Internet.  How many searches of sexually explicit    19           materials have you been involved with in the course of your    20           work throughout your law enforcement career that involved    21           investigations into sexually explicit materials?    22           A   Say somewhere between 30 and 50 different occasions that    23           I'd conduct that type of a search.    24           Q   And can you describe to the Court your capacity in those    25           different types of 30 to 50 investigations?                                                                           112     1           A   Yes, in some of them I would have been the investigating     2           officer involved, other cases I was the supervisor of those     3           that did, provided not only management supervision but also     4           technical supervision, other cases would have been as a     5           consultant to other law enforcement agencies that requested     6           some assistance.     7           Q   So 30 to 50 investigations all told?     8           A   That's correct, at least.     9           Q   And did your investigations involve, for example,    10           examining one particular graphical image?    11           A   Some of them did, yes.    12           Q   And what other kinds of investigations did you do?    13           A   Other investigations of they would provide me 600    14           different graphic images that had been found on a computer    15           system and ask me to locate them out on the Internet, what    16           the source might have been, bulletin board or Web site.    17           Q   And how did you conduct these searches in order to find    18           what you were asked to find?    19           A   Using essentially the same search techniques I used here,    20           I would go out and search for the adult content terms.  If I    21           had a specific file name I might even search on that specific    22           file name to see if I could locate it more readily.    23           Q   And did you search for a range of sexually explicit    24           materials?    25           A   Yes, I did.                                                                           113     1           Q   Could you describe to the Court in general terms the     2           types of ranges of sexually explicit materials that you've     3           had experience in in searching in these 30 to 50     4           investigations?     5           A   Yes, some of them would have been the presumably     6           innocuous Playboy centerfold types, things depicting     7           simulated acts, actual acts all the way up to and including     8           some of the more -- I use the term heinous type graphical     9           activity that's out there.    10           Q   So your investigations have covered the range of that    11           kind of material, is that correct?    12           A   That's correct, yes.    13           Q   Now, in order to view images that are available on the    14           Internet you need a computer, is that correct?    15           A   Yes, that's correct.    16           Q   Okay, that's what this case is about, images on a    17           computer, is that correct?    18           A   Yes, it is.    19           Q   Okay.  And without a Webbrowser you can't surf through    20           information on the World Wide Web, is that correct?    21           A   There -- there is -- that's not totally correct.  There    22           is -- you can do, look for textual information using a non-    23           graphic interface but not to the extent where the World Wide    24           Browser allows you to view the images and have all the    25           graphics that we see on the screen.                                                                            114     1           Q   You need a Webbrowser to do that?     2           A   That's correct, yes.     3           Q   Do Webbrowsers have search engines built into them?     4           A   They have connections to Web sites that have search     5           engines built in, yes.     6           Q   In fact, we saw -- did we see an example of that this     7           morning when you connected to the Yahoo search engine?     8           A   We saw a couple examples, yes.     9           Q   So is it correct to say that if you had the Netscape    10           browser software you would not need to purchase separate    11           software which constitutes a search engine, is that correct?    12           A   That is correct, yes.    13           Q   That Netscape had, the Netscape browser had the search    14           engine, several search engines built into it, is that    15           correct?    16           A   That it connects to the search engine sites, yes.    17           Q   And from there you could conduct the searches you showed    18           us this morning, is that correct?    19           A   Yes, it is.    20           Q   Is it also the case, as I believe you showed us this    21           morning, that the Netscape Webbrowser software has a capacity    22           to allow you to search various news groups, is that correct?    23           A   That is correct.    24           Q   And that was built into the software of the Netscape    25           Browser software?                                                                           115     1           A   Yes.     2           Q   I believe Ms. Heins also asked you some questions in     3           connection with the adult verification exhibits that you     4           provided for the Court.  Did you produce those exhibits to     5           provide the Court in examples of some of those mechanisms     6           that are now appearing on the Internet?     7                    MS. HEINS:  Well, I'll just object to the leading     8           quality or the --      9                    JUDGE DALZELL:  I think he's trying to save time.    10                    JUDGE SLOVITER:  Oh, I think, yeah.    11                    JUDGE DALZELL:  He's just trying to save time.    12           BY MR. COPPOLINO:      13           Q   Do you recall the question?    14                    JUDGE SLOVITER:  Go ahead and answer.    15                    THE WITNESS:  And, yes, that's why I produced them,    16           to give the Court the sense of what was out there that people    17           are putting on the sites now.    18           BY MR. COPPOLINO:      19           Q   Does your declaration purport to indicate that you are an    20           expert in the precise details about how each one of these    21           examples works?    22           A   No it does not.    23           Q   Are you aware of an increase in the number of Web sites    24           that are sexually explicit Web sites that are advertising, if    25           you will, or describing these various types of various adult                                                                           116     1           age checks?     2           A   Yeah, there's been a fairly significant increase over the     3           past few months of those sites that are saying, posting     4           things such as Surfwatch and First Virtual and these type of     5           information on the site.     6           Q   An increase over the past few months?     7           A   Few months, yes.     8           Q   Let me just jump back to a question that I believe Judge     9           Sloviter asked this morning during the demonstration.  When    10           you searched for the term "XXX" in the Yahoo search engine,    11           does Yahoo search engine search for that term in the text of    12           the document, in the documents that are available?    13           A   Yes, it appears to, yes.    14           Q   And does it also search for the terms "XXX" in the URL    15           heading as well?    16           A   That's correct, yes.    17           Q   So if XXX appears in the URL heading, is it your    18           understanding that Yahoo would pick that up?    19           A   Yes, it is.    20           Q   And if the term "XXX" also appears in the text of the    21           document that's being retrieved would the Yahoo also retrieve    22           that document?    23           A   That's correct, yes.    24           Q   By the way --    25                    JUDGE SLOVITER:  Would it be -- can I --                                                                           117     1                    MR. COPPOLINO:  Go ahead.     2                    JUDGE SLOVITER:  Would it be possible for one of     3           these, all of the groups to say do not allow any XXX, any     4           material such as that Mr. Coppolino just mentioned, to be     5           shown, to block anything that says XXX?     6                    THE WITNESS:  Yes, it would be as far as the viewers     7           themselves, your Honor?     8                    JUDGE SLOVITER:  Yes.     9                    THE WITNESS:  Yes, very similar to the way Surfwatch    10           works where it blocks it out, doesn't allow you to see it.    11                    THE COURT:  We heard it, yeah, I'm sorry, go ahead,    12           Mr. Coppolino, all yours.    13                    MR. COPPOLINO:  Thank you, your Honor.    14           BY MR. COPPOLINO:      15           Q   Also during the demonstration we went to Exhibit 3 in    16           your text of your declaration which was a warning screen.     17           Would you take a look at that, please?      18                    MR. COPPOLINO:  Exhibit 3, your Honor.    19                    THE WITNESS:  Is that the one has "warning, warning,    20           warning?"    21           BY MR. COPPOLINO:      22           Q   That's the one.    23           A   Yes.    24           Q   "Sexvision" up in the -- "Sexvision" security shield up    25           in the upper right.  Now, do you see the first sort of in                                                                           118     1           purple print says "Yes, I am over 18 years old and would like     2           to access this," do you see that?     3           A   Yes, I do.     4           Q   Could anyone click that on once they reach the screen and     5           get to the next image on the next page, is that correct?     6           A   That's correct, yes.     7           Q   You don't have to actually be 18 to press the mouse     8           clicker to get to that, is that correct?     9           A   That is correct, yes.    10                    JUDGE DALZELL:  By the way, if -- I know it may    11           stretch credulity, but if a child were honest and said -- and    12           clicked over no, I am not 18, what would happen?    13                    THE WITNESS:  In most cases, your Honor, it would    14           take you back to the search engine or the previous location,    15           the same as using that back key would take you back to where    16           you came from.    17                    JUDGE DALZELL:  Okay, sorry.    18                    JUDGE BUCKWALTER:  And then you can go there again    19           and press the other button, right?    20                    (Laughter.)    21                    THE WITNESS:  Yes, your Honor.    22           BY MR. COPPOLINO:      23           Q   With respect to the -- let's take a look at Paragraph 54,    24           please, of your declaration?    25                    (Pause.)                                                                           119     1           Q   Could you -- if you'd like to, if you'd refresh yourself,     2           I'm going to ask you some questions on this.  Read as much as     3           you'd like.  But my first question is have you ever advised     4           parents that parental control software such as Surfwatch or     5           Cyber Patrol or any other type of product by itself was     6           sufficient to protect their children from access to sexually     7           explicit material on line; have you ever given that advice to     8           parents?     9           A   No, I haven't.    10           Q   Have you ever advised parents that closer supervision on    11           their part would be sufficient to protect their children from    12           discovering inappropriate sites on line?    13           A   No, I haven't.    14           Q   The circumstances of Paragraph 54, "In my opinion    15           however, user-based controls, while commendable, will    16           inevitably be trying to keep up with the addition of new and    17           revised sites," what were you referring to right there?    18           A   The fact is, as evidenced by previous testimony, there    19           are a number of new sites being placed on the Internet daily,    20           weekly, monthly and so it would be a constant battle trying    21           to keep up with these sites and identify not only the    22           addition of new sites but also the changing of names,    23           changing of locations as we've seen through these earlier    24           demonstrations.    25           Q   The next sentence indicates that based on your experience                                                                           120     1           in law enforcement in this area which includes teaching     2           classes to officers at beginner levels and also substantial     3           anecdotal information from talking to parents about their     4           children's use of computers, "In my opinion many parents do     5           not have the same level of sophistication with computers as     6           many minors do today nor the time to supervise their     7           children's use of on-line computers."     8                    Could you just describe for the Court in a little     9           more detail your experience in meeting with and talking with    10           parents or students you have taught which leads you to state    11           this conclusion?    12           A   Yes, I do quite a bit of teaching, once again, of law    13           enforcement personnel, computer security personnel as well as    14           public speaking in various forums.  And it seems a common    15           thread through a lot of the either at break time or after the    16           speaking engagement, parents will come up to me and say, you    17           know: I'm glad I'm learning this thing because my kids know    18           more than I do about computer.  I don't understand, you know,    19           what they're doing, I have to rely on my kids to help me set    20           up my particular windows.  And I hear that an awful lot    21           coming from parents that they need to get smart on what the    22           kids have on their computers and how to operate them.    23                    JUDGE BUCKWALTER:  In another generation that will    24           fade however from the picture, don't you think?    25                    THE WITNESS:  Yes, your Honor, I do.                                                                           121     1                    JUDGE BUCKWALTER:  Okay.     2           BY MR. COPPOLINO:       3           Q   Ms. Kappler, I believe, asked you a number of questions     4           about various parental controls and measures, Cyber Sitter,     5           Net Nanny, she asked you about whether you had checked out,     6           if you had specifically examined those, if you had     7           specifically examined the parental controls of Compuserve and     8           America On Line, do you recall that question?     9           A   Yes, I do.    10           Q   Did you have the time in your preparation for this    11           preliminary injunction hearing to examine every single one of    12           those products?    13           A   No, I did not.    14           Q   With respect to Surfwatch, I believe the last part of    15           your declaration contains examples of sites that were not    16           blocked with Surfwatch running, is that correct?    17           A   That's correct, yes.    18           Q   Now, were the various searches you conducted that are    19           reflected in the declaration without Surfwatch running    20           designed to show the Court what could be accessed in an    21           unrestricted environment?    22           A   That is correct, yes.               23           Q   For the people who, for example, do not have Surfwatch?    24           A   That is correct, yes.    25           Q   With respect to the sites that you identified that were                                                                           122     1           not blocked with Surfwatch running, why did you test     2           Surfwatch by typing in the site name?     3           A   Well, a couple reasons.  First, during the demonstration     4           in court by Ms. Duval in the previous instance, she talked     5           about some of the blocking and I wanted to see if those     6           particular sites were blocked, particularly from a     7           publication that conceivably one could pick up a URL from and     8           pass it amongst friends.     9                    Traditionally, in those of us that use the World    10           Wide Web on a regular basis, we find sites that may be of    11           interest and swap that URL address just as one would say    12           check out channel 7 at five o'clock because there's a good    13           show that comes on every night.  That's a very common way to    14           pass this information back and forth of sites of interest to    15           us.    16           Q   It's your understanding, Mr. Schmidt, that one of the    17           methods by which Surfwatch blocks sexually explicit sites is    18           to previously identify the specific site, is that correct?    19           A   That's correct, yes.     20           Q   Did you type the specific sites in in order to test -- in    21           order to test Surfwatch's site-blocking capability?    22           A   That's correct, yes.    23           Q   Does Surfwatch also block by key words, to your    24           knowledge?    25           A   Yes, it does.                                                                           123     1           Q   If a site has not otherwise been identified by Surfwatch     2           and if a content provider has not used a sexually oriented     3           term such as XXX or sex in its Web address, to your knowledge     4           is it possible that that kind of site would not be blocked by     5           Surfwatch?     6           A   Yes, it is.     7           Q   It would not be blocked by Surfwatch?     8           A   That's correct, yes.     9           Q   You were asked a number of questions as to whether or not    10           with Surfwatch running it would be possible to access    11           sexually explicit sites by a key word search.  Do you know    12           whether or not sexually explicit sites can be accessed    13           through a key word search with Surfwatch running?    14           A   Depending upon the key word that's used, yes.    15           Q   Have you ever done a key word search with Surfwatch    16           running which resulted in hits and access to sexually    17           explicit sites?    18           A   Yes, I have.    19           Q   Could you describe for the Court just some examples of    20           the kinds of key word searches that you have done with    21           Surfwatch running that resulted in actual access to sexually    22           explicit sites?    23           A   As I mentioned earlier, I recently was looking for some    24           computer videos and that was one example where Surfwatch was    25           running in the background, typed in the M-Peg and immediately                                                                           124     1           came to a site advertising it.  After the deposition the     2           question was raised, I went back and checked some further     3           sites using non sex-related terms like "pictures" and "women"     4           and had access to some sites that once again that came up     5           with photographic related topics as well as sexually explicit     6           topics.     7           Q   And those sites were not blocked at that time, is that     8           correct?     9           A   That's correct.  If I remember correctly, two of them    10           specifically were on university sites, ADU sites.    11           Q   With Surfwatch running?    12           A   With Surfwatch running, correct.    13           Q   Sir, to your knowledge is it possible to reach sexually    14           explicit sites with Surfwatch running by using certain key    15           word searches?    16           A   Yes, it is.    17                    JUDGE SLOVITER:  And those -- those words were    18           "women" and "pictures"?    19                    THE WITNESS:  Pictures, your Honor, yes.    20           BY MR. COPPOLINO:      21           Q   Last question, there was also some questioning about    22           foreign sites.  In the course of your investigation did you    23           encounter some sexually explicit sites that appeared to    24           originate overseas, is that correct?    25           A   Yes, it is.                                                                           125     1           Q   Are you involved in any efforts to address the issue of     2           sexually explicit site overseas by other countries?     3           A   Yes, I am.     4           Q   Could you describe that for the Court?     5           A   Yes.  I'm an Executive Board Member of the International     6           Organization on Computer Evidence and one of our charters is     7           to deal with different aspects of computer crime or computer-     8           related investigations in a broader spectrum.     9                    We recently had our conference in Australia in    10           February in which our representative to Interpol and Europol,    11           an attorney from the Netherlands, this was one of the topics    12           that was very greatly discussed because they're watching very    13           closely the outcome of this case to see about them enacting    14           similar legislation.  And obviously I'm not a lawyer but I    15           know the term was used a number of times, "dual criminality,"    16           where if it's a crime in this country, is the way it's    17           explained, that it could be a crime in another country if    18           that same statute exists as relates to some of the sexually    19           explicit material and the distribution through the Internet.    20           Q   So, Mr. Schmidt, based on the experience you have just    21           described, do you have personal knowledge that other    22           countries are examining the issue of the availability of    23           sexually explicit site on the Internet?    24           A   That's correct, yes.    25                    MR. COPPOLINO:  Your Honor, could I just confer for                                                                           126     1           one moment?     2                    JUDGE DALZELL:  Sure.     3                    JUDGE SLOVITER:  Sure.     4                    MR. COPPOLINO:  Thank you.     5                    JUDGE SLOVITER:  I want counsel to know that we're     6           going to go until the questioning is finished with Mr.     7           Schmidt, unless he's coming back on Monday or something, but     8           otherwise we'll keep on going and if you have a low tolerance     9           for lack of food, well, so be it.    10                    (Laughter.)    11                    MR. COPPOLINO:  I have no further questions.  Thank    12           you.    13                    JUDGE SLOVITER:  Any redirect?  Recross?    14                    MS. HEINS:  Just a few further questions, Mr.    15           Schmidt.    16                    THE WITNESS:  Yes.    17                                RECROSS-EXAMINATION    18           BY MS. HEINS:    19           Q   I believe Mr. Coppolino asked you a little bit about your    20           experience as a law enforcement officer searching the    21           Internet for sexually explicit sites in connection with    22           criminal investigations.  And again, this was -- these    23           investigations involved potential -- sexually explicit    24           material that was potentially illegal, is that right?    25           A   It involved a broad range of materials, including that                                                                           127     1           type of materials, yes.     2           Q   Well, you were involved in criminal law enforcement     3           investigations, so am I correct to infer that you were     4           primarily looking at material that might be illegal?     5           A   Some of the specific images would have been considered as     6           such, but I had to look at all the material that was out     7           there in order to find specific images that related to the     8           investigations.       9           Q   And I think you said that either as a supervisor or as a    10           consultant or as an on line investigator, you've been    11           involved in 30 to 50 such matters?    12           A   Approximately, yes.    13           Q   So, it's fair to say you've spent a substantial amount of    14           time over the last decade looking at sexually explicit    15           material on line?    16           A   That would be fair to say, yes.    17           Q   And in comparison, you haven't spent an equivalent amount    18           of time looking, for example, at on line material that would    19           be provided by libraries, is that fair to say?    20           A   No, that's not.  I also review educational material, as    21           well.    22           Q   Well, you've done 30 to 50 investigations and you've    23           spent a substantial amount of time on line in the area of    24           sexually explicit material.  Are you telling me you spent an    25           equivalent amount of time looking at on line material                                                                           128     1           produced by libraries?     2           A   No, what I'm saying is I'd look at a lot of different     3           material, including materials produced by libraries.     4           Q   Right, but not equivalent to or even close to equivalent     5           to the amount of time you have spent on line looking at     6           sexually explicit material, isn't that right?     7           A   That is correct, yes.     8           Q   And you would give the same answer with respect to on     9           line material having to do with the visual arts.  You have    10           not spent an equivalent or close to an equivalent amount of    11           time looking at that material on line as you have at sexually    12           explicit material?    13           A   That is correct, yes.    14           Q   Now, most of the sites you've visited in connection with    15           your investigation for this case, I think we've agreed were    16           adult pornographic sites, is that right?    17           A   They were adult-oriented sites, yes.    18           Q   And most of these sites are commercial sites that after    19           you have entered the home page and perhaps a few sample    20           pages, cost money to go any further, don't they?    21           A   I don't know that I could say that most of them were,    22           because I couldn't always tell what type of site, whether it    23           was a commercial site or in the first page that you got to    24           see unless you went further.  Not all of them would advertise    25           or ask for money initially.                                                                           129     1           Q   Okay, let me put it this way.  Most of these sites either     2           asked for a credit card verification or some form of adult     3           verification before going past the home page and perhaps, in     4           some cases, a few sample pages, isn't that right?     5           A   That's correct, yes.     6           Q   They wanted you to become a member, right?     7           A   That's correct, yes.     8           Q   Okay.  Now, with respect to your claimed expertise on the     9           subjects of parents' ability to supervise their children, I    10           think you told Mr. Coppolino that this was based on parents    11           who talked to you in the course of your public speaking    12           engagements or appearances at conferences, right?    13           A   That's correct, yes.    14           Q   And this was therefore, a self-selected group of parents    15           who had questions for you, is that right?    16           A   I'm not sure --    17           Q   That they selected themselves to come up?    18           A   -- that's correct, yes.    19           Q   You didn't conduct any kind of empirical sample of    20           parents out there, these were people who came up to you and    21           chose to ask you questions?    22           A   That is correct, yes.    23           Q   And it's fair to assume therefore that parents who had no    24           questions with respect to controlling their children's    25           computer use didn't come up and ask you those questions since                                                                           130     1           they didn't have any, right?     2           A   Either that or they were too shy to come up, yes.     3           Q   And again, you've done no formal research regarding the     4           percentages of parents out there who may feel that they are     5           unable to control their children's computer use, have you?     6           A   No, I have not.     7           Q   And do you have any basis for reason that -- for thinking     8           that there's any substantial number of homes that have     9           computers that were not bought by the adults in those homes    10           as opposed to the children?    11           A   No, I do not.    12           Q   Parents generally buy computers for the home, rather than    13           the child, right?    14           A   I would think that's accurate, yes.    15           Q   And the same would go for the printer?    16           A   That would make sense, yes.    17           Q   And the WEB browser.  And in fact, with respect to your    18           own son, you supervise his computer activities, do you not?    19           A   When I'm home, yes.    20           Q   And you feel that you are capable of doing so, don't you?    21           A   As far as capable of supervising him, yes, I do.    22           Q   And you don't turn him loose on the Internet?    23           A   No, I do not.    24           Q   And although he's only 12 now, by the time he's 17, you    25           feel that he'll have a sufficient basis of input from you and                                                                           131     1           from his life experiences that he would not be harmed even if     2           he were exposed to even exploitative sexually explicit     3           material on line, isn't that right?     4           A   It's my hope that would be the case, yes.     5           Q   And it's your belief that that's -- that that will be the     6           case, isn't it?     7           A   Yes.     8                    MS. HEINS:  Nothing further.  Ms. Kappler?     9                                RECROSS-EXAMINATION    10           BY MS. KAPPLER:    11           Q   Mr. Schmidt, Mr. Coppolino asked you a question about    12           your understanding or about what is going on in terms of    13           foreign countries treatment of sexually explicit materials on    14           line.  Isn't it true that there are countries which are far    15           more lenient in their treatment of sexually explicit    16           material, that is, whether it is deemed illegal or not    17           illegal?    18           A   That is correct, yes.    19           Q   And in fact, when parents come up to talk to you about    20           sexually explicit material on line, you've advised them that    21           in fact, there are sexually explicit materials that might be    22           deemed illegal in this country which are perfectly legal in    23           other countries, isn't that correct?    24           A   That is correct, yes.    25           Q   And Mr. Coppolino also asked you a question in which you                                                                           132     1           indicated that subsequent to your deposition, you ran some     2           more general searches with Surfwatch running, is that     3           correct?     4           A   That is correct, yes.     5           Q   This is where you were typing in a word within a search     6           engine to see what kind of listing of various WEB addresses     7           would come up, is that correct?     8           A   Yes, it is.     9           Q   And I believe the two examples you gave were pictures and    10           women, is that correct?    11           A   Correct, yes.    12           Q   And Surfwatch allowed you to search for pictures, is that    13           correct?    14           A   Yes, it did.    15           Q   It didn't block that, so in fact, you could look for    16           things that related to in any kind of way to pictures, is    17           that correct?    18           A   Yes, as I stated, some of them were photography type WEB    19           sites.    20           Q   Do you recall how many listings came up when you searched    21           for pictures?    22           A   Not offhand, I don't know.    23           Q   Well, do you have a rough estimate?  I mean, was it    24           hundreds?    25           A   I printed up a copy of them which I don't have with me.                                                                            133     1           I could refer to it, if the Court would like at some point     2           and give you that information.  But I don't remember offhand,     3           no.     4           Q   Well, can you tell me, was it -- it wasn't a small list,     5           is that accurate?  Is that fair to say?     6           A   It was a number of pages, considering 25 per page, it     7           only went, you know, two or three pages back.  Conceivably     8           say      9           100-plus links, but I have no absolute recollection of how    10           many numbers are involved.    11           Q   Okay.  Out of those, how many were links to sexually    12           explicit sites?    13           A   I think just off the first page I found one link that was    14           connected to a sexually explicit site that was very -- that    15           linked me to that site, which then, that site then it linked    16           like STEAMIESRUS, in my declaration, it then linked to    17           multiple, multiple links off of that one again.  And I think    18           I looked at two of those in that process there.  And one of    19           them, like I said, had multiple links off of it.    20           Q   Okay, but all these others, you didn't look at all these    21           others to see whether they were sexually explicit or not, is    22           that correct?    23           A   The titles of them indicated they were and plus the    24           heading on the beginning, it says, here's some more neat x-    25           rated sites and things of that nature.  But I didn't pursue                                                                           134     1           them all, no.     2           Q   All of these listings you're saying --     3           A   I'm saying all --     4           Q   -- suggested they were sexually explicit?     5           A   -- I'm sorry, all the listings off that one link that I     6           checked, all those listings indicated that they were indeed     7           sexually explicit material off that one link that I linked     8           off of.     9           Q   Okay.  But I guess I'm asking you, on the original    10           multiple pages that had listings from what -- of WEB sites    11           that related somehow to pictures, other than the ones you    12           looked at, all of those other ones, as far as you know, do    13           not have sexually explicit material on them?    14           A   Yes, I understand you.  No, they had various titles and    15           various pieces of information that did not indicate that.      16           Q   Okay.  Just for clarity's sake, for the record, do you    17           have the copy of your deposition in front of you?    18           A   Yes, I do.    19           Q   If you would turn to Page 335 of your deposition    20           transcript, there is a colloquy with Ms. Heins about your WEB    21           Crawler search for Jasmine, the word Jasmine, which is what's    22           referred to in Exhibit 32, attached to your declaration?    23           A   I have that --    24           Q   Are you on page?    25           A   -- yes.                                                                           135     1           Q   Okay.  And you'll see at Line 4, Ms. Heins asked you, why     2           did you pick the key word Jasmine?  And would you please read     3           what your answer was?     4           A   That's correct.  "Because one of my searches on line, I     5           came up with the WEB site name Jasmine that related to some     6           exotic, sensual aids and sex things and I was curious to see,     7           in light of the fact that I have a child and I'm a Disney     8           fan, to see what sort of responses I would get for searching     9           for some common Disney character names that might relate to    10           some Disney movies or some of the movies."    11           Q   So, when you ran this broader Jasmine search using the    12           WEB Crawler, you already knew that there was at least one    13           sexually explicit site that used the word Jasmine, is that    14           correct?    15           A   That's correct, yes.    16                    MR. KAPPLER:  No further questions, your Honor.    17                    THE COURT:  Wait, wait.  Mr. Coppolino.    18                    MR. COPPOLINO:  Just a very brief couple of points.    19           I think one -- I should just clarify the record on one point.    20                            FURTHER REDIRECT EXAMINATION    21           BY MR. COPPOLINO:    22           Q  Mr. Schmidt, the search you were describing of women and    23           pictures, was that one or two searches?    24           A   That was one search using those two search terms.    25                    MR. COPPOLINO:  Am I permitted or can I just ask one                                                                           136     1           more?     2                    JUDGE SLOVITER:  Yes -- do we have ground rules that     3           say he -- go ahead.     4                    MR. COPPOLINO:  I just have one very brief question.     5                    THE COURT:  Judge Dalzell has been setting the     6           ground rules with counsel, if anybody wants to know why.     7           BY MR. COPPOLINO:     8           Q   Was your role in the investigation -- in the     9           investigation you undertook in the law enforcement context,    10           the development of facts for use by prosecutors and in court    11           for a determination to be made by a court as to the legal    12           status of the materials?    13           A   That would be correct, yes.    14           Q   You, yourself are not a lawyer, is that correct?    15           A   That is correct, yes.    16           Q   And you, yourself were not making those legal    17           determinations, is that correct?    18           A   That's also correct, yes.    19                    MR. COPPOLINO:  I thank the Court.    20                    JUDGE SLOVITER:  Thank you.      21                    JUDGE DALZELL:  You are a law enforcement officer    22           and your vitae suggests that you do a great deal of the    23           practical application of the law in connection with the    24           obscenity investigations, correct?    25                    THE WITNESS:  That's correct, your Honor, yes.                                                                           137     1                    JUDGE DALZELL:  Okay.  And you are, I take it, at     2           least passingly familiar with the statute that brings us all     3           together in this case or these two cases, aren't you?     4                    THE WITNESS:  Yes, I am, your Honor.     5                    JUDGE DALZELL:  Okay, let's just -- I want you to --     6            I want to take advantage of the fact that you are so     7           experienced in this law enforcement area.  And I'd like you     8           to assume a couple of things with me.  Assume that the law     9           that brings us together is ultimately deemed to be    10           Constitutional, okay, that the law is fine.  And that your    11           job is that you now have to enforce that law, working with    12           the U.S. Department of Justice, okay?    13                    THE WITNESS:  Yes, your Honor.    14                    JUDGE DALZELL:  And let's assume that on two    15           occasions, as you meet with parent groups, you also meet with    16           content providers.  Okay.  And let's assume that you meet    17           with one content provider group, which is a group of parents    18           and concerned people about the spread of AIDS.  Okay?    19                    THE WITNESS:  Yes, your Honor.    20                    JUDGE DALZELL:  And one group is in New York City    21           and one group is in Brainard, Minnesota, which as you may    22           know, is where Paul Bunyan is supposedly from.  And they come    23           to you and they want advice because they don't want to get in    24           trouble with you, because they know that they'll never meet    25           Mr. Coppolino and his friends if they keep you happy.  And                                                                           138     1           they say we're concerned about teenagers getting AIDS and we     2           have a WEB site, one in New York and one in Brainard,     3           Minnesota.  And we have all decided that the only way to     4           prevent the spread of this is we actually have to have on our     5           site pictures of male -- of erect penises, to show how to put     6           on a condom.  And both groups say to you, but I don't want to     7           get in trouble with you, because these kids are all under 18.      8           What would you tell them?  And would your answer be different     9           for the people Brainard than it would be in New York City?    10                    THE WITNESS:  I think with those assumptions being    11           made, I think my answer would be the same for both of them    12           and look at the context in which that material is provided.     13           This appears to be an educational type context, not something    14           done purely for pleasure purposes.  And on that I would say,    15           put the adequate warnings in there so no one is surprised by    16           this.  Make sure that information is pertinent to what you're    17           trying to say.  But I would not, as a law enforcement    18           officer, look to obtain material to go to a prosecutor with    19           that type of information.    20                    JUDGE DALZELL:  Because of the context?    21                    THE WITNESS:  Because of the context, yes, your    22           Honor.    23                    JUDGE DALZELL:  Okay.  Now, same question is, you're    24           the publisher of Vanity Fair and you have all of your issues    25           on line.  And the publisher comes to you and says Mr.                                                                           139     1           Schmidt, I've got a problem.  We had this very famous,     2           controversial cover of the actress Demi Moore when she was     3           pregnant and she was naked on the cover.  What do I do -- and     4           it's all on line      5           -- what do I do now to prevent you from coming after me under     6           the Communications Decency Act of 1996?  What do you tell     7           them?     8                    THE WITNESS:  Once again, in that context, it's a     9           visual image for fun, basically.  Not an educational -- it    10           could be educational, but for fun more than anything else.     11           And I would tell them as well, depending upon the community    12           in which that image could be viewed, that standard would    13           probably apply towards the -- pursuant of the -- the rules of    14           this law.    15                    JUDGE DALZELL:  So, it would be different in    16           Brainard, Minnesota, perhaps, than New York City?    17                    THE WITNESS:  That's quite possible, yes, your    18           Honor.    19                    JUDGE DALZELL:  And you'd tell them that?    20                    THE WITNESS:  And I would tell them that, yes, your    21           Honor.    22                    JUDGE DALZELL:  Okay, so what should they do on the    23           Internet then, with their WEB site?    24                    THE WITNESS:  Well --    25                    JUDGE DALZELL:  Well, not their WEB site, it's                                                                           140     1           already loaded in.       2                    THE WITNESS:  -- my recommendation is to, once     3           again, in order to try to come up with some sort of a     4           standard by using the same standard we used in law     5           enforcement -- a lot of other things -- that's the reasonable     6           person within that area.  If it's in Brainard, Minnesota, put     7           those standard disclaimers, adult content, it may allow     8           someone in the community that feels that's offensive to not     9           have -- allow their children to have access to it, but the    10           same token for those that don't find it that way, they can    11           still have unlimited access through some sort of a user ID or    12           a pass code or something along those lines.  They'd still be    13           able to show it, but you'd have to go through, I guess, one    14           more step in order to get to it in order to protect    15           themselves.    16                    JUDGE DALZELL:  So, you'd advise them to put in a    17           CJI script?    18                    THE WITNESS:  Something along those lines, yes, your    19           Honor.    20                    JUDGE SLOVITER:  Could I just ask this question?  I    21           have others, but I want to let Judge Buckwalter -- but on    22           this one.  And suppose you were National Geographic and you    23           were taking them through India and you came across some of    24           your material that had all those couples copulating on the    25           various Indian statues, what would you tell them in that                                                                           141     1           instance?  Not to put it on the Internet or cut it out of the     2           travelogue?     3                    THE WITNESS:  Once again, based on my experience, I     4           would once again relate that to that's an educational thing.      5           It's a cultural thing.  It's something that even though some     6           people may find that offensive, that using that reasonable     7           person that this is not something designed out there to     8           create some sort of a problem.  It's something that's     9           educational.  It's just a part of the life that goes on    10           through that type of a magazine.    11                    JUDGE SLOVITER:  Go ahead.    12                    JUDGE BUCKWALTER:  Well, I'm not going to pursue    13           that.  I'd like to pursue that, but I'm not going to.  One of    14           the opinions you rendered here was that you felt that the    15           user base controls would, in the long term, face attacks from    16           those who may distribute information on how to disable the    17           program.  I guess based on your many years as an    18           investigator, wouldn't the same be true of any kind of    19           content provider base controls.  Aren't they subject to    20           somebody trying to disable them as well?  I mean, isn't this    21           a constant problem of law enforcement?    22                    THE WITNESS:  That is correct, your Honor, yes.     23           That is a constant problem.    24                    JUDGE BUCKWALTER:  I mean, there's no difference    25           than between a -- in that area -- between a content based                                                                           142     1           controls or user based controls, is there?     2                    THE WITNESS:  In that area of attempting for someone     3           to disable, no, there would be no difference.     4                    JUDGE BUCKWALTER:  Yes, okay.  That's all I have to     5           ask.     6                    JUDGE SLOVITER:  As an expert, when did the blockers     7           first come -- when did you first notice the beginning of     8           groups that were interested in being able to block material     9           that they thought would be offensive to themselves or to    10           children?  When did that first happen?    11                    THE WITNESS:  I think I first started noticWT02-B05-91IA095-001027-B015-99http://www.cdt.org:80/ciec/transcripts/April_12_Vezza.html 205.177.10.31 19970215013049 text/html 84751HTTP/1.0 200 OKDate: Sat, 15 Feb 1997 01:29:26 GMTServer: Apache/1.1.1Content-type: text/html    Testimony of Dr. Albert Vezza Testimony of Dr. Albert Vezza, MIT and the World Wide Web Consortium April 12, 1996     14                                 AFTERNOON SESSION    15                    THE CLERK:  All rise.    16                    JUDGE SLOVITER:  Good afternoon.      17                    JUDGE DALZELL:  Good afternoon.    18                    JUDGE SLOVITER:  I hope you are virtually, if not    19           actually nourished.      20                    MR. MORRIS:  Good afternoon, your Honor, I'm John    21           Morris, counsel for the ALA plaintiffs and somewhat out of    22           turn, we are presenting Dr. Albert Vezza as our next witness,    23           he -- next and final witness in this portion of the    24           proceeding.     25                    ALBERT VEZZA, Plaintiffs' Witness, Sworn.                                                                           145     1                    THE CLERK:  Please state and spell your name.     2                    THE WITNESS:  My name is Albert Vezza, V-E-Z-Z-A.     3                    MR. MORRIS:  Plaintiffs would at this time move that     4           Mr. Vezza's declaration, signed and submitted to the Court on     5           April 9th, be accepted as his direct testimony in this case.     6                    MR. BARON:  Your Honors, good afternoon.  Jason R.     7           Baron for the Justice Department.  We do not object to Mr.     8           Vezza's declaration being put into evidence, subject to the     9           caveat that I will be asking Mr. Vezza questions regarding    10           his technical expertise on PICs, as opposed to his general    11           familiarity with PICs, during the course of my     12           cross-examination and his declaration will be submitted    13           subject to his expertise as an expert on the areas that I    14           question him about.    15                    JUDGE SLOVITER:  Fine.  Our rulings have been    16           consistent on this matter.    17                    MR. MORRIS:  He is now available for examination by    18           defendants and the Court.    19                                 CROSS-EXAMINATION    20           BY MR. BARON:    21           Q   Good afternoon, Mr. Vezza.    22           A   Good afternoon, Mr. Baron.    23           Q   Would you please tell the Court what the W-3 Consortium    24           is?    25           A   The W-3C or W-3 Consortium is a consortium of about 130-                                                                           146     1           135 companies worldwide that have joined the consortium and     2           the goal of the consortium is to further the protocols in the     3           standards -- the de facto standards, if you would.     4                    JUDGE SLOVITER:  Speak up, please.     5                    JUDGE BUCKWALTER:  Yes.     6                    THE WITNESS:  The de facto standards of the     7           Worldwide WEB.     8           BY MR. BARON:     9           Q   And your declaration indicates that you are chairman of    10           the Worldwide WEB Consortium?    11           A   That's correct.    12           Q   The consortium is comprised of a number of companies,    13           correct?    14           A   That's correct.    15           Q   And Microsoft is part of it?    16           A   Microsoft is a member of the consortium.    17           Q   Netscape?    18           A   Netscape is a member of the consortium.    19           Q   America On Line?    20           A   America On Line is a member of the consortium.    21           Q   CompuServe?    22           A   CompuServe is a member of the consortium.    23           Q   Prodigy?    24           A   Prodigy is a member of the consortium.    25           Q   Could you look at Exhibit 167 in the binder that I've                                                                           147     1           provided to you and I believe binders have been provided to     2           the Court, as well, of defendants' exhibits, starting at 167.      3                    JUDGE BUCKWALTER:  Did you say 167?     4                    MR. BARON:  Yes, it's a smaller black binder, your     5           Honors.     6                    JUDGE SLOVITER:  Here it is, the black.     7                    JUDGE BUCKWALTER:  Sorry, I had it upside down.     8           Go ahead.     9           BY MR. BARON:    10           Q   At the back of Exhibit 167, there's a listing titled    11           members of the W-3 Consortium, it's the last three pages of    12           the exhibit, do you see that listing?    13           A   Yes.    14           Q   And you testified at your deposition last Friday that    15           this was a "pretty good list in terms of accuracy", correct?    16           A   I said that it was, as of that date it was a pretty good    17           list.  We try and keep it up to date.  I can't tell you today    18           whether this list is accurate or not.    19           Q   Okay.  Now, you would agree, would you not, that there    20           are benefits to companies in joining the consortium, correct?    21           A   There is one benefit.    22           Q   And what is that?    23           A   You get to sit at the table and argue about what and how    24           the Worldwide WEB standards should evolve. But in point of                                                                           148     1           fact, we give everything away to non-members also.     2           Q   In fact, at your deposition last Friday, you said that     3           the benefit was and I quote, that's Page 18, Line 22, I'll     4           just read it to you, Mr. Vezza, if it's okay.  "You get to     5           sit at the table and discuss with all of the other members,     6           the evolution of the protocols of the Worldwide WEB",     7           correct?     8           A   That's correct.     9           Q   There are conferences and advisory meetings and workshops    10           on the evolution of standards and protocols, correct?    11           A   That's correct.    12           Q   Some of the workshop topics have included security and    13           payment issues, correct?    14           A   That's correct.    15           Q   And PICs, correct?    16           A   That's correct.    17           Q   We'll get to PICs in a few minutes.  You've had a number    18           of payment workshops, including one in which VISA, MasterCard    19           and Microsoft attended to discuss various ideas on payment    20           mechanisms for credit cards, correct?    21           A   That's correct.    22           Q   In fact, on that specific topic, you told me at your    23           deposition, that there are anticipated other ways of making    24           payment on the net, including CyberCash, DigitCash and debit    25           cards, correct?                                                                           149     1           A   There will likely be such ways of making payment on the     2           WEB.     3           Q   And work on protocols to enable those to occur is     4           ongoing, correct?     5           A   That's correct.     6           Q   And the W-3 Consortium has frequently taken the lead     7           and/or has made recommendations for the way certain protocols     8           have evolved on the WEB, correct?     9           A   Sometimes we lead, sometimes we follow.    10           Q   And sometimes you make recommendations?    11           A   And sometimes we make recommendations, that is correct.    12           Q   The W-3 Consortium is currently working on furtherance of    13           HTTP, the HyperText Transport Protocol, correct?    14           A   That's correct.    15           Q   And W-3C is working on HTML, specifically how to put in    16           mathematical formulas into HTML documents, correct?    17           A   That's correct.    18           Q   And as I indicated before, W-3C has taken the lead on    19           PICs, correct?    20           A   That is correct.    21           Q   Just as a preliminary matter, you agree, Mr. Vezza, with    22           the proposition that standards are at the heart of the    23           Internet, correct?    24           A   Yes, they -- without standards we wouldn't have any    25           operability.                                                                           150     1           Q   With respect to the Internet, if you don't have     2           predictability, if you don't have a standard, then everything     3           fragments, correct?     4           A   That is correct.     5           Q   And as a general statement subject to exceptions, you     6           would agree that for the Internet, you have to have a     7           protocol that suppliers and vendors, platforms and     8           communication providers adhere to, so that there can be     9           intercommunication on the Internet --    10           A   Yes.    11           Q   -- correct?    12           A   That's correct.    13           Q   It's also true, is it not, that the U.S. Government was    14           heavily involved in the creation of the Internet, correct?    15           A   Well, let's back up a minute.  I'm not sure that that's     16           -- they were involved, but all the people involved were    17           technical people.  The fact of the matter is the Government    18           funded lots of the work, early work on the ARPA net.  But it    19           was the technical people in the university community and in    20           the laboratories that did all the work of ironing out all the    21           standards, okay.  The Government supplied the money, it did    22           not mandate, do it this way.      23           Q   You're familiar with the Advanced Research Project    24           Agency?    25           A   I am very familiar with the Advanced Research Project                                                                           151     1           Agency.     2           Q   And the acronym for that is ARPA?     3           A   That's correct.     4           Q   And ARPA funded the development of the ARPA net through     5           the 70s and 80s, correct?     6           A   That is correct.     7           Q   And the U.S. Government has funded the IETF, correct?     8           A   They have provided some funding to that, I believe, yes.     9           Q   And the U.S. Government has funded the creation of the    10           Internet Society, correct?    11           A   That is correct, although lots of funding for the    12           Internet Society now comes from private sources.    13           Q   And the U.S. Government through the National Science    14           Foundation, NASA and DOD continues to fund lots of work    15           today, correct, on the Internet?    16           A   It funds work associated with the Internet.    17           Q   Indeed, the U.S. Government also supplied seed money to    18           the W-3 Consortium itself, correct?    19           A   That is correct.    20           Q   ARPA gave 1.5 million for research to M.I.T., of which 50    21           to $100,000 went to the consortium, correct?    22           A   That's correct.    23           Q   Now, your role at W-3C is that of chairman, right?    24           A   Yes.    25           Q   And what are your duties?                                                                           152     1           A   My duties basically are to make sure that we behave in     2           the manner that doesn't get us into trouble with our members.      3           Okay.  It's very easy to do that.  We are -- we -- develop      4           pre-competitive standards software and we try and remain     5           neutral to the industrial community at large.  And doing that     6           requires some sophistication, both technically and     7           managerially and executive-wise.  And that's my role.     8           Q   You said at your deposition that your responsibilities     9           would be for what "most people would call marketing", that    10           is, your responsible for going out and explaining to people    11           what W-3C does, correct?    12           A   That's one of the responsibilities, yes.    13           Q   You have a technical staff at W-3C that works on PICs,    14           right?    15           A   Yes, I do.  Not only at W-3C, but at other companies,    16           also, have contributed heavily to PICs.    17           Q   And Timothy Burners Lee (ph) runs the team that does all    18           the technical work, correct?    19           A   That's correct.    20           Q   You don't consider yourself one of the technical experts    21           on the minute details of PICs, correct?    22           A   That is true.    23           Q   And you don't purport to having designed any of the exact    24           structures, of labels or exact structures of the syntax for    25           servers that's used on PICs, correct?                                                                           153     1           A   That is correct.     2           Q   And you don't claim that you could -- you could design     3           these structures, correct?     4           A   I don't claim that I -- I have better staff that can do     5           it better than I.  I use them to do that.     6           Q   In fact, you haven't designed any software related to     7           PICs, that's not your function, correct?     8           A   That is not my function.     9           Q   And you haven't designed or constructed any software for    10           the purpose of labeling documents on the Worldwide WEB or the    11           Internet, apart from the PICs project, correct?    12           A   Say that again, I'm sorry.    13           Q   You haven't designed or constructed any software for the    14           purpose of labeling documents on the Worldwide WEB or the    15           Internet, apart from the PICs project?    16           A   That is correct.    17           Q   Out of all the documents that appear on the WEB site for    18           PICs, involving technical specifications, you have authored    19           only some "presentations", correct?    20           A   Yes.    21           Q   Would Defendants' Exhibit 174 be an example of one of    22           these presentations.  If you turn to that?    23           A   Let me clarify that.  This presentation, the graphics was    24           done by someone at Netscape.  I crafted most of the language    25           that went with it, with some help from the technical staff.                                                                             154     1           Q   You had some input into this?     2           A   Had a lot of input into it.     3           Q   Now, you informed me at your deposition that the idea for     4           PICs came up at an early advisory committee meeting of the W-     5           3 Consortium around December 14, 1994, correct?     6           A   That is correct.     7           Q   And the idea was broached at that meeting about a rating     8           system like the movie rating system, correct?     9           A   That is correct.    10           Q   And thereafter, in July of 1995, there was an article    11           about pornography on the Internet and many of the W-3C    12           members started calling up and inquiring about the idea of    13           putting labels on content, correct?    14           A   That's correct, but we were working on it before that,    15           because we had a different idea about labeling.  I mean, the    16           PICs labeling scheme is a general scheme.      17           Q   You told me that, "we've had it in the hopper as some    18           activity", that was the statement you made at the time,    19           correct?    20           A   That's correct.    21           Q   And there was a workshop in August, '95 where members of    22           the W-3C set out in earnest to work out on developing the PIC    23           standard platform for labeling content?    24           A   Slight correction to that.  There were members of the W-    25           3C team there, but there were also a number of                                                                           155     1           representatives from companies who were not members.  And the     2           reason they were there was because we felt that they were a     3           necessary ingredient in this activity.  That is, the content     4           -- many of the content providers.     5           Q   And it's your testimony, Mr. Vezza, is it not, that the     6           issue of pornography on the Internet was and I quote, "one of     7           the major reasons for going forward", with the PICs project,     8           correct?     9           A   It was one of the major reasons why our companies thought    10           we should go forward with it, not the reasons why we thought    11           we should go forward with it.    12           Q   And you were going forward with it whether or not the    13           July, '95 article came out, correct?    14           A   That's correct.    15           Q   But the article had the effect of speeding up the time    16           frame, correct, for going forward?    17           A   That's true.    18           Q   The July article gave you a strong reason for    19           accelerating PICs development, correct?    20           A   It gave us a strong reason for -- it gave the companies a    21           strong reason for asking us to accelerate.    22           Q   Given the article, W-3C member companies that it would be    23           a good idea for the industry to come together with a labeling    24           scheme, correct?    25           A   I would say that's a fair statement.                                                                             156     1           Q   I'd like to turn to Page 56 of your deposition, which     2           I've given you.  Let me read a statement from your deposition     3           about what PICs is and ask you whether you agree with it.      4           It's Page 56, Line 6.  I will read the text in the six lines.      5           "PICs is a set of protocols which" -- this is your testimony.      6           "PICs is a set of protocols which allow a label -- a service     7           to describe its labeling system -- that's one aspect of it --     8            to a client or to the recipient of a communication.  It is a     9           method by which, if all of the vendors adhere to the PIC    10           standard, then all of the browsers that they develop will be    11           able to understand a labeling system or rating system, if you    12           will."  Was that your testimony?    13           A   It goes on further, but I believe that that's the intent    14           of it.    15           Q   But that statement is accurate?    16           A   Mm-hmm.    17           Q   And if you turn to Page 58, Line 9, you were talking    18           about the mission of PICs in your deposition and let me quote    19           a statement and see if you agree with it.  You said, "If    20           you're going to label something and you want a piece of    21           software to take action on that label, the software has to    22           understand what the label means.  And that's the mission of    23           PICs.  Is it to allow the software at either a proxy server,    24           an on line server, Internet access provider or the actual    25           home computer to understand the label and take the actions                                                                           157     1           whether or not to allow the content to be viewed by the     2           viewer or to block it."  Do you agree with that statement?     3           A   Yes, but let me read the first part of it.     4           Q   All right.     5           A   I think that the sentence before it begins -- is also     6           important -- a couple sentences.  I used the term browser     7           understanding and I used it in generic form.  By that, I mean     8           not only the browser, but all the software beneath it that     9           accesses the Internet.    10           Q   And why is that important?    11           A   Well, because the -- the blocking may occur either in the    12           browser itself or in some software underneath the browser    13           that's the actual access port to the Internet.    14           Q   If you could turn to Exhibit 174, this is the    15           presentation I referred to earlier.  It is not my intention    16           to have you walk through the presentation this afternoon, Mr.    17           Vezza, I just have a couple of questions about it.  If you    18           would turn to the page that says, ideally, at the top.      19                    JUDGE BUCKWALTER:  Ideally?    20                    MR. BARON:  "Ideally, children use the Internet with    21           their parents."  It's six pages in.    22                    JUDGE BUCKWALTER:  What exhibit are we on?    23                    MR. BARON:  174.  Six pages into the exhibit.    24                    JUDGE DALZELL:  Defendants' Exhibit 174.    25                    JUDGE SLOVITER:  Yes.  I'm just commenting that we                                                                           158     1           didn't have this before.  This is new to us, right, these     2           exhibits?     3                    MR. BARON:  That is correct, your Honor.     4                    JUDGE DALZELL:  Yes, we haven't referred to this     5           before?     6                    MR. BARON:  That is correct, your Honor.     7                    JUDGE SLOVITER:  We just got it?     8                    MR. BARON:  Yes.     9                    JUDGE SLOVITER:  Okay, so we haven't been through    10           it?    11                    MR. BARON:  That's right, but this is impeachment    12           exhibits for purpose of cross-examination.    13                    JUDGE SLOVITER:  I understand that.  It's just that    14           --    15                    MR. BARON:  We do intend to submit this particular    16           exhibit with other exhibits in our case.    17                    JUDGE SLOVITER:  I'm not questioning the exhibit,    18           I'm just saying that I don't know about my colleagues, but    19           we're looking at it fresh and therefore, don't have -- I    20           don't have anything intelligent to ask or question, but that    21           may not matter.  It may not be even if I had it.    22                    MR. BARON:  Well, if the Court desired at the end of    23           the question, we could certainly walk through the exhibit or    24           any other exhibits.    25                    THE COURT:  Well, that's why -- that's the only                                                                           159     1           reason I asked.  But, go ahead, you conduct your examination.     2                    MR. BARON:  All right, okay.     3           BY MR. BARON:     4           Q   Could you explain to the Court what this page, which says     5           "Ideally, children use the Internet with their parents"  and     6           the next page were purporting to represent?     7           A   Purports to represent a child sitting with a parent     8           making -- having access to the Internet.  And the next page     9           says but parents may not always be present and children may    10           run into an inappropriate material.    11           Q   You told me at your deposition that with respect to the    12           second page, we show -- well, with respect to these two    13           pages, we show a child using the Internet -- this is Page 89,    14           Line 7 of the deposition -- "We show a child using the    15           Internet with a parent supervising and that's an ideal    16           situation.  Unfortunately, that ideal situation is not always    17           the case, very often a child is using the Internet without a    18           parent's supervision."  Do you agree with that statement?    19           A   Where is that?    20           Q   You made it in your deposition at Page 89, Line 7.    21           A   Line 7.  Yes.    22           Q   Could you turn to a couple of pages after this in Exhibit    23           174.  There is a scenario, one --    24           A   Where?    25           Q   It's three -- three pages after the last page we referred                                                                           160     1           to.       2           A   Yes.     3           Q   Could you tell the Court briefly what this scenario is     4           getting at?     5           A   The scenario is getting at a parent using a system of     6           Netscape and create -- or Microsoft Explore and creating a     7           profile for the child, so that the child can only access     8           materials that the parent deemed is appropriate for the child     9           to see.      10           Q   If you look at the next page, could you explain what the    11           box that's checked block unrated sites means in the context    12           of this page?    13           A   In the context of this page, the parent has decided that    14           this ten year old child is not -- does not have the    15           sophistication or the maturity to handle material that is --    16           might have some sexual connotation, but that has not been    17           rated yet and therefore, has checked block unrated sites, so    18           that the only material a child will be able to have access to    19           is that material which is specifically rated.    20           Q   In a PICs --    21           A   According to the child's criteria.    22           Q   -- in a PICs compatible format?    23           A   In a PICs compatible format.    24           Q   And that's one way PICs works.  And PICs also works --    25           that's correct, right?  One way it block all --                                                                           161     1           A   That's one way --     2           Q   -- unrated sites?     3           A   -- right.  And another way would be not to check that and     4           if you look further on in this presentation for the 16 year     5           old child, the parent has chosen not to check block unrated     6           sites, because the parent has a feeling that the child is     7           mature enough to know the family's values and how to avoid     8           that material.     9           Q   Okay, that's all I'm going to have with that exhibit.     10           Now, PICs allows a content provider to place a label on the    11           content of a document, correct?    12           A   That's correct.    13           Q   And it also allows a third party to rate content,    14           correct?    15           A   A third party may rate content.  He may give it to the    16           content provider or he may put it in a bureau.    17           Q   When a content provider is rating his or her own content    18           on the Internet, that's referred to as self-rating, correct?    19           A   That is correct.    20           Q   Now, it's your view that where a PICs label is put in a    21           document is immaterial, correct?      22           A   No, I went back and checked the specs after my deposition    23           and it appears in two places if it's put in the document.     24           It's either put in the HTTP header or it's put into MediTech,    25           you're right, Mr. Baron.                                                                           162     1           Q   Let's look at Page 62 of your deposition, Line 7 and     2           through 16.  And I understand that what you've stated just     3           now -- let me give you a chance to read --     4           A   Line?     5           Q   -- that passage - from Line 7 to 16.  Let me read it for     6           the Court.  "Answer" -- well, a question, "Could you describe     7           the technical steps of where a label would be put?"  "Answer:      8           Where a label is put is immaterial.  All that has to happen     9           is that when a client reaches for a particular activity, a    10           particular URL and says, give me that content, that the label    11           arrive at the client before the content or that the -- that's    12           not even necessary, depending upon how the folks who build    13           browsers decide to do it.  All that's required is that the    14           label arrive at the Browser and the Browser examined the    15           label and determined whether to show that URL -- the contents    16           of that URL."  Now, aside from the tag or where it's put in    17           the header and that is the rest of that passage, correct?    18           A   Well, the issue here is whether or not it's attached to    19           the document that's coming or whether there's a label bureau    20           that supplies the label by itself.  In other words, you reach    21           for the document and you say, well, wait a minute, go off the    22           Label Bureau, get the labels for that document and bring him    23           back.  And then get the document if the label is okay.'  So,    24           that's what I was trying to drive at when I made those    25           comments.                                                                           163     1           Q   Okay.  Now, with respect to is there content creators in     2           the first way, the self-writing method.  The method of     3           labeling may vary from place to place.  For example, Company     4           A might automatically prompt you to label a page when you     5           start creating it and place the label somewhere, is that     6           correct, that's one methodology?     7           A   Say that -- I'm sorry, I'm missing --     8           Q   Well, you -- you testified that there were different     9           methods of labeling for PICs compatible labels.  And one    10           method, that is in your deposition, one would be where you    11           might automatically be prompted to label a page when you    12           start creating it and in a different methodology, a different    13           institution might require the labeling based on a set of HTML    14           creating tools, is that correct?    15           A   Are we talking about -- I'm missing something here -- are    16           we talking about creating labels when you're creating a    17           document or are we talking about when labels come down to be    18           read by a browser or the client software, to be interpreted    19           as to whether or not to show that software?  I don't    20           understand the question.    21           Q   Why don't you look at Page 63, Lines 16 through 23 of    22           your deposition?  Tell the Court what you were getting at    23           there?    24           A   What I was getting at there, in this instance here, the    25           question was "How" -- let's look at the question.  I -- the                                                                           164     1           way I understood the question was how would labels be     2           created?  And what I responded to here is that it's up to the     3           people who create the software, who allow you to create     4           documents for the Worldwide WEB or the Internet, as to how     5           they will prompt you to create the label.     6           Q   Okay.       7           A   And that's all I'm saying.  And it could happen, I mean -     8           -     9           Q   In a variety of way?    10           A   -- in a variety of ways.    11           Q   Right.    12           A   And that each of the designs would be fine.    13           Q   Okay.  PICs compatible self-labeling is not in widespread    14           use today, correct?    15           A   That is correct.    16           Q   In fact, you don't personally know of anyone who has    17           actually self-labeled their own site with PICs, as of today,    18           correct?    19           A   That is correct.    20           Q   How many different ratings systems are possible in PICs?    21           A   Many rating systems are possible, but I don't think that    22           that will happen in the market place.    23           Q   PICs doesn't rate sites on a single number or value,    24           correct?    25           A   That is correct.  In PICs, you are able to distinguish                                                                           165     1           between literature which might have some explicit content in     2           it or just pornography.  In fact, PICs is general  enough so     3           that you could use the Dewey Decimal System, you could use     4           the Library of Congress system.  You can use any kind of     5           system you'd like to provide a label.  And that's its     6           flexibility and its power.     7           Q   There are innumerable numbers or values possible under     8           PICs, correct?     9           A   That is correct.    10           Q   The categories in PICs can be quite complex, correct?    11           A   The categories in PICs are meant to differentiate    12           subtleties in all of the material that's on line.    13           Q   Can you look at Defendants' Exhibit 175.  It's a document    14           that has a title, Rating Services and Rating Systems and    15           their machine readable descriptions.    16           A   Yes.    17           Q   Do you recall my showing you this exhibit at your    18           deposition?    19           A   Yes.    20           Q   And you had seen earlier versions of this document,    21           correct?    22           A   I have seen earlier versions of this document, that's    23           correct.    24           Q   Can you turn to Appendices -- well, look at A, B and C,    25           but start with A?  It's --                                                                           166     1                    JUDGE DALZELL:  Appendix A to Exhibit 175?     2                    MR. BARON:  Yes, it's Page 7 of 12, at the lower      3           left-hand corner.      4           BY MR. BARON:     5           Q   This is a hypothetical rating service called Good Clean     6           Fun, correct?     7           A   That is correct.     8           Q   It is presented to be in PICs compatible format, correct?     9           A   That's correct.    10           Q   And the document says this is, "one of the simplest    11           possible rating systems, using a single-category, minimum    12           recommended age, we present the machine description for a    13           fictional service that uses this rating system."  Do you see    14           where it says that?    15           A   Yes.    16           Q   And that would be one of the simplest possible rating    17           systems, correct?    18           A   It's a simple rating system, that's correct.    19           Q   You told me at your deposition that with respect to    20           Appendix B, that you had a passing acquaintance with the RSAC    21           rating service?    22           A   Yes, I've talked to the folks there about it.  I talked    23           to our own staff about it.    24           Q   Could you explain for the Court what -- how this rating    25           service works in terms of being in the PICs compatible                                                                           167     1           format?     2           A   That the example here is in PICs compatible format, okay.      3           Now, I'm --     4           Q   The number of categories.     5           A   -- do you want me to go through line by line?     6           Q   No, but there are a number of categories here described     7           as values that you didn't put in PICs, right?     8           A   Oh, sure.  There's -- well, let's look down, there's a     9           lot of -- one of the labels is the amount of violence.    10           Q   Well, why don't we go down to the bottom of the page    11           where there is nudity and sex?    12           A   Okay.    13           Q   And there are label descriptions in categories, none or    14           values 0, 1, 2, 3, correct?    15           A   Yes.    16           Q   And 4 on the next page?    17           A   That's correct.    18           Q   And they're -- different standards apply to the labels?    19           A   And the different standards apply.    20           Q   Okay.    21           A   None is zero, revealing attire is number one.  Partial    22           nudity is number two.  Frontal nudity is number three.     23           Provocative frontal nudity is number four.    24           Q   And you told me that with respect to Appendix C, the same    25           self-writing system you weren't familiar with that one?                                                                           168     1           A   I'm not as familiar with it, no, I'm not.     2           Q   But looking at it, it does look like it's more detailed     3           than Appendix B and A, correct?  In terms of the number of     4           values assigned to the labels?     5           A   Yes, in terms of the number of values, that's true.     6           Q   With respect to -- that's all I'm going to do with that     7           exhibit.  With respect to all of these ratings, PICs will     8           allow a content rater or a third party rater to rate a whole     9           site, correct?    10           A   That is correct.    11           Q   Or individual pages within a site, correct.    12           Q   Or files.    13           A   Or files.    14           A   You can ave --    15                    JUDGE SLOVITER:  What was that word?    16                    MR. BARON:  Granularity.    17                    MR. BARON:  Maybe you can explain it to Judge    18           Sloviter.    19                    JUDGE SLOVITER:  Nobody else can -- everybody else    20           can stop listening.      21                    MR. BARON:  And to the rest of us?    22                    THE WITNESS:  We talk about granularity when we say    23           if you're going to rate a site or a generic label for the    24           whole site, then you should apply the label to that site,    25           which is the most conservative label for the whole site.  If                                                                           169     1           you want to then go down deeper and label pieces of that     2           site, we say that's more granular labeling and you can label     3           a variety of pieces of that site.  In fact, you can label all     4           -- every place where you can have an entry point you can     5           label.     6                    JUDGE DALZELL:  I mean, you could ultimately label     7           every single word, so says Dr. Olsen.     8                    THE WITNESS:  No, when we say label, what we mean is     9           label where you can get at it by a URL or some entry point.    10                    MR. BARON:  Only a select number of third party    11           rating systems --    12                    JUDGE SLOVITER:  Judge Sloviter thanks you.      13                    MR. BARON:  Thank you, your Honor.      14           BY MR. BARON:    15           Q   Only a select number of third party rating systems out    16           there -- there are only a select number at present, correct?    17           A   Yes, there are, you know, half a dozen or thereabouts    18           that I'm aware of, there may be more.    19           Q   That you're personally aware of?    20           A   That I'm personally aware of.    21           Q   And you don't know how many sites have been rated out on    22           the Internet, correct?    23           A   I do not know at this time how many sites have been rated    24           on the Internet.    25           Q   It isn't very realistic that third party rating systems                                                                           170     1           can rate all of the sites on the Internet, correct?     2           A   Depends upon really the business model the third party     3           rating service is going to employ.  Some rating services, I     4           anticipate, will employ people who will go out and do     5           ratings.  And they will probably be interested in a certain     6           segment of the Internet which they will rate very carefully.      7           There will be other parties who will make contracts with     8           people and say, I will let you -- here is my criteria for     9           rating, rate yourself.  And we'll sign a contract with you    10           and we'll do spot checks and if you -- if the -- if you break    11           my contract, I'll yank my rating from you.  Or I may even    12           take you into court and sue you.  There may be some penalties    13           associated with that.  If you take that kind of a business    14           model, many sites can be rated.  Those that -- by a third    15           party rating service.  And there are many business models    16           that one could employ.  And I don't know which ones are going    17           to flourish and which ones are going to be good.  But    18           certainly, a lot of sites can be rated fairly rapidly under    19           certain business models.    20           Q   At your deposition last Friday, I asked you a question,    21           "How realistic is the statement" -- this is at Page 128, Line    22           16 -- "How realistic is the statement that, for example, the    23           hypothetical rating service, Good Clean Fun, rates all the    24           material on the Internet, how realistic is that?"  "Answer:     25           Not realistic."                                                                           171     1           A   That's Good Clean Fun.  That's a specific rating system.      2           We didn't talk anything about a business model.  Somewhere in     3           this deposition I also pointed out to you that how many sites     4           could be rated would depend upon a business model that a     5           third party rating service would employ.     6           Q   You agree with Mr. Bradner, who has previously testified     7           in this action, that the Internet is doubling every nine     8           months, correct?     9           A   I believe I stated that it's possible, but that I    10           couldn't -- I couldn't verify it.    11           Q   And that the Worldwide WEB is experiencing phenomenal    12           growth?    13           A   That's correct.    14           Q   The W-3 Consortium doesn't keep track of how many sites    15           are being rated by third parties, correct?    16           A   At the current time, we do not.    17           Q   I asked you at your deposition, if you have 22 million    18           URLs on the Internet covered by Alta Vista today and a rating    19           service has rated 5,000 sites and you turned the blocking    20           mechanism to the toggle where it's blocking all unrated    21           sites, then you have effectively shut down 99 percent of the    22           Internet, do you recall that question?    23           A   I recall that question.    24           Q   And you answered, "That's the user's choice though,    25           that's me as the user, my choice to do that for my children                                                                           172     1           or my choice to let them see it."     2           A   That is correct.  The parent can decide for the child     3           whether or not he wants to block unrated sites.  The other     4           aspect of that is that many of the sites that children would     5           be interested in, would likely be rated very quickly.  The     6           third aspect of it is there's lots of stuff out there that     7           children don't care about.  I have tons of stuff on the WEB     8           site at my laboratory at M.I.T. that would be of zero     9           interest to children under the age of about 14 or 15.     10           Furthermore, I could go to any of the ratings services and    11           say, give me a label, this is what's on it.  They'd probably    12           give me a label for the site and we'd be done with it.  I    13           don't think it's a big problem.  I mean, I think this is a    14           start-up problem.    15           Q   And you understand --    16           A   It's not the -- it's a start up problem, it's not a    17           problem in the long run.    18           Q   Well, you don't dispute the notion that if there are    19           5,000 sites rated today and they are 22 million URLs and    20           you're blocking all unrelated sites in that option, you're    21           blocking 99 percent of the Internet, correct?    22           A   I don't dispute that.    23           Q   Okay, let's talk about self-rating schemes.  Put aside    24           PICs for the moment.  You would agree that it could be    25           arranged to have a tag or a label put on a variety of                                                                           173     1           Internet applications, correct?     2           A   Yes.     3           Q   There's some generic tag that's possible for UseNet,     4           correct?     5           A   PICs is one of those?     6           Q   The same for UseNet postings?     7           A   Yes.     8           A   And a standard tag for browsers to pick up for documents     9           on the WEB could be created, correct?    10           A   PICs is one of those tags.    11           Q   And there are other tagging schemes that are possible?    12           A   That's correct.    13           Q   And the same for FTP, correct?    14           A   That's correct.    15           Q   Could be arranged?    16           A   Yes.    17           Q   And same for IRCs, correct?    18           A   Yes.    19           Q   In fact, if the attacking scheme was a simple four    20           character set consisting of a label or a tag.  For the    21           Worldwide WEB, let's stay on that.  The Microsofts and    22           NetScapes of the world could reconfigure their browsers to    23           pick up the four character tag in short order, correct?    24           A   Not -- from my perspective, that's not a rational    25           solution, it gives you --                                                                           174     1           Q   I didn't ask that.     2           A   Okay.     3           Q   I asked whether they could, as a technical matter --     4           A   Was a technical matter.     5           Q   -- was pick up the tag in short order.      6           A   Yes.     7           Q   And your answer is?     8           A   Yes.     9           Q   In some cases, it could be hours or days, correct.    10           A   Well, I don't know.  It would be depend upon where and    11           how they would have to modify their browser and making the    12           change is usually the simplest part.  Testing it is usually -    13           - takes all the time.      14           Q   I just have a few more questions, Mr. Vezza.  If I didn't    15           know the address or the URL for a platform for Internet    16           contents selections home page, would you agree that one way    17           to search for the PICs home page would be to type in the word    18           PICs?    19           A   That's one way of doing it.    20           Q   And you could use any search engine to that?    21           A   You could use a variety of search engines to do that.    22           Q   You've used various search engines like Yahoo and Alta    23           Vista in the past, correct?    24           A   I've used mainly Alta Vista, but I've used Yahoo,yes.    25           Q   You also told me at your deposition you've used WEB                                                                           175     1           Crawler once or twice, correct?     2           A   I did not.  I am not familiar with it.     3           Q   Well, you -- you --      4           A   Where is that?     5           Q   At Page --     6           A   I said I know what a WEB Crawler is, I have not used that     7           particular --     8           Q   I think the -- it's Page 212, Line 14 -- Line 13, I     9           asked, "Question:  You're familiar with WEB Crawler, though?"     10           Your answer:  "Not particularly, no, I may have used it once    11           or twice, but I use hundreds of things."  Do you see where I    12           said that?    13           A   Where is that?    14           Q   Page 212, Line 13, 14, 15.    15           A   Line 12 says not that one.      16           Q   Well, I --    17           A   Not the one I use, I use Alta Vista.    18           Q   Line 13, "Question:  You're familiar with WEB Crawler    19           though?    20           A   I said not particularly, no.    21           Q   No.  And then, I may have used it once or twice, but I    22           use hundreds of things?    23           A   Well, I may have.  I honestly don't know whether I have    24           or not.    25           Q   Would you turn to Exhibit 179?                                                                             176     1           A   Yes.     2           Q   Do you recall my showing you this exhibit at your     3           deposition?     4           A   I sure do.     5           Q   Do you see the Line 48 or where it's numbered 048 down --     6            this -- my representation to the Court is that this was a     7           down loaded page, using WEB Crawler under a search-PICs.  Do     8           you see where Platform for Internet Content selection is     9           listed?    10           A   Yes, I do.    11           Q   And there are a number of other listings on this page?    12           A   There are a number of other listings on this page.      13           Q   That's all I'll say on that.  Last question, Mr. Vezza.     14           At that time I deposed you last Friday, you did not recognize    15           the name Donna Hoffman, correct?    16           A   That is correct.    17           Q   Or Scott Bradner, correct?    18           A   That is correct.    19           Q   You asked me, could you tell me who they are, correct?    20           A   Yes.    21                    MR. BARON:  That's it, that's all my questions.    22                    MR. MORRIS:  Just a few questions, your Honor.    23                    JUDGE SLOVITER:  Thank you.    24                                REDIRECT EXAMINATION    25           BY MR. MORRIS:                                                                           177     1           Q   Mr. Vezza, on the question of your expertise, you're very     2           familiar with the PICs specification, is that correct?     3           A   Yes.     4           Q   And to use Mr. Baron's terms, there perhaps are some     5           minute details that you may not be familiar with, is that     6           correct?     7           A   That is correct.     8           Q   But, with the specification documents, both the labeling     9           specification documents and the rating service specification    10           document, you are very familiar with those?    11           A   I'm -- I'm familiar with the -- very familiar with those.     12           I've been through them the last few days.    13           Q   Let me go back.  Mr. Bradner -- I mean, Mr. Baron asked    14           you about a four character string and you indicated that that    15           was not a rational approach.  Was there something that you    16           had wanted to add?    17           A   Yes, the problem with that is there is very little    18           granularity to be -- for someone to express the fact of what    19           this material is.  I'll give you the example and which was    20           raised by the jurists here, that of showing something to do    21           with AIDS and an erect penis.  You could, in fact, in PICs    22           say this is educational.  Okay.  This is educational, this is    23           what the educational activity is.  And a parent may be able    24           to set up or would be able to set up a browser to discern    25           that, so that in fact, a 15 year old would be able to down                                                                           178     1           load that information because it would specifically say this     2           is educational.  Or in the case of the National Geographic,     3           all of those things.  I was struck by the fact that you kept     4           asking the previous witness, what would you tell your parent     5           -- what would you tell those people how to deal with it?      6           Well, I mean if we have to -- if everybody has to go to an     7           authority to try and get a decision about how to deal with     8           material they want to put on the Net, we're going to have a     9           lot of authorities making decisions like that.  Why don't we    10           let other folks bring in a whole group of people that can    11           help make those decisions.  And that's what the PICs labeling    12           system is about.  It is to allow a lot of granularity and    13           allow people who know how to do that to actually create the    14           labels appropriately.    15           Q   And the PICs specifications aren't limited to just    16           labeling sexually oriented material, is that correct?    17           A   That's correct.  The PICs specification are a general    18           labeling scheme.  We looked at it and we said what we need is    19           something that will deal with the Dewey Decimal System, deal    20           with the Library of Congress.  Or deal with any other kinds    21           of labeling schemes that we might think of in the future.     22           And that's what it's all about.  It's going to be used for a    23           variety of reasons.  Whether or not it's used for rating or    24           not, it's got a life of its own already.      25           Q   And so, if you hypothesize that there might be a desire                                                                           179     1           to label content by its sexual -- sexual levels.  And then     2           there might also be a desire to label content -- a different     3           content according to whether I dealt with racial issues or     4           Nazism or things like that, PICs would be able to label -- to     5           be used in all those situations.     6           A   PICs would be able to be used in all those situations.      7           We have -- we have behind us the Internet community that the     8           industry that's putting software out there to use PICs, we     9           have evangelized this around the world.  I just came back    10           from the Far East.  Jim Miller just came back from Europe.     11           We;re talking to all of those folks, they're all interested    12           in the idea of labeling.  They are all interested in using    13           this system.      14                    It has another advantage in that a rating system    15           here in the United States could rate foreign sites according    16           to the U.S. values.  And foreign sites could rate U.S. sites    17           according to their values. If you -- if you go to some    18           European countries, they think that our violence is    19           abhorrent.  Okay, they just --they say how can you have so    20           much violence in your pictures and what not.  So, I think a    21           value is local and that has to be taken into account and PICs    22           allows for that value to be local.  Q   Now, Mr. Baron asked    23           you a number of questions about the block unrated sites    24           option that the PICs specifications allow.  Would this option    25           interfere with an adult's ability --                                                                           180     1                    JUDGE SLOVITER:  I would suggest you might get a     2           little closer or talk a little louder.  Not too close,     3           because it's --     4                    MR. MORRIS:  Thank you, your Honor.       5           BY MR. MORRIS:     6           Q   Would this option, the block unrated sites option within     7           the PICs specification, would it interfere with an adult's     8           ability to access content on the Internet?     9           A   No, I mean, the adult could change it to not to block    10           unrated sites and so they could access anything they wanted.    11           Q   So, an adult would have access to the full range of    12           content on the Internet?    13           A   That's correct.    14           Q   And would the block unrated sites option mean that minors    15           could never, ever get access to unrated sites?    16           A   No, in fact, if you go through the scenario, one of the -    17           - one of the things in the scenario, the child says I need --    18           gets to an unrated site, the child says I need this for my    19           homework.  The mother comes back and gives the child    20           permission.  So, in fact, with the child's -- with the    21           parent's supervision, a child could get at it.    22           Q   And under the block unrated sites option, would a parent    23           be able to sit down with her children and access the Internet    24           together?    25           A   Yes.                                                                           181     1           Q   And in that method, they'd be able to --     2           A   To control the situation.     3           Q   And get access to the whole range of content on the     4           Internet?     5           A   That's correct.     6           Q   Now, but with the -- if you -- if a parent were to turn     7           the block unrated sites option on to activate that option and     8           to block unrated sites, would the parent be able to protect     9           their children from indecent or patently offensive sites that    10           didn't have a label?    11           A   That's correct, that's exactly what that option is for.    12           Q   And this protection would protect United States citizens    13           from foreign sites.    14           A   That's correct.    15           Q   Foreign content.    16           Q   And that's under the PICs standard, a child could be    17           protected form indecency and patently offensive material    18           without any requirement that labeling be done mandatorily    19           across the Internet?    20           A   That is correct.    21                    MR. MORRIS:  No further questions, your Honor.    22                    MR. BARON:  No further questions at this time.    23                    JUDGE BUCKWALTER:  Here is a question.  You said    24           PICs are tabs?    25                    THE WITNESS:  I'm sorry?                                                                           182     1                    JUDGE BUCKWALTER:  Are PICs --     2                    THE WITNESS:  Are PICs tabs?     3                    JUDGE BUCKWALTER:  No, are PICs tags, I'm sorry.     4                    THE WITNESS:  Oh, no.  PICs are -- PIC stands for     5           Platform for Internet Content Selection.       6                    THE COURT:  Right.     7                    THE WITNESS:  It's a standard by which a rating     8           service can express how they will rate things.  And it's also     9           a standard for how labels should appear.    10                    JUDGE BUCKWALTER:  Yes.      11                    THE WITNESS:  Okay.    12                    JUDGE BUCKWALTER:  And what are tags, then?    13                    THE WITNESS:  Oh --     14                    JUDGE BUCKWALTER:  I thought you said --    15                    THE WITNESS:  -- that was a detail that Mr. Baron    16           asked me about in my deposition as to whether or not a PICs    17           label could appear in a Meta tag of an HTML document.  And I,    18           it was late and I didn't remember and I didn't know and I    19           said, no, I don't think so.  But in fact, he was right.    20                    JUDGE BUCKWALTER:  Okay.  All right, I --    21                    THE WITNESS:  That it can appear there.    22                    JUDGE BUCKWALTER:  -- I didn't quite get that    23           exchange and I wanted to be sure I understood it.  The other    24           thing you mentioned was about PICs will be, you said words to    25           the effect, successful if all vendors adhere.  What's the                                                                           183     1           chance of that happening?     2                    THE WITNESS:  Extremely high.     3                    JUDGE BUCKWALTER:  Mm-hmm, okay.     4                    THE WITNESS:  Netscape is going to have PICs.      5           Microsoft has already announced that they are releasing PICs     6           compatible explorer in June.  I can't believe that Netscape     7           would be far behind.  In fact, Netscape may even beat them to     8           the punch.  Certainly Spyglass will.  Spyglass -- both     9           Netscape, Microsoft and Spyglass helped us with these    10           specifications.  Most of the ratings services that I know    11           that are out there, area already, Surfwatch, are changing to    12           a PICs compatible spec rating scheme.  So, I think the    13           chances are very high that --    14                    JUDGE BUCKWALTER:  Okay.    15                    THE WITNESS:  -- it will all happen.    16                    JUDGE BUCKWALTER:  Thank you.    17                    JUDGE DALZELL:  I mean, the reason is because there    18           are enormously powerful market forces that are driving that,    19           are there not?    20                    THE WITNESS:  That's correct.    21                    JUDGE DALZELL:  And you know that from your meetings    22           of the W-3C, right?    23                    THE WITNESS:  I know that from the meetings of the     24           W-3C and I know that from the meetings of the people who keep    25           urging us to quickly get PICs out and get it into the net.                                                                           184     1                    JUDGE DALZELL:  So, that they can say to parents     2           like me, for example, who have small children, don't worry.       3                    THE WITNESS:  That's correct.     4                    JUDGE DALZELL:  Come on line with us, your kids     5           won't see what's in Mr. Coppolino's book.       6                    THE WITNESS:  We hope so.  I mean, AOL is there,     7           Prodigy is there.       8                    JUDGE SLOVITER:  We'll be forever now on this.     9                    THE WITNESS:  They're all there.    10                    JUDGE DALZELL:  Well, looking at Defendants' Exhibit    11           167 and the members of the W-3 Consortium, am I correct that    12           there is no Government member of that?  That is to say, no    13           United States Government member?    14                    THE WITNESS:  That's correct.  They have a lot of    15           input into the process, but there's not really -- they're not    16           really members.  And I have to tell you the reason.  The    17           reason is because we give everything away.  In our contracts    18           with our members talks about how we deal with the    19           intellectual property that we developed.  And the Government    20           doesn't know how to deal with the way we want to give stuff    21           away.  And when you have several members that want to be.  We    22           have several Government agencies, can we be a member.  I said    23           if you can sign the standard contract, you can be a member.     24           But they don't want to sign the standard contract, they want    25           to give us a bunch of FARs (ph), which those FARs countermand                                                                           185     1           the standard contract intellectual property clauses.     2                    JUDGE DALZELL:  FARs?     3                    THE WITNESS:  Federal Acquisition Regulations.     4                    JUDGE DALZELL:  Okay.  So, I am correct then and I     5           asked Mr. Bradner about this when he was here.  You now know     6           who Mr. Bradner is?     7                    THE WITNESS:  I know that he testified.     8                    JUDGE DALZELL:  Okay, good.  That in fact, the     9           Worldwide WEB is a creature completely divorced in its    10           creation from any government, isn't that right?    11                    THE WITNESS:  Almost true.  Almost true.  The fact    12           of the matter is Tim Burners Lee did it when he was a staff    13           member at Cerne (ph), which is a particle physics laboratory    14           in Geneva, which is funded by the European Governments.    15                    JUDGE DALZELL:  By the European governments?    16                    THE WITNESS:  European governments, that's correct.    17                    JUDGE DALZELL:  But Cerne is funded by it, but it's    18           not an agency of any government?    19                    THE WITNESS:  It's not an agency of a government.     20           In fact, there's a lot of United States participation in    21           Cerne activities.  One of our faculty members from M.I.T. is    22           a big player in the Cerne activity.      23                    JUDGE DALZELL:  All right, so --    24                    THE WITNESS:  And spends a lot of time there.    25                    JUDGE DALZELL:  So, in truth, it would not be fair                                                                           186     1           to say that with respect to the Worldwide Web  that     2           Government has "nurtured it".       3                    THE WITNESS:  I think --     4                    JUDGE DALZELL:  As in the sense of a mother     5           nurturing a child.     6                    THE WITNESS:  That is true of the Worldwide WEB.       7                    JUDGE DALZELL:  OKay.  Now, we have been told with     8           respect to IP address blocking, okay.  That address blocking     9           requires that the user's computer have stored on it's hard    10           disc a list of all IP addresses which should be blocked. And    11           then it goes on to say that the more you have on there, the    12           more space you're using on the disk.  Ergo, the user will    13           soon run out of disk space to block, true or false?    14                    THE WITNESS:  I don't know what was being said by IP    15           blocking.  Certainly PICs does not work that way.    16                    JUDGE DALZELL:  So, PICs would not use up all the    17           disk space?    18                    THE WITNESS:  It certainly wouldn't.    19                    JUDGE DALZELL:  Why not?    20                    THE WITNESS:  Because the label could come with the    21           document or it could be down loaded from a service.  It may    22           be stored on a disk.  I mean, we admit that that can happen,    23           but it's not necessary that happened that way.    24                    JUDGE DALZELL:  When do you estimate, as practical    25           matter, the market will adopt PICs in a ubiquitous way.                                                                           187     1                    THE WITNESS:  I think that when Microsoft announces     2           in June or they've already announced, but when they release     3           in June, they will release an Explorer III with PICs     4           compatible blocking software.  I think Netscape will be     5           shortly behind that.  And at that point, it's been adopted.     6                    JUDGE DALZELL:  All right.     7                    JUDGE SLOVITER:  I'd like to understand how it works     8           from the -- again -- or mae more specifically, when you say -     9           - when you say that the parent can say block all unrated    10           sites.  And then in the colloquy that took place, the    11           analysis was that all patently indecent sites would --    12           patently offensive and indecent sites would be blocked.  But    13           they would be blocked, would they not, along with everything    14           else. And is there any way -- I mean, I'm not sure how one    15           would pick out from the rating, sites that are patently    16           offensive.  Is that what you suggested?    17                    THE WITNESS:  No, I didn't suggest that.       18                    JUDGE SLOVITER:  I mean, is that what you were?    19                    THE WITNESS:  The question went to what happens if    20           you check block unrated sites?  What would happen then is you    21           would block sites that did not come with a label or did not    22           have a label to associate with him.  YOu would only allow    23           information into computers that had a label.      24                    JUDGE SLOVITER:  Okay, but all I'm suggesting is    25           there is no way in which that you know of or through PICS,m                                                                           188     1           in which you can identify marginal material?     2                    THE WITNESS:  Marginal material is always in the eye     3           of the beholder.  And it's the person who's doing the rating     4           that's going to decide what kind of a rating they're going to     5           place on that material.       6                    JUDGE SLOVITER:  All I'm saying is when you block     7           unrated material, you block it all?     8                    THE WITNESS:  That's correct.     9                    JUDGE SLOVITER:  That's what I wasn't clear on.    10                    THE WITNESS:  Block all material that's unrated.    11                    JUDGE SLOVITER:  That's right.  All unrated    12           material.  Whether it is for children or --    13                    THE WITNESS:  It could be pictures of ducks.      14                    JUDGE SLOVITER:  That's right.    15                    THE WITNESS:  You would be blocking them, too.      16                    JUDGE SLOVITER:  No, that was my point.  That's just    17           the point, there was in the colloquy some possible ambiguity    18           that what you would be blocking was only material that was    19           unrated that could be considered questionable?    20                    THE WITNESS:  Yeah.      21                    JUDGE SLOVITER:  And I gather that that's not what    22           you're testifying.    23                    THE WITNESS:  That's not what I'm testifying.    24                    JUDGE SLOVITER:  It's everything, no matter how    25           innocuous, would be unavailable to -- once that button or                                                                           189     1           once that tag was pushed.       2                    THE WITNESS:  That's correct.  However, if it were a     3           child and the child wanted to see that material, he could ask     4           his parent.     5                    JUDGE SLOVITER:  Oh, no.  I understand that.     6                    THE WITNESS:  Okay.     7                    JUDGE SLOVITER:  That's not the -- it was the     8           technicality of what was being asked.  Okay.  Does counsel     9           have anymore?    10                    MR. BARON:  Just a couple questions, your Honor?    11                    JUDGE SLOVITER:  Sure.    12                                RECROSS-EXAMINATION    13           BY MR. BARON:    14           Q   Mr. Vezza, Judge Dalzell referred to enormously powerful    15           market forces that are driving adoption of PICs.  If all the    16           browsers in the world support PICs, then self-labeling with    17           Pics would work, will it not?    18           A   That's a complicated question and requires a complex    19           answer if you'll allow me.  Self labeling, everybody labeling    20           their own way is going to be chaos and I think everybody will    21           recognize that. But self-labeling, according to some, a few,    22           half a dozen, dozen rating mechanisms will work.     23           Q   And just to be clear, you were talking about how there is    24           this drive towards adoption of PICS and PICs compatible    25           architecture.  That adoption of PICS compatible architecture,                                                                           190     1           in terms of the market place, is a different issue and poses     2           different problems than the actual rating of sites using PICs     3           compatible architecture, correct?     4           A   Repeat that?     5           Q   First there's the adoption of the architecture.      6           A   Right.     7           Q   But the question of rating sites on the Internet, on the     8           Worldwide WEB, that's a different issue?     9           A   That's a different issue and it's going on and it will --    10            the minute there are browsers out there, there will be lots    11           of folks that will be getting into the game.  And they're    12           different business models will cause sites to be rated.  Some    13           sites will be rated slowly by one business model, but more    14           carefully.  Other sites will be rated very rapidly, but    15           perhaps no as carefully.    16                    MR. BARON:  That's all I have.    17                    JUDGE SLOVITER:  This is a relatively unique and    18           novel experiment in information, isn't it?    19                    THE WITNESS:  Yes.    20                    JUDGE SLOVITER:  And with the exception of the movie    21           rating system which has --     22                    THE WITNESS:  It's a one rating system.    23                    JUDGE SLOVITER:  -- which doesn't do anything at all    24           like this because so simple in the sense to this.  There's    25           really nothing out there, is there, that you can use as an                                                                           191     1           analog.       2                    THE WITNESS:  That's correct.  In fact, we looked at     3           the moving rating system carefully and said, gee, it will not     4           capture the kinds of material that we'd like to have ratings     5           posted to.  It will not capture the essence of literature.      6           It will not capture the essence of art, it will not capture     7           the essence of education.  It just won't capture those things     8           and this is one of the reasons why we have come up with a     9           relatively sophisticated system.    10                    JUDGE SLOVITER:  But to work, isn't it so that there    11           has to be a commitment to continue this indefinitely because    12           there is material that will be coming on to the Internet and    13           Worldwide WEB indefinitely.    14                    THE WITNESS:  That's true, but we only have -- I    15           don't know any other way around it.    16                    JUDGE DALZELL:  And your point, I think, well, to me    17           or Judge Sloviter was in a lot of sites, this issue is simply    18           beside the point?    19                    THE WITNESS:  That's correct.    20                    JUDGE DALZELL:  If you're in the area of    21           microbiology, I mean, if you were to raise this subject, I    22           assume they'd look at you as though you're speaking Ordu or    23           Sanskrit?    24                    THE WITNESS:  Right, that's correct.    25                    JUDGE DALZELL:  It's totally irrelevant to them?                                                                           192     1                    THE WITNESS:  It's irrelevant.  I mean, you know,     2           you could -- I deal in microbiology.  I have, you know, 500     3           gigabytes of microbiology information here and you'll     4           probably get a label that says microbiology and everybody     5           will forget about it.     6                    JUDGE DALZELL:  And much of those 22 million sites     7           are of that nature?     8                    THE WITNESS:  Is that kind of information, that's     9           correct.  That's exactly -- that's exactly correct.  I mean,    10           I have tons of stuff at M.I.T. under my control that nobody    11           would care about.  I mean, it's just not -- it's not relevant    12           -- it's a rating and you just slap a label on it and it says    13           this is what this is and be done with it.      14                    JUDGE SLOVITER:  Well, really maybe all material    15           coming out of the science labs at the University of    16           Pennsylvania, for example?    17                    JUDGE DALZELL:  So, that would have a label that    18           would just be say academic.    19                    THE WITNESS:  Well, you have to be a little careful    20           about that.  You noticed there were some EDU sites.    21                    JUDGE DALZELL:  I sure did.    22                    THE WITNESS:  Okay, so I'm not going to -- I'm not    23           going to bite on that one that easily.     24                    JUDGE SLOVITER:  What you're saying is that for    25           practical purposes was the exception of possibilities that                                                                           193     1           specific material may begin to draw and get closer to the     2           line, that the -- well, you're, I guess answering my question     3           is, that the amount of material that needs the kind of     4           attention that would be required to be satisfactory is more     5           limited than all of the material on it, but nonetheless,     6           there would have to be some care.     7                    THE WITNESS:  There is some gradation that has to     8           take place in terms of that marginal material from -- not     9           marginal to marginal to patently offensive.    10                    JUDGE SLOVITER:  Okay, thank you.  Anymore?    11                    JUDGE DALZELL:  Anymore questions based on our    12           questions?    13                    JUDGE SLOVITER:  No, thank you.    14                    (Witness excused.)    15                    JUDGE SLOVITER:  Do you want to break now?    16                    JUDGE DALZELL:  Yes, it's a good time to take a    17           break.    18                    JUDGE SLOVITER:  All right, we will break now before    19           the next witness.  And I think counsel should be prepared to    20           stay late.  If those -- some of you have trains, I don't know    21           how long the next witness will be.  But if some of you -- oh,    22           do you want to talk to them?    23                    JUDGE DALZELL:  Yes, may I just see counsel briefly?    24                    (Court in recess at 3:05 o'clock p.m.) Back to Hearing Transcripts index Back to Citizens Internet Empowerment Coalition Page WT02-B05-92IA095-001027-B015-147http://www.cdt.org:80/ciec/transcripts/April_12_Olsen.html 205.177.10.31 19970215013113 text/html 114661HTTP/1.0 200 OKDate: Sat, 15 Feb 1997 01:29:43 GMTServer: Apache/1.1.1Content-type: text/html    Testimony of Daniel Olsen Testimony of Dr. Daniel Olsen, Brigham Young University April 12, 1996     25                    (The following occurred at 3:25 p.m.)                                                                           194     1                    DEPUTY CLERK HIGGINS:  Court is now in session.      2           Please be seated.     3                    JUDGE DALZELL:  Okay, does the Government have Dr.     4           Olsen for us?     5                    MR. BARON:  At this time, your Honors, we call Dr.     6           Dan Olsen, Jr. to the stand.     7                    JUDGE SLOVITER:  What's the timing?  Until what time     8           is he available till, quarter after 5:00?     9                    MR. BARON:  Yes.    10                    JUDGE SLOVITER:  Remember, it's Friday afternoon, so    11           you have to --    12                    MR. BARON:  He's taking a taxi to the airport and    13           6:30 is his plane.    14                    JUDGE DALZELL:  He'll be in good shape.    15                    JUDGE SLOVITER:  Well, you still have to be able to    16           get there, physically, taxi or not.    17                    DAN OLSEN, Sworn.    18                    DEPUTY CLERK HIGGINS:  Please be seated.  Please    19           state and spell your name.    20                    THE WITNESS:  Dan Olsen, O-L-S-E-N.    21                    MR. BARON:  At this time, your Honors, we offer Dr.    22           Olsen's declaration into evidence.    23                    JUDGE SLOVITER:  Is there any objection?    24                    MR. ENNIS:  Your Honors, there is an objection.  We    25           do not in general object to Dr. Olsen's qualifications, and                                                                           195     1           we understand the Court has been generous in receiving     2           testimony.  But based on his specific admissions during his     3           deposition, there are five discrete areas in which we do     4           contest his expertise, and I would appreciate an opportunity     5           for a brief voir dire limited to those deposition questions.     6                    JUDGE DALZELL:  Sure.     7                    MR. ENNIS:  First, your Honors, we contest the     8           expertise of Dr. Olsen regarding Surfwatch, Cyber Patrol, Net     9           Nanny and similar end-user blocking software.      10                               VOIR DIRE EXAMINATION    11           BY MR. ENNIS:    12           Q   Dr. Olsen, is it true that you have never installed or    13           run Surfwatch or Cyber Patrol or Net Nanny?    14           A   I did not use the specific applications.  My    15           understanding of what was done there was based on analysis of    16           the required algorithms.    17           Q   Is it basically fair to say that you have read their Web    18           pages?    19           A   I have read the Web pages and considered carefully what    20           the underlying algorithms necessary to accomplish the goals    21           are.    22           Q   And have you primarily read those Web pages and learned    23           what you've learned about them since you were retained by the    24           Department of Justice in this litigation?    25           A   With regard to specific products I have considered those                                                                           196     1           pages in the past but not extensively.  However, I have done     2           some work on exactly what the algorithms necessary to do that     3           would be.     4           Q   Have you read the Web pages since you were retained in     5           mid March of this year?     6           A   Yes.     7           Q   We also -- you've never conducted any independent studies     8           of Surfwatch, Cyber Patrol or Net Nanny, have you?     9           A   I have not.    10           Q   And not personally run them yourself?    11           A   I have not.    12                    MR. ENNIS:  The second area is parental control    13           technologies employed by America Online, Compuserve, Prodigy    14           and Microsoft Network, including whether the tagging system    15           Dr. Olsen proposes would work in those closed communities.    16           BY MR. ENNIS:    17           Q   Dr. Olsen, is it fair to say other than cursory notice of    18           AOL announcements recently, you have no knowledge of AOL's    19           parental technologies, and you have not subscribed to or used    20           Prodigy, Compuserve or Microsoft Network?    21           A   That is correct.    22           Q   Is it also fair to say that at least as of your    23           deposition Tuesday you did not know whether the tagging    24           system you propose in your declaration would work within AOL,    25           Compuserve, Prodigy or Microsoft Network within their closed                                                                           197     1           communities?     2           A   I do not know whether that tagging system would work.      3           However, I do understand some characteristics of what they do     4           that is relevant to my declaration.     5                    MR. ENNIS:  The third area in which we contest Dr.     6           Olsen's expertise is with respect to either direct or third     7           party verification of credit cards, including the technology     8           of verification, the costs of verification and the types of     9           transactions that would be verified.      10           BY MR. ENNIS:    11           Q   Again, Dr. Olsen, with respect to that subject matter, is    12           it fair to say that you have just simply read the Web pages    13           of MasterCard and Visa since being retained in this    14           litigation?    15           A   I would have no technical knowledge of what MasterCard    16           and Visa do.    17           Q   Is it fair that you've just read their Web pages?    18           A   That is correct.    19           Q   And since being retained --    20           A   That is correct.    21           Q   -- you've had no discussions with personnel at MasterCard    22           or Visa?    23           A   I have not.    24           Q   And I believe you just said you have no expertise in the    25           technology of credit card verification.                                                                           198     1           A   The technology of what MasterCard and Visa themselves do,     2           I have looked some at verification.     3           Q   You have no idea what they would charge to verify for     4           commercial transactions?     5           A   I cannot say what they would charge.     6           Q   And I take it you don't even know whether they would     7           verify for a noncommercial transaction, that is, for a     8           speaker who wanted to provide his speech for free?     9           A   I would have no useful knowledge.    10           Q   Now, with respect to third party verification systems, is    11           it also fair to say that you have only looked at the Web    12           pages of those third party verification systems since being    13           retained in this litigation?    14           A   Clarify what you mean by a third party verification    15           system.    16           Q   Other systems that will themselves go to MasterCard or    17           Visa and obtain verification of credit card information,    18           adult ID check systems --    19           A   Oh, adult ID as to what they -- I have read their Web    20           pages and I have studied some of their technical documents.    21           Q   And that's again since being retained in this litigation?    22           A   That is correct.    23           Q   Have you interviewed anyone at those third party    24           verification systems?    25           A   No.                                                                           199     1           Q   Have you interviewed any speakers who have used those     2           third party verification systems?     3           A   I have not.     4           Q   Have you ever used those systems yourself?     5           A   I have not.     6           Q   Do you have any idea how many people are registered with     7           those systems?     8           A   I do not.     9           Q   Could be one, could be 1,000, could be 500, you have no    10           idea?    11           A   I have no idea.    12           Q   Is it fair to say that you don't know how the "referral    13           technology" between a third party verification system and a    14           speaker would work, and you're foggy about how the third    15           party obtains verification; is that fair?    16           A   No.  Referral technology, please clarify that.    17           Q   Well, would you look, please, at pages 247 to 249 of your    18           deposition transcript which we took last Tuesday.  I'm using    19           the phrase you used there.    20                    Have you located those pages?    21           A   247?    22           Q   Right.  And you were asked the question, "Okay, what    23           happens when John comes to my site?      24                    "Answer:  Okay.  My understanding is that somehow,    25           and I would have to check the details, is that initially he                                                                           200     1           not having a password would be referred to adult check for     2           which he would pay whatever it was and then be referred back.      3           How that referral technology works, I can't say right now.      4           I'd have to look at the detail."     5                    And then you say further down, "Question:  Okay.      6           Now, how does that work?     7                    "Answer:  As I remember the technology there, IC     8           Verify provides -- I believe it is a PC-based system, but     9           they may have mentioned Unix (ph), I'm foggy there, whereby a    10           phone line is connected to your machine or multiple phone    11           lines, and then software makes the request.  A call gets made    12           to MasterCard, whoever they're connected to or the bank,    13           however they do that, and a charge gets processed."    14                    Do you recall that question and that answer?    15           A   Yes, I do.    16           Q   Does that -- since you used the phrase "referral    17           technology," what does it mean in that context?    18           A   Referral -- excuse me.  Referral technology as I    19           mentioned it there on page 248 has to do with when someone    20           arrives at a site that would like to be verified, say by    21           Adult Check or Validate, they are transferred back to the    22           Adult Check site.  They do that by means of code.  They have    23           the original people who want to be blocked, they have to put    24           that code into their HTML pages.  Now, the details of exactly    25           what the syntax is without again looking at the spec I could                                                                           201     1           not quote to you, but the substantive nature of exactly how     2           that mechanism works, I do understand that clearly.     3                    MR. ENNIS:  All right.  Now, the fourth area in     4           which we challenge Dr. Olsen's expertise is with respect to     5           PICs technology, or how cumbersome it would be to use PICs     6           technology.     7           BY MR. ENNIS:     8           Q   Dr. Olsen, is it fair to say that your knowledge of PICs     9           has been gained exclusively after being retained by the    10           Department of Justice in this litigation?    11           A   I have read the specifications since being retained by    12           the Department of Justice.  Most of my opinions on PICs have    13           to do with computer science technology in general.    14           Q   Again, you read the downloads from the Web pages?    15           A   Yes.    16           Q   Since being retained in this litigation?    17           A   That is true.    18           Q   Is it fair to say you have no idea and have no expertise    19           in how cumbersome PICs would be to use?    20           A   I have never seen PICs used.    21           Q   Is the answer to the question then yes?    22           A   In terms of experimental evidence, I have no idea what it    23           would take.    24           Q   Would you please look at page 133 of your deposition    25           transcript?                                                                           202     1           A   Number again, please?     2           Q   133.  And do you see the question, "Question:  How about     3           for PICs technology?     4                    "Answer:  For PICs technology, it is more cumbersome     5           than that.  How cumbersome, I would be unwilling to     6           characterize because I think that's beyond my expertise in     7           PICs other than that I read the materials and it is a more     8           cumbersome mechanism for rating."     9                    Do you see that question and answer?    10           A   Yes.    11           Q   Now, do you believe today you are qualified to testify as    12           an expert in how cumbersome it is to use PICs technology?    13           A   I would not characterize myself as being able to say how    14           individuals or how human beings would function in trying to    15           create such specifications.  I am perfectly comfortable with    16           identifying to you exactly what you would have to do in the    17           technology, and what has to be specified.    18                    MR. ENNIS:  A final area in which we challenge Dr.    19           Olsen's expertise, your Honors, is in the day-to-day    20           operations of libraries, including how libraries classify    21           materials and what libraries do.    22           BY MR. ENNIS:    23           Q   Dr. Olsen, you've had no experience running a library,    24           have you?    25           A   That is correct.                                                                           203     1           Q   And is it fair to say that you do not have knowledge of     2           the day-to-day operations of an existing library?     3           A   That is correct.     4           Q   And that you do not have knowledge of what librarians do     5           and how librarians classify materials?     6           A   That is correct.     7                    MR. ENNIS:  That concludes my voir dire, your     8           Honors.     9                    JUDGE SLOVITER:  We will note the plaintiffs'    10           reservations.  We will hear Dr. Olsen and the points will go    11           to the weight of his testimony.    12                    MR. ENNIS:  I appreciate the courtesy, your Honor.     13           Thank you.    14                                 CROSS-EXAMINATION    15           BY MR. ENNIS:    16           Q   Dr. Olsen, for simplicity and speed, I'm going to talk    17           first about a category of information which I'll call for    18           convenience tagging speech.  Your declaration reflects the    19           opinion that it is simple for a speaker or a content provider    20           to add a four-character string to the address or the title of    21           their speech; is that correct?    22           A   That is correct.    23           Q   And the purpose of adding that four-character string is    24           to communicate information about the content or nature of the    25           speech that is so tagged or labeled; is that correct?                                                                           204     1           A   It could be used for that, yes.     2           Q   The four-character string that you propose in your     3           declaration as an example is a dash followed by the capital     4           letter L followed by the numerals 18; is that correct?     5           A   That is correct.     6           Q   What information would that string of characters     7           communicate to listeners or speakers who knew nothing other     8           than those four characters?     9           A   That would communicate nothing.  It was not designed for    10           that purpose, to communicate with people.  It was designed to    11           communicate with software.    12           Q   And what would it communicate to software that knew    13           nothing other than those four characters?    14           A   If the software had not been configured to catch it, it    15           would mean absolutely nothing.    16           Q   Well, suppose it had been configured to catch it, what    17           would it mean to the software?    18           A   It would depend on what the software was programmed to    19           do.  If the software was programmed to ignore it, the program    20           would ignore it.    21                    JUDGE BUCKWALTER:  Dr. Olsen, could you stay back a    22           little bit?  I'm losing some of your answers because of your    23           puffing into the microphone.  Thank you.    24           BY MR. ENNIS:    25           Q   What do you mean the phrase dash capital L --                                                                           205     1                    JUDGE BUCKWALTER:  What was that -- I'm sorry, I did     2           miss the answer to his last question, if the software --     3                    MR. ENNIS:  I'm sorry, your Honor.     4                    THE WITNESS:  The question, I believe, was if I put     5           a -L18 and some software catches it, he said what would that     6           mean to the software.  My answer was it would mean whatever     7           that software was programmed to mean.     8                    If, for example, we were talking about a Web browser     9           and that Web browser was programmed to look for -L18 and this    10           is a minor flag was turned on in the browser, then it would    11           refuse to ask for that information.  It's merely a code.    12           BY MR. ENNIS:    13           Q   That's assuming the browser would understand -L18 to mean    14           not appropriate for people under 18; is that what you're    15           saying?    16           A   All I used, I approached this from a technical point of    17           view that said could I identify material that's not    18           appropriate for people under 18.  It was my understanding the    19           Act was concerned with that.  And I suggested one mechanism    20           by which that could be encoded.    21           Q   But the four characters, -L18, could as easily mean okay    22           for people under 18.    23           A   Absolutely.  It depends on the convention --    24           Q   It's a convention.    25           A   Absolutely.                                                                           206     1           Q   Does the letter L there mean legal?     2           A   It means less than.     3           Q   It means less than.  Why is it capitalized?     4           A   I just felt like it.  I needed an example.     5           Q   Does the -L --     6                    JUDGE DALZELL:  So it wouldn't look like a one.     7                    THE WITNESS:  That is actually true.     8           BY MR. ENNIS:     9           Q   Does the -L18 string mean inappropriate for persons under    10           18 for any reason whatsoever?    11           A   When I approached this problem, I approached it in    12           response to Mr. Bradner's testimony, which was that it was    13           not possible to tag.  My understanding of the law was that it    14           was important to identify what was not appropriate for under    15           18-year-olds.  I fabricated a tag that could possibly    16           represent that.  That could be programmed to be anything,    17           that's not important.    18           Q   So it could mean inappropriate because of violent    19           content?    20           A   I made no judgment about why you would want to say not    21           for less than L18.    22           Q   Pardon me?    23           A   I made no judgment as to why you would want to say less    24           than -- not less than --    25           Q   So there's nothing in those characters which would                                                                           207     1           indicate to a speaker who might use them that it means     2           inappropriate because of sexually oriented content?     3           A   It would not.  You would need something like PICs to give     4           more detail.     5           Q   All right.  In other words, it would be necessary that     6           there develop a common understanding of what -L18 means and a     7           consensus among speakers worldwide and among listeners     8           worldwide of what -L18 means.     9           A   You would need a consensus between speakers and the    10           software that was being used by listeners, yes, you would.    11           Q   Now how long do you think it would take -- well, first,    12           is it fair to say you've created this -L18 concept in the    13           last two weeks?    14           A   Yes.    15           Q   How long -- and you haven't submitted it to any Internet    16           standards community?    17           A   I have not.  I created it purely as an example of what    18           was possible.    19           Q   Do you know of any comparable convention, for example,    20           Kidcode (ph) has ever been submitted to any Internet    21           standards community organization?    22           A   Yes.  Mr. Vezza just testified that PICs had been.    23           Q   Do you know what Kidcode is?    24           A   No, I don't, I'm sorry.    25           Q   Now, how long do you think it would take for the                                                                           208     1           consensus you acknowledge would have to spring up to develop     2           around the use of the four character -L18 string?     3           A   We're focusing carefully on L18.  Mr. Vezza has just     4           testified that there are market forces that would make such     5           things available very quickly.  He testified under PICs.      6           PICs is comparable to what I wanted to do.     7           Q   Well, the reason I'm asking that question is we're     8           talking about compliance with an Act that's in effect.     9           A   Mm-hmm.    10           Q   And your proposal is to use -L18.  How long do you think    11           would it take to emerge the consensus that worldwide speakers    12           would know what that means and begin to use it?    13           A   It would depend on the people who are producing Web    14           browser software, other client software.  To the extent that    15           they adopted it, it could move rapidly.  To the extent they    16           didn't, it may move much more slowly.    17           Q   In other words, it's uncertain.    18           A   Absolutely.    19           Q   Do you agree that technologically and conceptually there    20           is no difference between using the string -L18 or using the    21           string XXX, triple X?    22           A   The only difference would be, and I purposely selected    23           L18 for this, and that is that currently in most of the    24           Internet commerce I'm acquainted with, L18 does not appear.     25           XXX does have some societal meaning, but other than that                                                                           209     1           technologically there is no difference.     2           Q   Technologically and conceptually.     3           A   No.     4           Q   And I take it technologically and conceptually there     5           would be no difference between using as the string the     6           letters SEX?     7           A   There would be a problem with SEX.  The problem that     8           would occur there is when you select a word that has a common     9           English meaning, you start to interfere with the normal use    10           of that word in its normal meaning.  So, for example, if you    11           were screening on the word SEX, you would screen out things    12           from some organization that was discussing why one should not    13           have sex.    14           Q   I understand that --    15           A   So -- when you incur -- when you bring in a word that has    16           a common everyday meaning, then you start to get fuzzy about    17           what you are and are not screening for.    18           Q   Unless the common, everyday meaning is pretty clear like    19           X-rated, triple X?    20           A   Yes.    21           Q   Well, let's stick with triple X for now.    22           A   Yeah, that one works because it's sort of a code in our    23           society that's been established by makers of various kinds of    24           movies.    25           Q   Do you agree that the, as you described it, simple act of                                                                           210     1           adding a three or four-character string to an address or     2           title of your speech which says XXX or which says -L18 would     3           not by itself insure that minors would not have access to     4           that speech?     5           A   Without filtering software on the receiving end, no, it     6           would not be sufficient.     7           Q   In fact, isn't it fair to say that in order for the     8           speaker to have assurance that the speaker's speech is not     9           displayed in a manner that would be available to a minor,    10           it's not enough that the speaker tag the speaker's speech     11           -L18 or something comparable if all they did was tag and    12           there was no other cooperative technology, that wouldn't be    13           enough, correct?    14           A   That depends on what kind of assurance you want.  If you    15           want the kind of assurance that's necessary in a monetary    16           transaction where you're actually exchanging something of    17           significant value, that would not be enough.  If you want    18           something less than that, which is to prevent a large number    19           of minors from accessing a piece of material, and as Mr.    20           Vezza testified, you would have almost all the browsers    21           looking for PICs or some other labeling.    22           Q   I'm not talking about if you have the browsers looking.     23           As of now I'm just talking about the simple act of tagging,    24           self rating my own speech, labeling it XXX or -L18, if that    25           by itself will not insure that my speech so tagged would not                                                                           211     1           be available to minors; correct?     2           A   And my testimony is it depends to the extent to which     3           browsers catch it.  If there are no browsers catching it, you     4           have nothing.  If most of the browsers in the world catch it,     5           you can have a high degree of assurance.     6           Q   Well, that's talking about what browsers might do, and we     7           are going to get to that.  Just take this in logical order.      8           The mere act of tagging or labeling or self rating speech by     9           itself is not sufficient to insure that minors will not have    10           access to that speech.  Correct?    11           A   That is true.    12           Q   So if I self rate my speech triple X, that by itself is    13           not going to insure that minors do not have access to it.    14           A   I will agree with you on that with the caveat that    15           communication does not occur without both a speaker and a    16           listener.  And to have ignored the listener is to have    17           ignored something important.    18           Q   All right.  Now, as you just started to indicate in your    19           answer, the tagging is not enough, you're going to have to    20           have some capacity to block the speech once it's been tagged,    21           to filter or block it; is that correct?    22           A   That is correct.    23           Q   And in order to do that, you're going to need to have    24           software that's capable of recognizing the tag and then if    25           it's set that way to block speech with that particular tag,                                                                           212     1           correct?     2           A   That is correct.     3           Q   And that software could be used not to block but to find     4           an access speech that's so tagged, correct?     5           A   That is also correct.     6           Q   All right.  The blocking software could be either at the     7           speaker's end of the communicative chain or somewhere down     8           the communication pipeline; is that correct?     9           A   That is correct.    10           Q   Now, for convenience and simplicity here, I'm going to    11           try to break this down.  I'm going to speak first about    12           speaker blocking and ask you questions about that, and then I    13           will ask some questions about user or client blocking,    14           blocking at the user or client end.  Is that convention    15           understood?    16           A   Yes.    17           Q   The main point we have here is we're not trying to block    18           all speech that's tagged -L18 or triple X or whatever,    19           correct?  We want that speech to be available to adults --    20           A   Yes, that is correct.    21           Q   -- but not available to minors.    22           A   That is correct.    23           Q   So it's not just a simple matter of having a software    24           program that automatically blocks all speech with that label.    25           A   That would not be appropriate.                                                                           213     1           Q   So in addition to the software, we are going to need to     2           have some means of verifying the ages of the listeners who     3           are requesting access to that speech; correct?     4           A   If we are to verify that it doesn't go to a minor, yes,     5           we will need that.     6           Q   Yes.  And that will mean that with respect to blocking at     7           the speaker end, the speaker would have to have some way of     8           verifying the age of the people attempting to access that     9           speech; correct?    10           A   That is correct.    11           Q   And if we're blocking at the client or user end, there    12           would have to be some way at that end to verify the age of    13           the person attempting to access the speech.    14           A   That is correct.    15           Q   All right.  Now, first let's talk about user end    16           blocking.  With respect to user or client blocking, do you    17           agree that if the speaker is relying on the client's software    18           to do the blocking, existing client's software and present    19           technology is insufficient to provide assurance to speakers    20           that the client software is able to block and is actually    21           blocking?    22           A   One more time, please?    23           Q   Do you agree that insofar as the speaker is relying on    24           user blocking software, that existing technology and present    25           technology is insufficient to provide any assurance to the                                                                           214     1           speaker that the client's software is actually able to block     2           and is actually blocking?     3           A   With current technology the only assurance you might have     4           would be a statistical one in the sense that if I understood     5           X percent were blocking, then I would have an assurance that     6           some X percent was not getting through.     7           Q   Well, in particular, if you were to speak today, there is     8           no client browser software that would verify to you, the     9           speaker, that that client browser software was filtering,    10           correct?    11           A   That is correct.    12           Q   There's no such browser on the shelf purchasable today.    13           A   Does not exist.    14           Q   So if you as the speaker tag your speech -L18 or triple X    15           and then you were relying on blocking at the user end to make    16           sure minors didn't access the speech you had so tagged,    17           there's no technology today that could give you assurance    18           that your speech would not be available to minors.    19           A   Again I'd qualify that with assurance.  For example, if    20           you did tag it with XXX, it's already been testified that    21           Surfwatch, for example, is watching for XXX.  To the extent    22           that Surfwatch is deployed, you have that amount of assurance    23           that it's not getting through, but no more than that.    24           Q   Well, let's be clear here.  You could have some assurance    25           that anybody who is using Surfwatch should get blocked.  But                                                                           215     1           what I'm asking is you could have no assurance as the speaker     2           that the particular home that's getting that speech and using     3           Surfwatch or any other -- any browser is actually running     4           that program and is actually blocking.     5           A   That is true.  There is no technology that will give you     6           a handshake that says yes, indeed, I am doing this service     7           for you.  Your only assurance is statistical.     8           Q   Let's turn for a moment to blocking at the speaker end.      9           At the speaker end, if the speaker is going to do the    10           blocking, the speaker is going to have to have software or    11           have a contract with a company that has software that can do    12           the blocking at the speaker end; correct?    13           A   That is correct.    14           Q   Is it fair to say that not all speakers have that    15           software today?    16           A   Whether or not they have it, I couldn't say.  Whether or    17           not they could obtain it readily off the shelf, there is    18           software that one could obtain that could assist in doing    19           that.  Whether or no all speakers right now have access to    20           that on their site, I don't know what they have installed on    21           their site.    22           Q   Would most of the software you're talking about involve    23           use of a CGI script?    24           A   Yes, that would be one way of doing it.    25           Q   Do you have any knowledge whether the Web pages that are                                                                           216     1           made available by America Online, Compuserve, Prodigy,     2           Microsoft, to speakers who contract with them for those Web     3           pages have the capacity to provide CGI script technology?     4           A   It is my understanding that they do not currently allow     5           that for reasons of security.     6           Q   Now, we've talked a little about the software, but we     7           began by indicating the software is not enough either.  You     8           have to have a separate age verification system in order to     9           screen minors from adults.  Now, again for simplicity, let's    10           try and break it down and I'll ask you first what could    11           speakers directly do themselves if they were going to be    12           doing the blocking and they were going to be doing the age    13           verification to determine who's adults and who's minors.     14           First about what speakers could do directly themselves, and    15           then I'll ask you what speakers could do through third party    16           age verification systems.  Okay?    17           A   We're assuming the speaker has control over the Web    18           server?  The software is actually providing the service on    19           the Web?    20           Q   Yes.    21           A   Okay.    22           Q   And now the speaker has to determine age.    23           A   Exactly.    24           Q   Are there two basic ways of determining age?  One is    25           through some sort of an ID, adult ID, or adult access code,                                                                           217     1           and the other is through credit card verification, is that     2           fair?     3           A   Those are the ones that I'm aware of.     4           Q   Let's talk first about the use by the speaker of an adult     5           ID or access code system.  If a speaker wanted to make his or     6           her speech available to the entire adult world, is it fair to     7           say that there is no existing ID or access code listing of     8           which people in the world are adults and which are not?     9           A   There is no on line listing that I know of that would    10           identify all of the adults in the world.    11           Q   Is there any off line listing you're aware of?    12           A   Not that I'm aware of.    13           Q   Now, putting aside for the moment adult --    14           A   Excuse me.    15           Q   Sure.    16           A   I'm sorry.  The only possibility I could think of is    17           possibly the Social Security Administration.    18           Q   Okay.  That's not -- that information is not available to    19           common speakers, correct?    20           A   Yeah, but it is there, and I'm sure they know how old we    21           are.  (Laughter.)    22           Q   But what we're talking about here is speakers who are    23           trying to comply with the Communications Decency Act and to    24           verify age.  There's no such listing available to those    25           speakers.                                                                           218     1           A   No.     2           Q   Now, putting aside for the moment the use of credit cards     3           as a proxy for adulthood, we're really now trying to find out     4           actual adulthood, is there any system of which you're aware,     5           any adult ID registration system, any adult access code     6           system that a speaker could use to determine whether the     7           listeners attempting to access that speaker's speech are     8           adults or not?     9           A   Existing today I know of no adult code mechanism.  That    10           does not mean one could be readily built, and one of the    11           things we've seen about the Internet is technology develops    12           very quickly when there is a need.  But I do not know of one    13           that exists at this moment.    14           Q   And if one sprang up, would it take some sort of an    15           authority to have control over that?    16           A   It would depend to what extent you wanted to insure    17           adulthood.  There are various ways that it could spring up    18           whereby libraries or other public institutions could verify    19           adulthood and then all share them in a central database.     20           That is possible.  Whether they would not, I could not say.    21           Q   Would you look, please, at page 224 and 225 and 226 of    22           your deposition?    23           A   Okay.    24           Q   Do you recall being asked the following question.  "How    25           do you envision those would work?                                                                           219     1                    "Answer:  I guess part of the question is, it would     2           depend on who issued them.  Some authority is going to have     3           to issue them.  I don't know who that might be."       4                    Do you see that?     5           A   Yes.     6           Q   And then further down you say "Not necessarily a     7           Governmental authority," do you see that?     8           A   What line, excuse me?     9           Q   Line 20.    10           A   20, okay.    11           Q   And then line 11 on page 225, "Yeah, I don't know of one.     12           If that becomes a necessary part of adult access on the    13           Internet, I would immediately postulate the market would    14           create such authorities quite quickly."  That's what you just    15           testified to, correct?    16           A   Exactly.    17           Q   And then you go on to page 226 to say, line 7 -- line 8.     18           "As far as some other way of obtaining the code, I know of no    19           such service."  Correct?    20           A   That is correct, other than the possibility of Verisign    21           (ph) and I could not testify as to the details of what    22           they're proposing.    23           Q   Okay.  Now, do you agree that there is nothing in current    24           technology that would enable a speaker to go to a news group,    25           a chat room, a list serve, and get back an adult access code                                                                           220     1           for everyone who was listening?     2           A   I do not know of any such technology.     3           Q   So again there's no way a speaker today could get     4           assurance through technology that only adults were in the     5           news group, chat room or list serve to which that adult     6           wished to speak?     7           A   If you want a positive verification, I know of no way.      8           It would only have to be statistical as I mentioned before.     9           Q   All right.  Now, in addition to the adult ID system,    10           which there's none in place today, another possible way for    11           the speaker to verify age is through the proxy of a credit    12           card, correct?    13           A   Yes.  I would be reluctant to say there is no other    14           possible way.  That is the only other one I know of.    15           Q   Now, you've already testified that you don't personally    16           know what it would cost you as a speaker to verify credit    17           cards, and you haven't checked that cost with credit card    18           companies.    19           A   I have not.    20           Q   And suppose you wanted to make your speech available for    21           free.  Do you know whether credit card companies would verify    22           those noncommercial transactions at all?    23           A   I have no knowledge.  I would suspect they would not.    24           Q   Let's turn to speaker verification of age through third    25           party systems.  This time the speaker is not doing it                                                                           221     1           directly.  Your declaration suggests that there are springing     2           up some third party systems that might do age verification --     3           A   Such as Adult Check or Validate.     4           Q   Adult Check or Validate.  And again, what you know about     5           those is what you learned from their Web pages recently?     6           A   Yes.  I read their technical specs.     7           Q   I assume there's no -- you're not aware of any adult ID     8           list or adult access code that's available to those third     9           party verification systems that's not directly available to    10           you as the speaker; correct?    11           A   From my reading of it what they're doing is they're    12           building their own databases.    13           Q   Based largely on the use of credit cards?    14           A   Yes.    15           Q   And again, since you didn't profess to know about this,    16           you don't know what those third party verification systems    17           would do with credit card information in order to verify it.    18           A   No.  I have no idea what they actually do with --    19           Q   All right.  Well, let's move on then.  I'd like to shift    20           ground now and talk about another subject for a while, PICs,    21           PICs technology.  You would agree, would you not, that PICs,    22           a browser with PICs technology, could be set to reject all    23           unflagged speech?    24           A   Yes.                                                                           222     1                    JUDGE BUCKWALTER:  All what?     2                    MR. ENNIS:  All untagged or unflagged speech.  All     3           speech that did not carry a label that was a PICs compatible     4           label.     5                    JUDGE BUCKWALTER:  Yes, I understand.  I didn't     6           hear, I'm sorry.     7           BY MR. ENNIS:     8           Q   Correct?     9           A   That is correct.    10           Q   Or you would agree, would you not, that if a parent    11           wanted to, a parent could set a PICs browser to prevent that    12           parent's children from accessing any speech at all unless A,    13           the speech was PICs flagged, and B, the speech was PICs rated    14           as appropriate for minors by a third party rating service the    15           parent trusts.  Correct?    16           A   With a minor caveat which I hope isn't a quibble, and    17           that is that there are no PICs browsers right now.    18           Q   Well, I understand.    19           A   But assuming there was, setting that aside, yes, a parent    20           could do that.  A parent could set such a browser and one can    21           easily be built to exclude everything except what was rated    22           appropriately.    23           Q   By a third party rater that the parent trusted.    24           A   That is correct.  It --    25           Q   The parent doesn't have to trust --                                                                           223     1           A   May I finish?     2           Q   Sure, I'm sorry.     3           A   The net result of that would be to create a kid's ghetto     4           which is, you would lock them out of most of the Internet,     5           but you could do that.     6           Q   Well, it might be a kid's ghetto or it might not,     7           depending on how many third parties had rated how many sites     8           as appropriate for children, correct?     9           A   That is correct.  Part of my declaration is is that that    10           would be a problem.    11           Q   All right.  But a parent for example could say, I'm going    12           to set my PICs browser so that when I'm home, I'll have    13           access to the whole Internet, myself.  But when I'm not home,    14           I'm going to set it so my child will not have access to    15           anything on the Internet unless it's A, PICs flagged, and B,    16           rated in a PICs-compatible way as appropriate for my child by    17           the Boy Scouts of America, the Christian Coalition, any third    18           party rating service the parent trusts.    19           A   That is correct.    20           Q   And the parent doesn't have to trust the rating attached    21           to the speech by the speaker.  The parent may have no idea    22           whether Joe Jones, the speaker who says this material is    23           appropriate for kids, is rating accurately or not, right?    24           A   It is true that by going through a third party they don't    25           have to trust the speaker, they can trust the third party if                                                                           224     1           they desire.     2           Q   All right.  Now, if a parent has set their PICs browser     3           in that way, to block all access by their children to     4           material from the Internet unless it's appropriately rated by     5           a third party the parent trusts, in that circumstance then     6           isn't it fair to say that the children would be protected     7           from any inappropriate material regardless of whether     8           speakers flagged their speech or not, and regardless of how     9           they tagged their speech.  Correct?    10           A   It is true they would be protected from inappropriate    11           material.  They would also be protected from most of the Web.    12           Q   From any part of the Web that hadn't been rated, approved    13           by a third party rating system.    14           A   Which is most of the Web.    15           Q   But the point here, the critical point I believe we agree    16           upon, is that if a parent is concerned enough to deprive    17           their child of access to the whole Web, to set their PICs    18           browser in that way, then at that point there is no need for    19           Government or anyone else t compel the speaker to label their    20           speech at all.    21           A   If parents want to deprive their children of most of the    22           Web, they could do that.  That is true.    23           Q   Of course a parent doesn't have to set PICs technology    24           that way.  A parent could set PICs technology to allow    25           everything to come to their child unless that material had                                                                           225     1           been rated as inappropriate for children by a third party     2           rating service the parent trusts, correct?     3           A   That is true.  They could also do that if the speakers     4           had accepted the responsibility and they could trust unrated     5           speech, then they'd have all the Web.     6           Q   Well now, your proposal, unlike PICs, relies exclusively     7           on trusting the speaker to label properly, responsibly, is     8           that fair?     9           A   So does the PICs self-tagging scheme.    10           Q   Yes, but --    11           A   I would not want to characterize that as my proposal or    12           PICs.  There are -- a primary feature of the PICs system is    13           self rating, and I am entirely in favor of that and    14           supportive of that.    15           Q   All right.  The PICs also strong features and encourages    16           third party rating, correct?    17           A   Right.    18           Q   And your proposal doesn't rely on third party rating    19           systems at all.    20           A   No.  My declaration specifically points out problems with    21           third party systems.    22           Q   Well, let me talk about some of the problems about    23           relying exclusively on the speaker to rate.  How is a parent    24           to know whether potentially 40 million speakers who have    25           rated their speech around the world have acted responsibly?                                                                           226     1           A   The same way I know whether or not my bank's     2           advertisement is true, because there are laws that say they     3           cannot lie.     4           Q   Ah.  Well, speaking of laws, does your proposal make any     5           assumptions about whether foreign speakers would responsibly     6           label their speech -L18 or whatever convention is adopted?     7           A   In doing my analysis of the problem I did not consider     8           foreign speech because I was not aware that Congress could     9           legislate foreign speech.    10           Q   So with respect to any speech that for any reason is not    11           labeled appropriately in the -L18 code or whatever other    12           convention comes up, under your proposal that speech would    13           reach the home?    14           A   That is true.    15           Q   All speech that's foreign posted where people don't care    16           about United States laws, that would reach the United States    17           also --    18           A   Unless some other measure was taken, that is true.    19           Q   We seem to have shifted ground here.  We're now talking a    20           little more about your particular -L18 proposal, so let's    21           stay there as long as that's where we're at.    22           A   Okay.    23           Q   Again, a difference between your proposal and PICs is    24           that PICs can be imbedded in the client browser or in the    25           actual computer operating system, correct?                                                                           227     1           A   You're talking about client side blocking?     2           Q   Yes.     3           A   It wouldn't really matter whether you imbedded in the --     4           in terms of -L18 or in terms of PICs, they are the same in     5           that regard.  You can imbed them in the operating system, you     6           can embed them in the browser.  There are technical     7           preferences as to why you go one or the other, but it doesn't     8           really matter.     9           Q   Your proposal envisions that the software for recognizing    10           the -L18 tag and blocking it would be imbedded in the    11           browser, correct?    12           A   That is one place.  You could also imbed it exactly the    13           place Surfwatch embeds its keyword checking.    14           Q   But your primary proposal, your recommendation is that it    15           be in the browser?    16           A   My position, my technical position is I don't care.  It's    17           irrelevant.    18           Q   Well, doesn't your declaration say that if it's imbedded    19           in the operating system, that can complicate the operating    20           system, and that is not a good idea?    21           A   It might.  It might.  But that's a technical decision.     22           It could work.  It would not be a problem.    23           Q   Oh, I thought your declaration said that it would be a    24           problem.    25           A   If I had to make an implementation choice, that's                                                                           228     1           probably where I wouldn't put it.  But it would work.     2           Q   You'd put it in the browser.     3           A   It would work in the operating system.  It doesn't     4           matter.     5           Q   All right.  Insofar as your proposal is imbedded in the     6           browser, isn't it fair to say that even if a parent went to     7           the trouble to buy a browser some point down the line in the     8           future that has the software to read your -L18 code and has     9           that installed, turns it on, that a minor in that home could    10           easily go out onto the Internet and for free download a quite    11           different browser that's not configured to recognize and    12           block -L18, correct?    13           A   They could do that.  They could download one that did not    14           recognize PICs.  They could download one that didn't do any    15           of that.  Yes, enterprising children could do that.    16           Q   And if a child were to use that way of getting around    17           your proposal, then --    18           A   And the PICs proposal.    19           Q   Well, not if the PICs proposal is embedded in the    20           operating system.    21           A   Well, then embed mine in the operating system, too.  It    22           doesn't --    23           Q   Well, all I'm trying to get at is you quibble with PICs    24           about whether it should be in the operating system.    25           A   Well, let me state that for the purposes of this law,                                                                           229     1           quibbling about in the operating system or in the browser is     2           irrelevant.  Both technologies can go both places.  It     3           doesn't matter.  And another set of enterprising teenagers     4           could un-install it from the operating system.     5           Q   Have you ever tried to do that?     6           A   To un-install stuff?     7           Q   No, to un-install Surfwatch or Cyber Patrol or --     8           A   No.     9           Q   -- Net Nanny from an operating system?    10           A   No, I haven't.  However, you could reinstall the    11           operating system and it would effectively take it away.  And    12           I know a large number of teenagers that can do that.    13                    JUDGE DALZELL:  That can't or can?    14                    THE WITNESS:  Can.    15                    JUDGE BUCKWALTER:  Can.    16                    JUDGE SLOVITER:  Have you seen them?  I mean have    17           you observed that?  Is that from your own --    18                    THE WITNESS:  I would not characterize them as a    19           majority.  In fact, I would characterize them as a relatively    20           small majority, but almost every high school has four or five    21           kids who really love their computers, and yeah, they could do    22           that.    23                    JUDGE SLOVITER:  Have you seen -- speaking of your    24           own knowledge, have you seen them do that?    25                    THE WITNESS:  To see them specifically install an                                                                           230     1           operating system?     2                    JUDGE SLOVITER:  Or take one out, yeah.     3                    THE WITNESS:  Yes.  It's a common problem we have     4           actually in our labs at BYU.  When they don't like the     5           operating system we put in there, they take it out and put     6           their own in.  It causes no end of grief.     7                    JUDGE SLOVITER:  But are they kids or are they over     8           18?     9                    THE WITNESS:  These are freshmen just out of high    10           school, some of them --    11                    JUDGE SLOVITER:  But they're over 18?    12                    THE WITNESS:  It depends.    13                    JUDGE BUCKWALTER:  Maybe.    14                    THE WITNESS:  I guess I would characterize to you --    15           I would characterize to you that their knowledge is not    16           significantly higher when they enter our program than they    17           had in high school in that regard.  For some kinds of    18           machines it actually is relatively easy.    19           BY MR. ENNIS:    20           Q   Dr. Olsen, you testified that you haven't done this    21           yourself.  Are you aware that some of the end user software    22           that is on the market today is specifically designed so that    23           if a child attempts to do exactly what you just said they    24           could do, that the whole system shuts down?    25           A   If they attempt to disable it?                                                                           231     1           Q   Yes.     2           A   To the extent that they directly try to disable it, yeah,     3           I believe that's probably the way it works, but that's not     4           the only way to get at the problem.  You can reinstall the     5           operating system.     6           Q   You agree, do you not, that a significant number of the     7           host servers that are connected to the Internet are located     8           outside of the United States, possibly 40 percent?     9           A   I couldn't characterize the percentage, but it's a    10           nontrivial number.  It's a very significant percentage, yes.    11           Q   And growing?    12           A   And growing.    13           Q   Let me turn to a group of miscellaneous questions for a    14           moment.  They don't fall neatly under any category.  Would    15           you agree that because of the ways that news groups propagate    16           through other news groups, that even a speaker who posted to    17           a tagged news group, to a news group that was tagged in its    18           heading -L18 or XXX, would have no assurance that his or her    19           speech would not be available to minors?    20           A   Same problem we discussed before.    21           Q   So your answer is yes.    22           A   Your only assurance is to the extent that filtering    23           browsers have been deployed.    24           Q   And in order to be safe, a speaker who wanted to post a    25           message to such a news group would have to either establish                                                                           232     1           their own news server, buy, own and operate their own news     2           server, or independently verify that everyone -- and     3           independently verify that everyone accessing it is an adult,     4           that's one way, correct?     5           A   Characterize safe for me, please?     6           Q   In order to be safe, a person who wanted to post to a     7           news group --     8           A   No, the issue is, are we talking about safe in that safe     9           from prosecution under the CDA?    10           Q   They wanted to comply with the Communications Decency    11           Act, and they wanted to post a message which they think it's    12           appropriate to post, certainly to adults, but might be    13           considered indecent for minors.    14                    MR. BARON:  Objection.  Calls for a legal    15           conclusion.    16                    JUDGE SLOVITER:  Let's go back to the -- by this    17           point I've lost the question.    18                    JUDGE BUCKWALTER:  Well, I would permit it though,    19           wouldn't you?    20                    JUDGE SLOVITER:  Yeah, is --    21                    JUDGE DALZELL:  Is the question intelligible to you?    22                    THE WITNESS:  The issue I'm talking about is the    23           issue of safe.    24                    JUDGE BUCKWALTER:  Right, yes.    25                    THE WITNESS:  And if you wanted, without drawing a                                                                           233     1           legal conclusion --     2                    JUDGE DALZELL:  No, a layperson's, a layperson's --     3                    JUDGE SLOVITER:  Let's let him answer when it's     4           rephrased so we can all understand it.     5                    THE WITNESS:  No, it's -- if I can clarify it, it     6           will be fine.       7                    MR. ENNIS:  Let me rephrase the question without the     8           word safe in it.     9                    THE WITNESS:  I think I can clarify it, if it's    10           fine.    11                    JUDGE SLOVITER:  Well, why don't you let him ask his    12           question and then you can answer --    13                    THE WITNESS:  Well, the issue is --    14                    JUDGE SLOVITER:  No, no, let him ask his question,    15           okay?    16                    THE WITNESS:  Oh, I'm sorry.    17           BY MR. ENNIS:    18           Q   Suppose I'm a speaker and I want to post a message to a    19           news group, and I want to be sure that my particular message    20           is not going to be available to anyone under 18 who has    21           access to that news group.  I can't do that.  I can't be sure    22           that people in existing news groups are under 18, correct?    23           A   If the assurance is zero minors will receive this, no.    24           Q   Now, one thing I could do is I could buy, own and operate    25           my own news group, correct?                                                                           234     1           A   That is one way.     2           Q   But then I would have to independently verify the age of     3           everyone who had access to it.     4           A   And that would give you absolute assurance, yes.     5           Q   Right.  Another way I could do it is by posting a     6           reference in the news group to my speech, but posting the     7           speech somewhere else, for example, on a Web site that I own     8           and control where I also independently verify age.     9           A   That is true.    10           Q   Short of that though there is no way I can just speak to    11           a news group and have assurance that my speech will not be    12           available to minors.    13           A   Again, the issue of assurance.  If you're talking about    14           absolute perfection, no.  If you're talking about some    15           reasonable statistical view that 90 percent of the minors    16           cannot receive my speech, then there are other possibilities.     17           But if you're talking about a contractual monetary assurance,    18           no.    19           Q   Well, let me ask it this way.  Is it fair to say that as    20           of today with respect to all or the vast majority of news    21           groups in the country, a speaker posting a patently offensive    22           message to a news group has no way of insuring that that    23           message will not be available to persons under 18?    24           A   Under the assumption that browsers are not filtering,    25           that is true.                                                                           235     1           Q   Are you aware of the Internet Yellow Pages and other     2           directories?     3           A   I'm aware of a number of such things, yes.     4           Q   Are you aware of any of those directories that at the     5           present time list speech according to what's appropriate for     6           people under 18 and speech which is only appropriate for     7           people over 18?     8           A   I have not seen such a category, no.     9           Q   Now, speaking not as a legal matter, I'm not asking for a    10           legal conclusion under the Communications Decency Act, but if    11           you were a speaker and you thought about posting a centerfold    12           from Playboy Magazine, would you personally think that that    13           image might be indecent or patently offensive for persons    14           under 18?    15           A   You're asking me for a conclusion about the decency of a    16           particular piece of --    17           Q   No, I'm asking for your personal opinion, would you    18           personally think that that image might be indecent or    19           patently offensive for persons under 18?    20           A   So you're asking me for a conclusion as to patently    21           offensive?    22           Q   You personally.    23                    MR. BARON:  Objection.  It's beyond the scope.    24                    JUDGE SLOVITER:  What?  Excuse me?    25                    MR. BARON:  It's beyond the scope of his direct                                                                           236     1           examination.     2                    JUDGE SLOVITER:  Okay.  A lot of the witnesses have     3           been so asked, you know, from both sides, but go ahead.  It     4           is beyond the --     5                    JUDGE DALZELL:  But so what?     6                    MR. BARON:  We're presenting Dr. Olsen as a     7           technical expert.     8                    JUDGE BUCKWALTER:  We understand, but --     9                    MR. BARON:  Not as a speech witness.    10                    JUDGE BUCKWALTER:  We'll let him answer that    11           question.    12                    JUDGE SLOVITER:  We're going to let him answer it.    13                    THE WITNESS:  Okay.  If we consider the local    14           community which consists of Dan, Dan would be offended.    15           BY MR. ENNIS:    16           Q   And how about the seven dirty words?    17           A   Dan would be offended.    18                    JUDGE BUCKWALTER:  Who's Dan?    19                    JUDGE SLOVITER:  Who's Dan?    20                    THE WITNESS:  That's me, I'm sorry.  That's me.     21           (Laughter.)    22                    JUDGE DALZELL:  Oh, he's the community.  He is an    23           expert on what would offend him.    24                    THE WITNESS:  That's a relatively small community,    25           but it's the one I know best.  (Laughter.)                                                                           237     1                    MR. ENNIS:  May I take one moment, please?     2                    JUDGE SLOVITER:  Yes.       3                    (Pause in proceedings.)     4                    JUDGE SLOVITER:  I should have waited for you to ask     5           him.     6                    JUDGE BUCKWALTER:  I thought it was an acronym.      7           (Laughter.)     8                    JUDGE DALZELL:  I can't imagine why you would think     9           that.    10                    MR. ENNIS:  Your Honors, we have attempted to divide    11           cross-examination between us, and I know Mr. Hansen has some    12           questions in areas that I have lightly touched upon but    13           didn't explore in depth, so I think I have no further    14           questions at this time.    15                    MR. HANSEN:  Good afternoon, your Honors.  My name    16           is Christopher Hansen, one of the lawyers representing the    17           ACLU plaintiffs.  Mr. Ennis is modest.  He asked most the    18           questions I wanted to ask, so I have relatively few to ask    19           the witness.  I'd like --    20                    JUDGE SLOVITER:  The witness won't cry about that.    21                                 CROSS-EXAMINATION    22           BY MR. HANSEN:    23           Q   Dr. Olsen, I'd like to bring this from the abstract down    24           to the concrete.  I'd like you to assume a hypothetical    25           situation for me, if you would.  I'd like you to assume first                                                                           238     1           that I am a nonprofit organization, noncommercial     2           organization, that I run a Web site, that I would like to get     3           the information on my Web site to the maximum number of     4           people I possibly can, and I currently offer the information     5           for free to everybody, and that this Act has gone into effect     6           as of 6:00 p.m. this evening and I don't want to go to jail.      7           I don't want to even risk going to jail.       8                    I'd like to now talk about what it is I might have     9           to do in order to make sure that the Government doesn't start    10           investigating me at 6:15 this evening.  Now, first what I    11           have to do is I have to tag my speech under your proposal,    12           correct?    13                    MR. BARON:  Objection.  I just want to clarify that    14           this is a hypothetical, that as the Court is well aware the    15           CDA is not being enforced pending the decision of this Court    16           and --    17                    JUDGE DALZELL:  That hasn't eluded our attention.     18           (Laughter.)    19                    MR. BARON:  Thank you, your Honor.    20           BY MR. HANSEN:    21           Q   The first thing I would have to do is tag my speech under    22           your proposal, correct?    23           A   Correct.    24           Q   Now, I want you to assume that the name of my Web site is    25           the Electronic Frontier Foundation, and I want you to assume                                                                           239     1           I have 14,000 separate files in my Web site, some of which     2           might be at risk under this statute and some of which might     3           not.  The first thing I'm going to have to do is go to each     4           of the 14,000 files and decide whether to tag each one     5           indecent or not indecent, correct?     6           A   Whether or not you would actually have to look at all of     7           them is actually problematic.  I assume that you've     8           categorized them in some way and you could recognize quickly     9           that there are large categories you don't need to look at.     10           But I will grant you that there is some labor involved in    11           doing the tagging.  I would not characterize that that label    12           means you looked at every one of those 14,000 pages.    13           Q   14,000 files.  A file can be a lot more than one page,    14           correct?    15           A   Yes.  For clarity, when I refer to a page it means a    16           file, and I will use them interchangeably.  I'm sorry.    17           Q   Now, I want you to assume that some of my files are in    18           fact multiple pages and within that file some of the material    19           is clearly decent by anybody's standard, and some is    20           potentially indecent under somebody's standard.  Then I have    21           to not only go to my 14,000 files, but I have to go below my    22           14,000 files and decide what parts of those files to tag and    23           what parts not to tag, correct?    24           A   Not necessarily.  It depends on how much of a compelling    25           interest you have in making sure that all of those actually                                                                           240     1           go to children.  You could, if you wanted, and assuming     2           tagging browsers were deployed, you could immediately tag     3           your entire site as being inappropriate for minors and then     4           over time work you way down exposing pieces as you felt it     5           was important to get them out to minors.     6                    JUDGE SLOVITER:  Excuse me.  Suppose it's a large     7           museum and they have -- I mean I don't know if that's within     8           the scope of what you're asking, Mr. Hansen.     9                    MR. HANSEN:  It is, your Honor.    10                    JUDGE SLOVITER:  Suppose it was a large museum, a    11           really big one with a lot of different pieces in the museum    12           from different cultures all over.  Does that make it --    13           that's the only way I can sort of try to think about this.    14                    THE WITNESS:  Right.  The issue here --    15                    JUDGE SLOVITER:  And I didn't mean to stop you in    16           your --    17                    THE WITNESS:  No.  Please forgive me for trying to    18           characterize what the counsel is driving at.  There is an    19           issue of what it would take to get started, in other words,    20           this transition period when the Act goes into effect.  And    21           then there is the issue of what would I have to do on an    22           ongoing basis over time.  So if I have a large electronic    23           museum, of which at this point there are relatively few,    24           electronic museums.    25                    JUDGE SLOVITER:  All right, but it could be another                                                                           241     1           kind of museum.  It could be a museum of paintings which one     2           might --     3                    THE WITNESS:  Your Honor, the reason I characterize     4           a difference is because if you had a large museum of     5           paintings which was not in electronic form and you wanted to     6           put them on the Web, there is a process by which you would     7           have to go through to put them on the Web.  So as you put     8           them on, I presume you would tag them.  And you already are     9           going through a process of paging through each one of them,    10           so you only incurred a small additional cost of evaluating    11           them.  That's different than I already have a huge electronic    12           library and I have to go back and sort it all out.    13                    JUDGE DALZELL:  Which you would agree is a big task,    14           or potentially a big task?    15                    THE WITNESS:  Yeah.  If you didn't have a    16           characterization that would help you narrow that down, it    17           could be a big task.  Many libraries have characterizations    18           that can help them, but I couldn't, as Mr. Ennis has pointed    19           out --    20                    JUDGE DALZELL:  You mention that in your    21           declaration, the Library of Congress system.    22                    THE WITNESS:  There are ways to use classifications    23           to get closer.  Whether they would work in all cases I    24           couldn't say.    25                    JUDGE SLOVITER:  Well, I'm sorry, I interrupted you,                                                                           242     1           but I was trying to make it concrete for me, not necessarily     2           for him.     3           BY MR. HANSEN:     4           Q   And if I'm trying to avoid going to jail by 6:15, you     5           suggest one of my options is I tag my whole site -L18, thus     6           preventing minors from getting access even to those portions     7           of my site that I know are perfectly acceptable to minors.      8           That's one of the short-term solutions I have; is that right?     9           A   If you were going to do it by 6:15 tonight, I cannot    10           conceive of another solution.  There's not time to do    11           anything.    12                    JUDGE DALZELL:  Except label the whole thing -L18.    13                    JUDGE BUCKWALTER:  That's what he said, yeah.    14                    THE WITNESS:  Exactly, exactly, yes.    15           BY MR. HANSEN:    16           Q   Well, you proposed one other alternative in your    17           deposition which is I could shut my entire site down for a    18           month or two and reconfigure the whole thing, correct?    19           A   Yes.  However, as we've talked about, just labeling the    20           entire site would be a little less Draconian and is easily    21           possible.    22           Q   But would prevent all minors from accessing all of my    23           material, even that which is unquestionably decent?    24           A   That is true.    25           Q   Now, there are some kinds of files that you can't tag                                                                           243     1           because tagging would destroy the file itself; correct?     2           A   No, that is not correct.     3           Q   So you disagree with Mr. Bradner's position on that?     4           A   Mr. Bradner -- I do not disagree directly with Mr.     5           Bradner's position.  Having read through what Mr. Bradner     6           said, Mr. Bradner said you could not change the contents of     7           those files because it would destroy the format.  In that     8           regard Mr. Bradner is correct.     9                    However, the proposal which I put in which was in    10           direct response to Mr. Bradner's declaration was that you    11           could change the name and that would not damage the file.  I    12           specifically, in designing the -L18 counterproposal, if you    13           will, I specifically looked at that because there are things    14           that you can't change the contents, but by changing the name    15           you have tagged.    16           Q   Well, I'd like you to look at your deposition, if you    17           would, at page 256.  I'm sorry, it's 255.  My Xerox is    18           unclear.    19           A   Which line?    20           Q   12.  The question you were asked was, "I understood Mr.    21           Bradner to suggest there were some files you couldn't embed a    22           tag in, that you would simply destroy the integrity of the    23           file, is that accurate?"    24                    And your answer was "Yes."    25                    "Question:  And what kinds of files are those?                                                                           244     1                    "Answer:  A GIF, G-I-F, image."     2                    Was that your testimony?     3           A   Yes, except the proposal that is stated in the     4           declaration does not change the file.  It changes the name.     5           Q   And if the -- okay, I understand.     6           A   So I did not directly contradict Mr. Bradner in that     7           regard.  He is absolutely accurate.  You can't go in the file     8           and mess with some of them.     9                    JUDGE DALZELL:  And a GIF again is what?    10                    THE WITNESS:  It stands for graphical interchange    11           format.  The example would be the same if it was JPEG (ph)    12           which is another graphics format, MPEG (ph) which is a movie    13           format.  Mr. Bradner testified about some data files that he    14           had.  It would probably not be appropriate to damage the    15           data.  That's why I specifically went for the -L18 proposal,    16           because you could change the name without actually having to    17           modify the data and damage the integrity of what he's doing.    18           BY MR. HANSEN:    19           Q   But the only way that would work is if you tagged the    20           entire file with the same tag.  And so if it were one of    21           those files we were talking about before, part of which was    22           unquestionably decent and part of which was questionable,    23           you'd still have to tag the whole thing indecent for your    24           proposal to work, correct?    25           A   No.  If we take for example --                                                                           245     1           Q   Correct?     2           A   Well, let me -- I'll get there.     3           Q   All right.     4           A   If you take the GIF image, for example, that is true.      5           You would have a hard time unless you did something to break     6           the image apart to put the tags in because there is no     7           mechanism for embedding.  If it was HTML, you could embed a     8           tag inside as Mr. Vezza has already testified.     9           Q   Now, I want you to assume hypothetically that the name of    10           my Web site is CDT, Center for Democracy and Technology, and    11           that I add on to my Web site the equivalent of hundreds of    12           typed pages of material a week.  Every time I did that from    13           now until eternity under your proposal I would have to read    14           all of those -- and assume I'm not the author of all of those    15           pages.  Under your proposal every time I did that I would    16           have to read it and decide whether to tag it or no and decide    17           whether to tag subparts of it or not; is that correct?    18           A   If there's going to be a label associated with it,    19           somebody will have to read it.  It will either be you or a    20           label bureau or a parent, but somebody will have to make the    21           judgment.    22           Q   But under your proposal it's me that has to make the    23           judgment, right?    24           A   That is correct.  Assuming you are the speaker.    25           Q   And you said at your deposition that if I want to make                                                                           246     1           the right kind of judgment under the law, I might well have     2           to hire and consult a lawyer in making these judgments,     3           correct?     4           A   Or you could be conservative about it and just classify     5           it for adults.     6           Q   Now, even -- I want you to next assume that my Web site     7           is called Critical Path AIDS Project, and on my Web site I     8           have hundreds of links to other sites.  Under your proposal,     9           how does that work?    10           A   Okay.  If you were using -L18, the links to the other    11           sites, there were actually several things we talked about in    12           the deposition.  One was that the other site is friendly with    13           you, and they are going to tag their stuff in some regular    14           way in which case a small program could be written that would    15           go through and fix your links in the same regular way.    16           Q   So I'd have to get on the phone or get on E-mail with all    17           of these hundreds of other sites and we'd all have to talk    18           and figure out a joint way of working this all out.    19           A   I recommend a news group.  It's the way things are done    20           on the Internet.    21           Q   Is there an alternate way in which I could do the -- and    22           if one of the other sites didn't tag themselves -L18, would I    23           then have to block access to that site, get rid of --    24           A   Block access to the site?    25           Q   Get rid of my link to that site?                                                                           247     1           A   I wouldn't think so, unless your link itself was     2           explicitly sexual or some other reference.  It doesn't seem     3           to me that holding the name of something which might be     4           explicitly offensive is not the same as having something     5           explicitly offensive.     6           Q   Well, in order to have a link from my site to somebody     7           else's, I have to take certain actions, correct?     8           A   You have to have the URL, yes.     9           Q   And I have to type that URL into my site and I have to    10           make a conscious decision to make that link.    11           A   That is true.    12           Q   So if I'm responsible for making it easy for minors to    13           use the link that I have created to get access to that    14           material, I'd better know what's on that link site as well as    15           what's on my own site, hadn't I?    16           A   Not necessarily.    17           Q   Why not?    18           A   All you've done is say there is something over there.     19           You haven't said anything -- you haven't revealed or exposed    20           or in any way communicated any explicit material.  I don't    21           see how -- what you're saying is you're saying that I would    22           incur liability by -- I would incur responsibility for    23           Playboy's content by having mentioned Playboy to someone.     24           That doesn't seem to be reasonable.    25           Q   Have I made Playboy more available if on my Web site I                                                                           248     1           have created an explicit link to Playboy?     2           A   You've made Playboy more available if you told anybody     3           about Playboy.  It is the same thing.     4           Q   Now, if all of the hundreds of sites that I have links to     5           also adopt the -L18 convention, I'm going to have to change     6           all the URLs on all my links to reflect that they've changed     7           all their addresses, correct?     8           A   And if there is some cooperative mechanism, that can be     9           done automatically.  Also I should point out that -L18 is not    10           necessarily the only way that you could have done the    11           labeling.  You could have done it with PICs and then you have    12           not changed the names and you have not broken the links.    13           Q   Right.  But we're the ones proposing PICs.  You're the    14           one that's proposing -L18.    15           A   No, no, no.  I'm the one that's proposing labeling on the    16           part of the content provider.  I only proposed -L18 as an    17           example of how it could be done because Mr. Bradner said it    18           couldn't be.    19           Q   Well, and you said that PICs and your proposal were    20           comparable.  But PICs does not require me as the speaker to    21           self label, does it?    22           A   But it allows it.    23           Q   That's right, but your proposal requires me as the    24           speaker to self label, correct?    25           A   That is true.                                                                           249     1           Q   Now, even if I've done all this tagging, either of my     2           files or my subfiles or my links, the next -- that still     3           hasn't prevented me from being vulnerable under this law,     4           correct?     5           A   Your only assurance at that point, as we discussed with     6           Mr. Ennis, is to the extent to which browsers are available     7           and are catching it.  As Mr. Vezza just testified, very soon     8           we will have browsers that will catch the PICs labels, and     9           you have some assurance.    10           Q   Well, I'm talking about 6:15 this afternoon.    11           A   6:15 this afternoon --    12           Q   If I put your -L18 in all the places I need to on my site    13           and done nothing else, I'm still pretty vulnerable, aren't I?    14           A   In the world of software, compliance with anything by    15           6:15 this afternoon, you are vulnerable.  I don't care what    16           it is you're trying to accomplish.    17           Q   All right.  Now, I want you to assume that my Web site    18           receives 50,000 unique visitors every day.  How do I screen    19           each of those 50,000 people to determine whether they're    20           above 18 or below 18?    21           A   Same techniques we discussed with Mr. Ennis.    22           Q   There are two of them as I understand you to say with Mr.    23           Ennis.  One is I could do credit card verification.    24           A   That's true.    25           Q   And my hypothetical is I'm a nonprofit, noncommercial                                                                           250     1           site and I'm not selling anything.  You don't know whether     2           this proposal will work for me, right?     3           A   Well, it depends on how you define "will it work for me."     4           Q   You don't know whether the credit card companies will     5           verify credit cards for me if I ask them to without attaching     6           a commercial transaction to it, correct?     7           A   I do not know -- I guess the easiest way to say this is I     8           do not know nor do I particularly believe that for free they     9           would do the validation you want.    10           Q   So if I want to comply relatively quickly with this    11           statute, I'm probably going to have to -- one of my options    12           is I'm going to have to talk to the credit card companies and    13           see if they'll let me pay them for each of my 50,000 visitors    14           to verify the credit cards.  And we don't even know whether    15           they'll say yes or not, but at least that's one possible    16           approach I have, correct?    17           A   That is.    18           Q   And I don't know whether today that approach is going to    19           work or not, right?    20           A   Well, wait a minute.  I mean all -- we would have to    21           process some transaction.      22           Q   Okay.    23           A   Whether or not -- I would be enormously surprised if    24           MasterCard says no, we will not let you charge something on    25           our service.                                                                           251     1           Q   Now, the alternate approach that you propose is this     2           adult ID system, correct?     3           A   Mm-hmm.     4           Q   And you propose in your declaration three or four     5           companies that exist now that will do this, correct?     6           A   Yes.     7           Q   One example is Adult Check, correct?     8           A   That is correct.     9           Q   And I believe as you told Mr. Ennis, what you know about    10           Adult Check is that you looked at their Web site.    11           A   I looked at their Web site and I also studied their    12           specification of how they claim that their stuff works.    13           Q   Did you make any effort to determine whether the people    14           behind Adult Check are reputable or not?    15           A   No.    16           Q   So you don't know if I go to Adult Check and put my    17           credit card number in there, you don't know whether they sell    18           it to other people or not?    19           A   I have no idea what they do.    20           Q   You don't know if they sell it to people who -- let me    21           ask this.  Did you look at what sites currently use Adult    22           Check?    23           A   No.    24           Q   Would it be fair to say that the sites that currently use    25           services like Adult Check are essentially pornography sites                                                                           252     1           of the kind in the Coppolino book?  (Laughter.)     2                    MR. BARON:  Objection.  Calls for speculation.     3                    JUDGE SLOVITER:  Is it -- I'm sorry.  Is the     4           objection to the characterization of the book?  (Laughter.)     5                    MR. BARON:  No.  To this witness' knowledge.     6                    JUDGE SLOVITER:  You're objecting that it's beyond     7           the scope of the witness' knowledge?  I'm sorry, I just don't     8           understand the objection.     9                    JUDGE DALZELL:  I didn't hear it.    10                    MR. BARON:  The objection is -- well, the question    11           was whether he knows something in detail about pornography on    12           these sites.    13                    JUDGE SLOVITER:  No, no.  But you've put this    14           witness forward --    15                    MR. BARON:  That's correct.    16                    JUDGE SLOVITER:  -- and they've objected to his    17           knowledge about this general field, part of the field, and    18           we've let him on, and they're trying to show in part that his    19           experience is limited at best on some of this because this is    20           something the witness has proposed as a possibility.  It    21           seems to me that he ought to be able to continue to question    22           him on a very significant point.    23                    MR. BARON:  I think there's a difference between a    24           mechanism, your Honor, and substance, but that's fine.    25                    JUDGE SLOVITER:  Okay.  We'll continue.                                                                           253     1                    JUDGE DALZELL:  That makes it all clear, doesn't it?     2           BY MR. HANSEN:     3           Q   Do you still remember the question?     4           A   The answer, Mr. Hansen, is that when I believe either     5           Adult Check or Validate had a long list advertising who it     6           was that had already signed up with them and which providers     7           were going through them, I did not look at that list at all,     8           I didn't care.  I was only interested in how does this     9           technology work.  So I really could not characterize what    10           kind of sites they were, who they were, I have no idea.  I    11           only looked at the technology.    12           Q   I want you to assume hypothetically that if we booted the    13           computer back up right now and got the Adult Check Web site    14           on the screen and looked at the list that every single Web    15           site currently listed under Adult Check would be what you and    16           I would fairly characterize as triple X or true pornography    17           sites.    18           A   That would not surprise me, but I have no knowledge.    19           Q   Okay.  So under your proposal if I'm this hypothetical    20           Electronic Frontier Foundation or Critical Path AIDS Project,    21           I have to send all of the 50,000 people who come to my site a    22           day to those people and ask them to list themselves on that    23           site, on Adult Check site, which we just established largely    24           as a place where people list themselves who want to get    25           access to pornography --                                                                           254     1                    JUDGE SLOVITER:  We haven't established, we've     2           assumed.     3                    THE WITNESS:  No, we didn't -- we did not establish.     4                    JUDGE DALZELL:  We'll assume.     5                    THE WITNESS:  Yes.     6                    MR. HANSEN:  You're correct, you're correct.       7           BY MR. HANSEN:     8           Q   I have to send all of my potential readers off to this     9           list that hypothetically includes only sites that are    10           pornography sites, correct?    11           A   I guess your question is would I have to send these    12           people off to them, and the answer is -- before I answer the    13           question, I would like to complain slightly about the 6:15    14           characterization.  The reason I complain about that is    15           because what it does is it precludes a number of other    16           actions you might take.  If we postulated a one-month    17           characterization, for example, then it is possible that the    18           ACLU and the Electronic Frontier Foundation and any number of    19           others could say we really don't want to be associated with    20           Adult Check, and you could have established an equivalent    21           service of your own that would not have all these people on    22           it and then you would not have to have guilt by association.     23           When you characterize 6:15, obviously you could not take any    24           of those measures because they will take time to accomplish,    25           but they are possible.                                                                           255     1           Q   Well, Dr. Olsen, my colleagues have helped me out while     2           you were doing that answer, and they have showed me Exhibit 6     3           to Mr. Schmidt's declaration, which I'd like to show you.     4                    (Off the record.)     5           BY MR. HANSEN:     6           Q   Would you agree with me that most of those sites appear     7           to be pornography sites?     8           A   I don't know what's there, but I wouldn't go there.     9                    JUDGE DALZELL:  Well, chick of the day could be    10           poultry.    11                    JUDGE SLOVITER:  Oh, you really are in for ducks and    12           poultry.  (Laughter.)    13                    JUDGE DALZELL:  It's a leitmotif.    14           BY MR. HANSEN:    15           Q   Nor would you want to be associated with that list, would    16           you?    17           A   No, I wouldn't.    18           Q   In addition to that, if I were to send all of my    19           potential listeners to Adult Check, my listeners would have    20           to pay money to Adult Check in order to get an adult ID from    21           Adult Check, correct?    22           A   That is my understanding.    23           Q   And if I have to comply with this law quickly, that's my    24           only option at this point, isn't it?    25           A   If you were assuming compliance within 6:15, yes.  If                                                                           256     1           you're assuming compliance within a month or two, you could     2           with your community of friends create an equivalent site     3           where you would not have to have bad neighbors.     4           Q   And it might well cost me a significant amount of money     5           to set up an equivalent site, mightn't it?     6           A   I couldn't judge how much money it would cost you to do     7           that.     8           Q   Now, the one area that Mr. Ennis did not cover is E-mail.      9           I want you to assume with me that again I'm head of the    10           Critical Path AIDS Project, and I get dozens of E-mail    11           requests for information about safer sex practices a day,    12           which at the moment I respond to without knowing the identity    13           of the person who is seeking the information.  Can I continue    14           to do that under your system?    15           A   Well, you would have to clarify something for me under    16           the CDA, since I'm -- my understanding of the CDA says did    17           you knowingly communicate with a minor.  If there's nothing    18           in the E-mail that you replied to to indicate they were a    19           minor, I don't think you've knowingly communicated with a    20           minor.  Aside from that minor quibble which would be a legal    21           decision, there is the issue of do you know if it's a minor,    22           and the answer is no, you don't.    23           Q   So to be 100 percent sure, I'd have to stop answering the    24           questions from people who came to me by E-mail, correct?    25           A   Unless the interpretation of the law that's been                                                                           257     1           characterized to me is that by not knowing you could reply in     2           a one-on-one situation.     3                    MR. HANSEN:  Okay.  I have no more questions, your     4           Honors.     5                    JUDGE SLOVITER:  Are there any other plaintiffs'     6           cross-examination?     7                    JUDGE DALZELL:  I think Mr. Baron --     8                    JUDGE SLOVITER:  No, I know, but they may have some     9           more.  Okay.  Any redirect?    10                    MR. BARON:  Your Honor, may I suggest that if we    11           take just a very short break so that I may confer with my    12           colleagues concerning redirect --    13                    JUDGE SLOVITER:  Sure.  We might have some questions    14           though.    15                    MR. BARON:  And this witness has indicated a problem    16           with his -- a time.    17                    JUDGE SLOVITER:  I know.    18                    MR. BARON:  Can I get some sense from the Court,    19           because I might go through a time period where Dr. Olsen may    20           need to leave and beyond?    21                    JUDGE SLOVITER:  I'm sorry.  Do you think that your    22           -- when does he have to leave, quarter after 5:00?    23                    JUDGE DALZELL:  Quarter after 5:00.    24                    JUDGE SLOVITER:  And you think that -- and I don't    25           want to cut you off, this is your case, and you're entitled                                                                           258     1           to ask it.  And if it means your witness has to come back,     2           your witness has to come back, because, you know, the     3           Government doesn't have that many witnesses and I think we     4           ought to hear you.  How long do you think you'll be today --     5                    MR. BARON:  Well, I could start, your Honor.     6                    THE COURT:  You don't believe you'll finish?     7                    MR. BARON:  I don't believe I'd finish by 5:15.     8                    JUDGE SLOVITER:  That's what I wanted to know, by     9           quarter after 5:00.    10                    MR. BARON:  That's correct.    11                    MR. ENNIS:  Your Honors, may I respectfully request    12           that we press on as much as possible, because the witness may    13           say something on redirect Monday morning if we don't finish    14           to which we need to have a rebuttal witness we don't know    15           about as of now.  So the more we can get done now, the more    16           likely it is --    17                    JUDGE SLOVITER:  All right.  Well, of course we're    18           not cutting him.  He wants five minutes or a few minutes to    19           talk to --    20                    JUDGE DALZELL:  Sure.    21                    JUDGE SLOVITER:  Sure, and his answer is yes.  Do    22           you want us to leave or do you want us to ask questions or    23           (laughter) -- what will you like?  We'll do whatever you    24           like.    25                    MR. BARON:  Just call another recess for another                                                                           259     1           five or ten minutes.     2                    JUDGE DALZELL:  Five minute recess.  All right.     3                    (Recess taken at this time.)     4                    JUDGE DALZELL:  Please be seated.     5                    Mr. Baron, how would you like to proceed?  Because     6           if you would prefer, because it is 5:00 o'clock and I'm sure     7           everyone's rather tired, and Mr. Ennis, it seems to me that     8           the redirect has to be within the scope of cross, so     9           therefore Mr. Baron's not going to open up a subject that    10           hasn't already been opened, because you've finished your    11           cross-examination.  I simply don't see any need to subject    12           the witness to the rigors of Friday afternoon traffic to the    13           airport when he's going all the way back to Utah, but what is    14           the Government's preference here?    15                    MR. BARON:  Well, Dr. Olsen will be available though    16           5:15 or so today, but he will also be available on Monday,    17           and we would be willing to start --    18                    JUDGE DALZELL:  Well, what would you like to do,    19           would you like to start asking questions?    20                    MR. BARON:  Starting early on Monday would be fine    21           with us.    22                    JUDGE DALZELL:  All right, well, let's do that.  I    23           think that's practical.  And I don't think the plaintiffs are    24           prejudiced at all because your redirect is limited to the    25           subject of cross.                                                                           260     1                    MR. BARON:  Thank you, your Honor.     2                    JUDGE SLOVITER:  We haven't been that strict --     3                    JUDGE DALZELL:  True, true.     4                    JUDGE SLOVITER:  We haven't been that strict, but we     5           find it unlikely that you're going to know a lot different     6           later if he goes on and questions for another 15 minutes.     7                    JUDGE DALZELL:  And, Counsel, I want to see you in     8           15 minutes anyway to conference back there as we've been     9           doing anyway.  All right?    10                    Thank you all very much.  Have a good weekend and a    11           good flight.    12                    JUDGE SLOVITER:  Thank you.  Yes.  And we'll see you    13           Monday morning.    14                    THE WITNESS:  I'll be here.    15                    (Proceedings concluded.) Back to Hearing Transcripts index Back to Citizens Internet Empowerment Coalition Page WT02-B05-93IA095-001027-B015-166http://www.cdt.org:80/ciec/transcripts/April_12_index.html 205.177.10.31 19970215013120 text/html 1472HTTP/1.0 200 OKDate: Sat, 15 Feb 1997 01:30:05 GMTServer: Apache/1.1.1Content-type: text/html Index of Testimony - 12 April 96 Index of Testimony - April 12, 1996                                                                            261     1                                       INDEX     2           WITNESSES                     D     C     RD     RC     3           Howard A. Schmidt     4             By Declaration              8     5             By Ms. Heins                      61           126     6             By Mr. Coppolino                       108,135     7             By Ms. Kappler                                  131     8           Albert Vezza     9             By Declaration             144    10             By Mr. Baron                     145             189    11             By Mr. Morris                            176    12           Dan Olsen    13             By Declaration              194    14             Voir Dire by Mr. Ennis      195    15             By Mr. Ennis                      203    16             By Mr. Hansen                     237    17                                       - - -                    Back to Hearing Transcripts index Back to Citizens Internet Empowerment Coalition page WT02-B05-94IA095-001027-B015-211http://www.cdt.org:80/ciec/transcripts/April_1_Burrington.html 205.177.10.31 19970215013148 text/html 163943HTTP/1.0 200 OKDate: Sat, 15 Feb 1997 01:30:25 GMTServer: Apache/1.1.1Content-type: text/html    Testimony of William Burrington Testimony of William Burrington, assistant general counsel of America Online April 1, 1996                               IN THE UNITED STATES DISTRICT COURT                            FOR THE EASTERN DISTRICT OF PENNSYLVANIA                                             - - -                 AMERICAN CIVIL LIBERTIES      :  CIVIL ACTION NO. 96-963-M                 UNION, et al                  :                                   Plaintiffs  :                                               :                             v.                :  Philadelphia, Pennsylvania                                               :  April 1, 1996                 JANET RENO, in her official   :  9:25 o'clock a.m.                 capacity as ATTORNEY GENERAL  :                 OF THE UNITED STATES,         :                                   Defendant   :                 . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .                                               :                 AMERICAN LIBRARY ASSOCIATION, :  CIVIL ACTION NO. 96-1458                 INC., et al                   :                                  Plaintiffs     :                          v.                   :  Philadelphia, Pennsylvania                                               :  April 1, 1996                 U.S. DEPARTMENT OF JUSTICE,   :  9:25 o'clock a.m.                 et al,                        :                                                   Defendants     :                 . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .                                        HEARING BEFORE:                               THE HONORABLE DOLORES K. SLOVITER,                          CHIEF JUDGE, UNITED STATES COURT OF APPEALS                                     FOR THE THIRD CIRCUIT                               THE HONORABLE RONALD L. BUCKWALTER                                 THE HONORABLE STEWART DALZELL                                  UNITED STATES DISTRICT JUDGES                                             - - -                 APPEARANCES:                 For the Plaintiffs:  CHRISTOPHER A. HANSEN, ESQUIRE                                      MARJORIE HEINS, ESQUIRE                                      ANN BEESON, ESQUIRE                                      American Civil Liberties Union                                      132 West 43rd Street                                      New York, NY  10036                                             -and-                                      STEFAN PRESSER, ESQUIRE                                      American Civil Liberties Union                                      123 S. 9th Street, Suite 701                                      Philadelphia, PA  19107                                                                             2                 APPEARANCES:  (Continued)                 For the ALA          BRUCE J. ENNIS, JR., ESQUIRE                 Plaintiffs:          ANN M. KAPPLER, ESQUIRE                                      JOHN B. MORRIS, JR., ESQUIRE                                      Jenner and Block                                      601 13th Street, N.W.                                      Washington, DC  20005                 For the Defendant:   ANTHONY J. COPPOLINO, ESQUIRE                                      PATRICIA RUSSOTTO, ESQUIRE                                      JASON R. BARON, ESQUIRE                                      THEODORE C. HIRT                                      Department of Justice                                      901 E. Street, N.W.                                      Washington, DC  20530                                             -and-                                      MARK KMETZ, ESQUIRE                                      U.S. Attorney's Office                                      615 Chestnut Street, Suite 1250                                      Philadelphia, PA  19106                                             - - -                 Also Present:         MICHAEL KUNZ                                       Clerk of the Court for the                                       Eastern District of Pennsylvania                                             - - -                 Deputy Clerks:        Thomas Clewley                                       Matthew J. Higgins                 Audio Operator:       Andrea L. Mack                 Transcribed by:       Geraldine C. Laws                                       Grace Williams                                       Tracey Williams                                       Laws Transcription Service                 (Proceedings recorded by electronic sound recording;                 transcript provided by computer-aided transcription service.)                                                                             3     1                    (Whereupon the following occurred in open court at     2           9:25 o'clock a.m.:)     3                    CLERK OF COURT KUNZ:  Oyez, oyez, oyez, all manner     4           of persons having any manner to present before the Honorable     5           Delores Case Sloviter, Chief Judge of the United States Court     6           of Appeals for the Third Circuit, and the Honorable Ronald L.     7           Buckwalter and the Honorable Stewart Dalzell, Judges in the     8           United States District Court in and for the Eastern District     9           of Pennsylvania, may at present appear and they shall be    10           heard.    11                    God save the United States and this Honorable Court.     12           Court is now in session, please be seated.    13                    JUDGE SLOVITER:  Good morning.    14                    ALL COUNSEL:  Good morning.    15                    JUDGE SLOVITER:  Well, if April is the cruelest    16           month, it's certainly starting out that way.  No spring.      17                    We'll hear a continuation, this is a continuation of    18           the plaintiffs' case in the motion for preliminary injunction    19           in ACLU and American Library Association versus Reno and    20           Department of Justice.  And the plaintiffs are, we have    21           received and absorbed, I hope, the direct case of plaintiffs'    22           case and I assume that you have brought witnesses here for    23           the purpose of cross-examination by the Government.  And we    24           will hear your witnesses.    25                    I understand the order is Mr. Barrington first.                                                                             4     1                    MR. ENNIS:  Your Honor, the first witness -- again,     2           my name is Bruce Ennis for the ALA plaintiffs -- our first     3           witness is William Burrington.     4                    JUDGE SLOVITER:  Burrington.     5                    MR. ENNIS:  Who is the assistant general counsel of     6           America Online.      7                    JUDGE SLOVITER:  Yes.     8                    MR. ENNIS:  And if Mr. Burrington could take the     9           stand, before he begins to testify I would move into evidence    10           the declaration of William Burrington sworn to on March 27th,    11           1996, as his trial testimony.    12                    THE COURT:  Thank you.  Is the Government agreeable?    13                    MR. COPPOLINO:  Your Honor, we object to Mr.    14           Burrington's testimony only insofar as he's being offered as    15           a technical expert.    16                    Paragraph 3 of his declaration indicates that he's    17           qualified to testify as an expert on the commercial on-line    18           services industry and on parental control empowerment tools.     19           We understand that to encompass general policy matters as    20           well as the general nature of those parental controls.  We do    21           not believe he is qualified to testify as an expert on the    22           technical nature of how America Online's network operates or    23           on the specific technical aspects of the parental empowerment    24           tools that we'll be discussing today.    25                    We would develop this further on cross-examination                                                                             5     1           for the Court, but we would object to his testimony to the     2           extent it is offered or construed to encompass technical     3           matter.     4                    THE COURT:  We will accept his testimony and if     5           there's any specific matter that you want to call to our     6           attention as outside his purview of expertise, then we'll     7           take it up specifically, but at the moment we'll take it      8           for -- as it's presented.     9                    MR. ENNIS:  Your Honors, if I may, because the    10           Government has indicated they may want Mr. Burrington to    11           refer to some of the supplemental exhibits, I think it would    12           be efficient if I could move at this time Plaintiffs'    13           supplemental Exhibits 290 through 299 be received in    14           evidence.  I understand there is no objection from the    15           Government.    16                    JUDGE SLOVITER:  Well, let's let the Government say    17           whether they object or not.  Mr. Coppolino.    18                    MR. COPPOLINO:  No objection, your Honor.    19                    JUDGE SLOVITER:  Okay.  Thank you.    20                    JUDGE DALZELL:  They'll be admitted then.    21                    (Plaintiffs' Exhibits 290 through 299 received in    22           evidence.)    23                    WILLIAM W. BURRINGTON, ESQ., Plaintiffs' Witness,    24           Sworn.    25                    THE COURT CLERK:  Thank you, please be seated.                                                                              6     1           Please state and spell your name.     2                    THE WITNESS:  My name is William W. Burrington, last     3           name is spelled B-u-r-r-i-n-g-t-o-n.     4                                 CROSS-EXAMINATION     5           BY MR. COPPOLINO:       6           Q   Good morning, Mr. Burrington.     7           A   Good morning.     8           Q   Mr. Burrington, you have on the witness stand a copy of     9           your deposition transcript, is that correct?  It's in one of    10           those notebooks there.    11           A   Yes.    12           Q   And a copy of Volume 3 of the defendants' exhibits?    13           A   Yes.    14           Q   And a copy of your declaration?    15           A   Yes.    16           Q   And a copy of the exhibits Mr. Ennis just referred to?    17           A   That's correct.    18           Q   Okay.      19                    MR. COPPOLINO:  I would indicate to the Court as    20           well we have provided you with Volume 3 of Defendants'    21           Exhibits, some of which we may be referring to throughout the    22           day for these witnesses.    23           BY MR. COPPOLINO:      24           Q   Mr. Burrington, what is your current position?    25           A   I'm the assistant general counsel and director of public                                                                             7     1           policy for America Online in Vienna, Virginia.     2           Q   How many attorneys are in the office of general counsel     3           of America Online?     4           A   Approximately 20.     5           Q   And how long have you been with America Online?     6           A   Since February 1st, 1995.     7           Q   Paragraph 2 of your declaration indicates that you     8           received a law degree from Marquette University in 1987, is     9           that correct?    10           A   That's correct.    11           Q   And Paragraph 2 also indicates that you practiced media    12           and telecommunications law in Milwaukee and in Washington,    13           DC, is that correct?    14           A   That's correct.    15           Q   Paragraph 2 also indicates, I believe, that you direct    16           America Online's international, federal, state and local    17           public policy activities, is that correct?    18           A   That's correct.    19           Q   And that you focus on issues concerning consumer    20           protection, intellectual property and the First Amendment, is    21           that correct?    22           A   Partially correct; there's additional issues as well.    23           Q   Does your expertise concern substantive legal and policy    24           issues that may affect on-line services?    25           A   Yes, it does.                                                                             8     1           Q   Do you consider yourself to be a technical expert on the     2           specific technical aspects of commercial on-line services?     3           A   Not -- not as a computer wonk (ph.), if you will, but as     4           a layperson, technical understanding, yes.     5                    JUDGE SLOVITER:  What was it that you said that you     6           weren't an expert on?  I didn't hear that.     7                    THE WITNESS:  I used the term computer wonk, your     8           Honor, meaning I'm not a computer programmer or have that     9           kind of background, but I understand the general technology    10           of America Online and the Internet.    11                    JUDGE SLOVITER:  Thank you.    12           BY MR. COPPOLINO:      13           Q   Mr. Burrington, you have not had any formal training in    14           computer software development, is that correct?    15           A   That is correct.    16           Q   Or in computer networking systems, is that correct?    17           A   That's correct.    18           Q   Or in computer communications protocols, is that correct?    19           A   That is also correct.    20           Q   And is it correct to say that in your work at America    21           Online you often work with those who are technical experts    22           who understand how America Online operates as a network?    23           A   Yes, I do.    24           Q   And do the technical people you work with also have    25           technical expertise in the various parental control                                                                             9     1           technologies that we'll be talking about today?     2           A   Yes, they do.     3           Q   And in the course of your work at America Online do you     4           rely on the expertise of the technical staff at AOL?     5           A   Yes, I do.     6           Q   Okay.  In Paragraph 3 of your declaration you use the     7           term "commercial on-line service."  Is it accurate to     8           describe America Online as a commercial on-line service     9           provider?    10           A   Yes, that's partially accurate; we're also an Internet    11           access provider as well.    12           Q   Would you describe for the Court what a commercial on-    13           line service provider is?    14           A   Yeah, if I -- if I may, probably the easiest way to do it    15           is by analogy.  We, as a commercial on-line service, if you    16           will picture a resort with a large swimming pool and our pool    17           has gotten much bigger very fast, it's a private, closed pool    18           at a resort and there are some lane guidance (ph.) and some    19           lifeguards and we check the water temperature, then there's a    20           little channel that leads directly into the ocean, and that    21           would be the Internet.    22                    And so we provide both access to our private, closed    23           network or pool of content, if you will, and we also provide    24           a quick channel access into the Internet or the vast sea of    25           information which is the Internet.                                                                            10     1           Q   America Online is a service to which individuals or     2           entities subscribe, is that correct?     3           A   Yes, it's correct.     4           Q   And could you indicate for the record what the current     5           cost of subscribing is for an individual?     6           A   Generally it's 9.95, $9.95 per month for your first five     7           hours and then $2.95 per hour thereafter.     8           Q   And is it also correct that America Online has created     9           software that is installed on a computer which when activated    10           enables an individual to access America Online?    11           A   That's correct.    12           Q   America Online software frequently comes already    13           installed on many computers when they're first purchased, is    14           that correct?    15           A   Yes, it is correct.    16           Q   And is it also correct that America Online gives away its    17           software for free?    18           A   Yes, it does.    19           Q   On Paragraph 4 of your declaration you indicate that    20           America Online has five million members, is that correct?    21           A   Yes, it is.    22           Q   Okay.  Some of the other major on-line service providers    23           are, for example, Compuserve, Prodigy and Microsoft Network,    24           is that correct?    25           A   Yes.                                                                            11     1           Q   On Paragraph 23 of your declaration I believe you     2           estimate that Compuserve has four million members, Prodigy     3           two million and Microsoft about one million, is that correct?     4           A   Yes, that's correct.     5           Q   So in all is it fair to say that there are approximately     6           12 million subscribers to commercial on-line services?     7           A   Give or take a few thousand.     8           Q   That is not the total number of individuals who are     9           connected on-line to the Internet, is that correct?    10           A   Yes, that is correct.    11           Q   There are, as you indicated I believe earlier, other so-    12           called Internet service providers that provide access to the    13           Internet, is that correct?    14           A   Yes, it is correct.    15           Q   How does an Internet service provider differ from an on-    16           line service provider such as America Online?    17           A   In a general sense, an interact -- an internet service    18           provider on ISP provides just the straight conduit, if you    19           will, it's a straight connection, you dial into a local    20           telephone number and you're immediately connected to the    21           Internet.  And sometimes or most often the Internet service    22           provider will provide the customer with some software to help    23           them browse the or surf the Net, as it is, but I'm sure here    24           in Philadelphia you can look in the Yellow Pages and there    25           are a number of ISP's listed.                                                                            12     1           Q   Would you agree that insofar as America Online is     2           providing access to the Internet specifically that that is     3           performing a service similar to that provided by an Internet     4           service provider?     5           A   Yes.     6           Q   Okay, would you take a look at Exhibit 292 of the     7           Plaintiffs' Exhibits which Mr. Ennis, I believe, provided     8           you.     9                    MR. COPPOLINO:  I believe the Court should have that    10           exhibit as well.  292 of the plaintiffs' exhibits.    11                    (Pause.)    12           BY MR. COPPOLINO:      13           Q   Do you have that exhibit, Mr. Burrington?    14           A   Yes, I do.    15                    MR. COPPOLINO:  Shall I proceed?  Is the Court --    16           thank you.    17           BY MR. COPPOLINO:      18           Q   I'm looking at the first page of Exhibit 292 which says    19           Main Menu -- says America Online at the top and then it says    20           Main Menu.  Does this exhibit depict the Main Menu when an    21           individual logs on to America Online?    22           A   Yes, once they've actually successfully logged on that is    23           the first screen that they would see.    24           Q   And this screen sets forth another of different types of    25           information and services that America Online provides, is                                                                            13     1           that correct?     2           A   Yes, it is.     3           Q   For example, America Online provides subscribers with     4           information on a variety of topics such as today's news and     5           sports education, is that correct?     6           A   That is correct.     7           Q   If you'd just flip through the rest of Exhibit 292, these     8           pages -- do they -- do these pages depict what the screen     9           looks like for some of the specific content areas on America    10           Online?    11           A   Yes, for those areas just by illustrative example, this    12           is a handful of areas that you can access, yes.    13           Q   Some of the content that is on America Online is created    14           by America Online employees themselves, is that correct?    15           A   Yes, that is correct.  We have our own content areas,    16           particularly in the areas of news, for example, we have a    17           News Department that is creating its own original content,    18           sometimes.    19           Q   And is it also the case that America Online will contract    20           with a third party to provide content within the closed area    21           network, I believe, as you described it for America Online?    22           A   Yes, a large amount of our content is provided by, as you    23           say, third-party content providers who create the content and    24           we help them put it on, put it onto America Online.    25           Q   Okay, it's a very sensitive mike, sir.                                                                            14     1           A   Yes, I have noticed that.     2           Q   Just for example the Newsstand Icon on this Exhibit 292     3           first page, does that include a number of on-line, on-line     4           versions of independent third-party publications?     5           A   Yes, it will include literally dozens of popular     6           magazines and newspapers like the New York Times, for     7           example.     8           Q   Could you just describe for the Court a couple of     9           examples of some of those publications for which the on-line    10           version is provided under Newsstand?    11           A   It will include in electronic format the New York Times    12           so you can actually read the New York Times in the morning on    13           line.  Atlantic Monthly is another example, there are a    14           number of special interest type publications like Boating    15           Magazine and things of that nature, but overall it's just a    16           variety of different newspapers around the country, major    17           newspapers as well as popular major nationwide magazines.    18                    JUDGE SLOVITER:  Does it cost extra to access what    19           would ordinarily require money like to buy the New York    20           Times?    21                    THE WITNESS:  No, your Honor, in fact that's the --    22           one of the benefits of the on-line services like AOL or    23           Prodigy is that we offer this vast array of content for a    24           monthly price and if you go beyond the five hours then you    25           pay per hour, but you basically have access to included in                                                                            15     1           that subscription price all of the content that we have on     2           America Online.     3                    JUDGE SLOVITER:  And would an Internet service     4           provider that you mentioned before, an ISP, also provide     5           these newspapers?     6                    THE WITNESS:  There, your Honor, that's a little bit     7           different in the sense that a pure Internet access provider     8           which merely allows you to dial into the Internet, they're     9           not involved in the content business at all like we are in    10           terms of packaging and developing content with third parties    11           like the New York Times, so you could still access through    12           that Internet service provider the New York Times which also    13           has an Internet version, a Webpage version of their newspaper    14           as do a number of other publications.    15                    So to make it more clear, on America Online we may    16           have the Atlantic Monthly Magazine and that's a private    17           contract we have with Atlantic Monthly to supply that content    18           to our members.    19                    JUDGE SLOVITER:  You pay them or they pay you?    20                    THE WITNESS:  They may pay us, we pay them the    21           model, the business model is rapidly changing, earlier on we    22           paid them to attract them to come on to our service.  Now    23           that we have five million members or ten million sets of    24           eyes, we of course now are in a better position for them to    25           pay us to have access to that number of people.                                                                            16     1                    JUDGE SLOVITER:  And that increases their     2           subscription and therefore the advertising, is that the     3           point?     4                    THE WITNESS:  I think as -- that that is correct,     5           your Honor.  I think as this business model continues to     6           evolve and it's literally evolving as we sit here, I think     7           what you're going to see is there is a tremendous value for     8           publication like Atlantic Monthly to have access to     9           potentially five million additional subscribers and the    10           potential there for advertising revenue, and I think that    11           that's the model you're going to see increasingly.    12                    JUDGE SLOVITER:  I don't want to get into the    13           Government's questioning, but is the same true if you're    14           dealing with Penthouse or magazines comparable, on the    15           assumption there are some?    16                    THE WITNESS:  I'm sorry, your Honor, what --     17                    JUDGE SLOVITER:  I mean, in other words, do they pay    18           you for you to carry them or do you pay them?    19                    THE WITNESS:  Well, they could but we don't carry    20           Penthouse.  We made judgments for business reasons and based    21           on what our members want, we do not have a contractual    22           relationship with Penthouse.    23                    But to use your example now, there could be    24           Penthouse somewhere out there on the Internet, they might    25           have a Webpage that would contain some of their content, but                                                                            17     1           again that would be accessible through to the Internet, not     2           as a part of our closed community.  We choose not to have     3           Penthouse in our community.     4                    JUDGE SLOVITER:  I mentioned Penthouse because there     5           was testimony about Penthouse in the first two days.  Okay,     6           thank you.     7           BY MR. COPPOLINO:       8           Q   But following up on Judge Sloviter's question, on the     9           Atlantic Monthly you have the full text and you have the ads    10           as well?    11           A   Well, the answer to that is partially true, I think that    12           the most of these publications today are offering essentially    13           electronic versions.  In other words, if you went down to the    14           news stand here in Philadelphia and picked up the Atlantic     15           Monthly, you have the whole magazine.      16                    If you go on to click on to the Atlantic Monthly on    17           America Online, you'll have an electronic version which won't    18           contain necessarily all the content for that particular issue    19           or all of the advertisements, for example.  And that's really    20           what a lot of these publications are doing is offering a sort    21           of a mini version electronically.     22                    A good example is the New York Times, you can read    23           the lead stories, you can read the key stories in this    24           morning's New York Times, but you're not going to get every    25           single item in that paper like obituaries or all of the                                                                            18     1           classifieds, for example.     2                    JUDGE DALZELL:  And the Times supplies that version     3           to you?     4                    THE WITNESS:  That is correct.      5                    JUDGE DALZELL:  Okay.     6           BY MR. COPPOLINO:       7           Q   Just following up on some of the questions, you indicated     8           that you do not have Penthouse Magazine among the     9           publications that are provided by America Online under the    10           Newsstand Icon, is that correct?    11           A   That is correct.    12           Q   Nor do you have Playboy Magazine?    13           A   That's correct.    14           Q   Do you have any magazines comparable to them?    15           A   No, we do not.    16                    JUDGE SLOVITER:  I don't know any, so I couldn't    17           ask, but you might.    18                    (Laughter.)    19                    MR. COPPOLINO:  I only know one more, just for the    20           record.    21                    (Laughter.)    22           BY MR. COPPOLINO:      23           Q   It's called Hustler, do you have Hustler?    24           A   No, we have Boating Magazine is the --    25           Q   Boating, okay.                                                                            19     1                    (Laughter.)     2           BY MR. COPPOLINO:       3           Q   Let's just, leaving aside for the moment information     4           that's on the Internet, does America Online itself create or     5           make available to subscribers any content of the nature of     6           Penthouse or Playboy?     7           A   No, we do not.     8                    JUDGE SLOVITER:  By that I assume you mean, having     9           not ever seen any of them, but I assume you mean magazines    10           that are devoted to -- I don't know if it's only women or    11           male and their bodies, is that a fair description of what    12           they are?    13                    THE WITNESS:  I'd say or of this genre of    14           publications that we're talking about.    15           BY MR. COPPOLINO:  Perhaps "adult sexually oriented" might be    16           an additional qualifier --    17           A   Right.    18           Q   -- since you might have a magazine with models, for    19           instance, but adult sexually oriented type magazines or    20           content.    21           A   Well, we -- no, we do not have a -- we do not provide     22           through again in our closed network we don't have contracts    23           with third-party content providers of that nature, no, we    24           don't.    25                    JUDGE SLOVITER:  But you are a gateway, are you not,                                                                            20     1           for some -- through some vehicle whereby a subscriber might     2           access such publications?     3                    THE WITNESS:  Yes, your Honor.  When I using the     4           analogy earlier about the resort swimming pool leading to the     5           ocean, there is that channel, if you will, that two-way     6           channel that you can get into that channel and you're whisked     7           into the sea, which is the Internet.  And out on that     8           Internet there may be and in fact are Websites and perhaps     9           news groups, publications of the type that you are    10           referencing.    11                    JUDGE SLOVITER:  When you say whisked into the sea,    12           you don't mean you're involuntarily whisked, do you?  You    13           mean that you have access that you could then do something to    14           give-- "you" being the subscriber -- you have access that you    15           could in some way make a connection to?    16                    THE WITNESS:  That's correct, your Honor.  From    17           America Online there is an Icon that you can affirmatively    18           have to go to and to click on, you know, you double click    19           with your mouse and that will then connect you into the    20           Internet and you will actually see a little AOL logo that's    21           circling on your computer screen to tell you that it's trying    22           to dial into the pure Internet.    23           BY MR. COPPOLINO:      24           Q   Just on that point, it doesn't seem terribly legible on    25           Exhibit -- Plaintiffs' Exhibit 292, but just below Reference                                                                            21     1           Desk, that is the supposedly is the Internet connection Icon,     2           is that correct?  This is the first page of Exhibit 292?      3           That's where it is, right?     4           A   I'm not sure that I --     5           Q   Exhibit 292 --     6                    JUDGE DALZELL:  It's hard -- it's hard to read.  Can     7           you read that for us?  It's the one, two, three, four, fifth     8           one down on the right.     9           BY MR. COPPOLINO:      10           Q   Below Reference Desk and above Sports?    11                    JUDGE SLOVITER:  Between reference and sports.    12                    THE WITNESS:  Reference sports.    13                    MR. COPPOLINO:  Can I assist the witness?    14                    JUDGE DALZELL:  What does that say?    15                    THE WITNESS:  Oh, the very first page, I'm sorry,    16           I'm actually looking at the Reference Desk.    17                    Boy, that's a -- that's a good question.    18           BY MR. COPPOLINO:      19           Q   Well, do you know if that's the Internet connection Icon?    20           A   I think that's, yes, it would be, based on my -- my    21           experience with our interface, that would be the Internet    22           connection, yes.    23           Q   And that's the Icon on which an individual can click and    24           get to a separate menu describing the Internet services that    25           are accessible to America Online, is that correct?                                                                            22     1           A   That's one way.  The other way you can do it is if you     2           look at the top of this exhibit, the first page, Exhibit 292,     3           you'll see a little -- oh, about midway in you'll see new, an     4           Icon New.     5           Q    Mm-hmm.     6           A   Just to the left of that is also an Icon that you could     7           click on to connect with the Internet.     8           Q   Through the Internet connection here can an individual     9           gain access to the so-called Worldwide Web?    10           A   Yes, they can.    11           Q   Just so the record is clear, after about a week off,    12           could you describe to the Court what a Website is like and    13           what it is?    14           A   Yes, we could use by way of example, I guess since    15           they're not playing, the Philadelphia Phillies, but there's    16           a-- there is a Philadelphia Phillies Webpage which    17           essentially if you were an AOL subscriber, you could click on    18           the Internet connection to Icon and then it would take you to    19           a screen that we have where you can then also click on the    20           Worldwide Web which would access you into the Worldwide Web.     21           And if you know the address for that particular Website, in    22           this case the Philadelphia Phillies, you would type in that    23           address much like you would dial a telephone number to get    24           some place.  And that will then connect to that Website.  And    25           that Website may contain any kind of information that they                                                                            23     1           choose to package on their Webpage, so it's almost like     2           looking up, I kind of use it as an analogy to an electronic     3           brochure which basically would maybe have some -- some     4           graphics, some pictures, in this case some team statistics,     5           what have you.     6           Q   Is it also correct that through the Internet connection     7           individual AOL subscribers could also gain access to so-     8           called FTP sites?     9           A   That is correct.    10           Q   And also to so-called Gofer sites or to Gofer service?    11           A   That is correct.    12           Q   AOL subscribers could also gain access to so-called news    13           groups, is that correct?    14           A   Yes, that's correct.    15           Q   We're talking about Internet news groups which are    16           sometimes referred to USNet groups, is that correct?    17           A   That's correct.    18           Q   Also on the main menu, if you look over at the Icon    19           called Post Office, that is -- is that the Icon which --    20           through which AOL provides its subscribers an electronic mail    21           service?    22           A   That's correct, that would be access to our electronic    23           mail system.    24           Q   And this E-mail service allows America Online subscribers    25           to send electronic mail to other AOL subscribers, is that                                                                            24     1           correct?     2           A   Yes, it is.     3           Q   And it also allows them to send electronic mail to anyone     4           on the Internet with an E-mail address, is that correct?     5           A   That's correct.     6           Q   Also, finally under this people connection which is the     7           last one on the left-hand column, is this where the so-called     8           chat rooms can be accessed, is that correct?     9           A   Right, that is the access Icon to get into the different    10           kinds of chat rooms that we have on America Online.    11           Q   Going to refer you to Paragraph 11 of your affidavit, do    12           you have Paragraph 11 before you, Mr. Burrington?    13           A   Yes, I do.    14           Q   I'm going to begin to ask you some questions about some    15           of the services we've just discussed.    16                    Paragraph 11, I believe it's fair to characterize,    17           expresses America Online's concerns as to liability under the    18           Communications Decency Act as to certain types of information    19           and specifically breast cancer, sexually -- this is on Page    20           6, breast cancer, sexually transmitted diseases, breast    21           feeding, birthing techniques and further down spectacular    22           masterpieces from galleries.    23                    Does America Online itself create or provide by    24           contract content on these topics?    25           A   Yes, it does.                                                                            25     1           Q   And with respect to breast cancer, sexually transmitted     2           diseases, breast feeding and birthing techniques, are these     3           topics that are discussed under health care related     4           categories on America Online?     5           A   Generally speaking, that could be in the health, health     6           category of our service, it could be in other areas, there     7           are a number of magazines on the Newsstand that we talked     8           about earlier, particularly women's magazines and others that     9           might contain, you know, those types of discussions.     10           Certainly Chatroom anywhere the service could contain    11           discussions about these illustrative examples.    12           Q   Now, is it fair to say, based on your understanding, that    13           the context of discussing these topics that I've just    14           mentioned in Paragraph 11, that the context of discussing    15           these topics is to educate America Online subscribers as to    16           these health care issues?    17           A   Yes, the context is essentially education or it's    18           dialogue, it's real time dialogue between individual members    19           who have an interest in those topics.    20           Q   Education, a dialogue on those health care topics, is    21           that correct?    22           A   That's correct.    23           Q   With respect to, as you describe it, spectacular    24           masterpieces from galleries and landmarks across the globe    25           that contain nude figures, does America Online provide                                                                            26     1           subscribers with access to this type of material through     2           publications such as Smithsonian Magazine?     3           A   Yes, it could either be through a publication like     4           Smithsonian that we may have contracted to have on our     5           service or it could be through access to the Internet and     6           Webpages or a number of museums and galleries have their own     7           Webpages now that are accessible via the Internet.     8           Q   This is the first instance I'm going to ask you to look     9           at our exhibits.  Exhibit 102 is the declaration from Sheila    10           Burke.    11                    JUDGE SLOVITER:  102.    Would you give the Court a    12           minute to find it?    13                    (Pause.)    14                    MR. COPPOLINO:  This is Volume 3.    15                    (Pause.)    16                    MR. COPPOLINO:  I'm sorry you're missing this    17           affidavit, your Honor?  I have an extra, if you need it.    18                    JUDGE SLOVITER:  Yeah, no, that's all right, go    19           ahead.  I'll share with Judge Dalzell.    20           BY MR. COPPOLINO:      21           Q   I'm just going to refer to Paragraph 6 of the Burke    22           affidavit which is at Exhibit 102, Defendant's Exhibit 102.     23           There's also a reference at the end of Paragraph 6 which is    24           very similar to the paragraph you signed to written and    25           visual depictions of remote tribes in South America from our                                                                            27     1           National Geographic section.  National Geographic is no     2           longer available on America Online, is that correct?     3           A   Yes, it is correct.     4           Q   If another magazine such as, for example, Smithsonian,     5           contained depictions of remote tribes, for example, with     6           little or no clothing, would this also be the type of     7           material that you believe subject -- might subject America     8           Online to liability under the Communications Decency Act?     9           A   Absolutely.    10           Q   I think that's it on that exhibit, for now.    11                    A few moments ago Judge Sloviter was asking you    12           about whether Penthouse was on line and I asked you about    13           that and you indicated it was not.  You said something in    14           your answer to her that I wanted to ask you about, that    15           you've not included publications such as Playboy and    16           Penthouse based on business reasons and based on what our    17           members want.  Was that your testimony?    18           A   Yes, it was.    19           Q   Does America Online feel that it is not appropriate to    20           have that kind of content within its service because there    21           are families and children on line?    22           A   We make business and marketing judgments, you know, as    23           the service evolves about the kind of content that we think    24           the vast majority of our members would like to have, yes.    25           Q   Well, just to clarify the point, maybe you should take a                                                                            28     1           look at Page 142 of your deposition.       2                    MR. COPPOLINO:  I have extra copies of the     3           deposition if you'd like them, but last time we didn't, the     4           Court didn't ask for them.     5                    JUDGE SLOVITER:  Not yet.     6           BY MR. COPPOLINO:       7           Q   On Page 142, do you have 142, Mr. Burrington?     8           A   Yes, I do.     9           Q   About halfway down I asked you this question, this is at    10           our deposition on March 27th:  "What is it about that type of    11           content," referring to Playboy and Penthouse "that led you to    12           decide not to offer it to your members?"  That was the    13           question.    14                    Answer: "Because we have a variety of members and a    15           number of families that use our service and have children, we    16           just do not feel that kind of content was appropriate to have    17           on our service."    18                    Was that your testimony?    19           A   Yes, it was.    20           Q   Okay.  Mr. Burrington, America Online has something    21           referred to as a -- as terms of service and rules of the    22           road, is that correct?    23           A   Yes, it is.    24           Q   And these terms of service and rules of the road in part    25           advise America Online subscribers what the subscribers may                                                                            29     1           not post on America Online, is that correct?     2           A   Yes, they do.     3           Q   Take a look at Exhibits 100-- Defendants' Exhibits in     4           that Volume 3, 106 and 107?     5                    (Pause.)     6                    MR. COPPOLINO:  Can I proceed?     7                    JUDGE SLOVITER:  Yes, that's all right.     8           BY MR. COPPOLINO:       9           Q   Mr. Burrington, you recall I showed you Exhibits 106 and    10           107 at your deposition?    11           A   Yes, I do recall that.    12           Q   At the bottom you'll see they're also marked Burrington    13           Exhibit No. 19 and Burrington Exhibit No. 20, is that    14           correct?    15           A   Yes.    16           Q   Do you recall whether to the best of your knowledge these    17           documents reflect what the America Online terms of service    18           and rules of the road look like?    19           A   Yes.     20           Q   Would you look at Page 2 of the terms of service which is    21           Exhibit 106 and I'm going to refer you to Paragraph 4 which    22           is encaptioned "Rights and Responsibilities."  I'm going to    23           refer  you to the last sentence of that which I'll read for    24           the record.  It indicates "AOL, Inc. does not pre-screen    25           content as a matter of policy, but AOL, Inc. and ICP shall                                                                            30     1           have the right but not the responsibility to remove content     2           which is deemed in their discretion harmful, offensive or     3           otherwise in violation of the TOS and ROR," referring to     4           Terms of Service and Rules of the Road.     5                    Does this reflect America Online's current policy?     6           A   Yes, it does.     7           Q   Would you look at the next -- I'm sorry, let's see.      8           Yeah, the next exhibit, No. 107, on Page 5.  Page 5 begins     9           with Caption C, "On-line conduct."      10                    And under Caption C, "On-line conduct," it    11           indicates, does it not, that a subscriber to America Online    12           may not post or use America Online to do a number of things    13           listed at one through ten, is that correct?    14           A   That's correct.    15           Q   And Item 2 is -- let me read it for the record: "Post or    16           transmit sexually explicit images or other content which is    17           deemed by AOL, Inc. to be offensive."  Is that a current rule    18           of the road on America Online?    19           A   That's a current rule of the road that we as a, you know,    20           as a company, a private service have decided we want as part    21           of our sort of community.  I need to explain that term, I    22           think it's important.  We are a community of five million    23           people and that's how we look at it.  And I think America    24           Online more than really most of the other services really is    25           aware of and really promotes this concept of community, just                                                                            31     1           like a physical community.  So we have in our community of     2           five million people developed some basic rules, based upon     3           what we want our service to be and that's what you're really     4           seeing here reflected in these, in the Rules of the Road.     5           Q   Item 3, the next item down on Page 5, indicates that "An     6           America Online subscriber may not transmit any unlawful,     7           harmful, threatening, abusive, harassing, defamatory, vulgar,     8           obscene, hateful, racially, ethnically or otherwise     9           objectionable content."  To the best of your knowledge is    10           that still a current Rule of the Road?    11           A   Yes, it is.    12           Q   And if you look at Page 6 of the same document, very next    13           page, the Item 3 encaptioned "Graphic Files," which indicates    14           "America Online, Inc. prohibits the transfer or posting on    15           America Online of sexually explicit images or other content    16           deemed offensive by America Online, Inc."  Is that still a    17           current Rule of the Road?    18           A   Yes, it is.    19           Q   Where would it be most likely that a subscriber might    20           post a sexually explicit graphical image on America Online?    21           A   If that's going to occur, the likely place is usually in    22           one-to-one private electronic mail.  In other words, you can    23           send an electronic mail message to somebody, and we have a    24           capability through a little button you click on, to attach a    25           file.  It will say "Attach file" and then you can go into                                                                            32     1           your computer, search for the file you want to attach, in     2           this case -- I'm giving you a hypothetical -- it could be a     3           graphic file of some type, it could be a picture or whatever,     4           and -- or document -- and then you can transmit that to that     5           person.  It's a private, one-to-one E-mail exchange.     6           Q   You say private one-to-one E-mail.  Is it also the case     7           that that one-to-one E-mail could be sent to a number of     8           users, is that correct?     9           A   Yes, you could address that letter, if you will, that    10           electronic letter to a number of people, yes, that's correct.    11           Q   And what would you need to know to send that E-mail to an    12           America Online subscriber?    13           A   You would need to know that subscriber's electronic mail    14           address, just like any other physical letter.    15           Q   If you're on America Online, you'd need to know their    16           screen name, is that correct?    17           A   That's correct.    18           Q   Where would it be most likely to --    19                    JUDGE SLOVITER:  Their what name?    20                    MR. COPPOLINO:  Oh, I referred to it as a screen    21           name, your Honor.    22           BY MR. COPPOLINO:      23           Q   Why don't you briefly explain what a screen name is?    24           A   Right, just not to -- not to confuse things here, but     25           we--                                                                            33     1                    JUDGE SLOVITER:  That's not the subscriber number,     2           that's not the password, is it?     3                    MR. COPPOLINO:  Not a password, your Honor.  I think     4           Mr. Burrington should explain that.     5                    JUDGE SLOVITER:  Yes, I think so.     6                    THE WITNESS:  In the broad vernacular of the     7           Internet, we all, those of us who are on the Internet have an     8           electronic mail Internet address.  And you'll see that often     9           as in my case, Bill Burr, at, with a little at sign, AOL.COM    10           and that just tells the world that I'm an AOL subscriber.     11           And that's how somebody who is on the Internet who is not an    12           AOL subscriber can get to me by sending me an E-mail.  Within    13           the AOL system, we operate on a system that are called screen    14           names which means when you first sign on to America Online,    15           you first subscribe, you get to pick a screen name.  And    16           that's the people who are -- the ones that can set up    17           accounts have to be adults and so they are what we call the    18           master account holder and they may pick a screen name,    19           whatever they want it to be.  It could be their own name or    20           it could be whatever name they want.      21                    And then when you're sending electronic mail within    22           our closed, private network, all you need to do is type your    23           screen name.  So just like when you're addressing a letter    24           where you say to and you put in Bill Burr, in my case, and    25           then I can -- well, I guess I could send mail to myself, but                                                                            34     1           I would send mail to someone else using that screen name.     2                    And then the password is something else you have to     3           have, obviously, in order to once you've put in your screen     4           name to access the service, you have to have your password as     5           well in order to get in.     6           BY MR. COPPOLINO:       7           Q   So if you're an America Online subscriber I only need     8           your screen name to send you an E-mail, is that correct?     9           A   That is correct.    10           Q   And otherwise the -- is it the case that for every AOL    11           subscriber the remainder of the E-mail address is simply at    12           AOL.COM, is that correct?    13           A   Yes.     14           Q   Where would it be most likely -- would it be most likely    15           that a subscriber might post harmful or vulgar language in    16           the same way, through E-mail?    17           A   I think that's one place that that type of language could    18           be posted, if you will, and I think that there are other    19           areas out on the Internet like news groups that we've talked    20           about previously.  Sometimes it would be possible in the live    21           chat rooms that are happening in, you know, real time, there    22           are live conversations back and forth with a number of people    23           that that could possibly be there as well.    24           Q   Why don't you remind the Court what a chat room is and    25           how it operates?                                                                            35     1           A   Okay, let me walk through that briefly.  When we were     2           looking earlier at Exhibit -- Plaintiffs' Exhibit 292 there     3           was a reference to the People Connection.  And if you click     4           on the People Connection, we have three types of what we call     5           chat rooms.  And basically America Online has created its own     6           set of we call them AOL-created rooms because we decided, you     7           know, here are several hundred topics we think people want to     8           talk about, from sports to cooking to whatever.     9                    And those rooms are created by us, we title them, if    10           you get into America Online and hit People Connection, you    11           will go first into a lobby and then you can just, you're in    12           electronic lobby and then you can get yourself into one of    13           those rooms.  And again we create those, up to 23 people can    14           be in one of those rooms at a time simultaneously and then    15           you essentially type messages back and forth and it's    16           happening, you know, instantaneously.    17                    The second category in addition to the AOL-created    18           rooms are what we call  member-created rooms and that is    19           subscribers who are allowed to create their own room.  Maybe    20           they don't want to talk just generally about cooking but they    21           want to talk about French cooking, so they will create a room    22           called French cooking.      23                    In any given night there will be anywhere from 800    24           to 1500 of those rooms with up to 23 people in them    25           simultaneously chatting back and forth and we scroll through                                                                            36     1           the titles of those rooms to make sure that they at least     2           conform to our terms of service.       3                    Not to confuse things, but then there is the third     4           category, in addition to AOL-created rooms and member-created     5           rooms, we have a thing called private rooms and that is most     6           useful, I think, for and I'm aware of families that have     7           maybe kids around the country in college or whatever and you     8           can actually set up a room name, a private room with like     9           your last name and then your family could sign on anywhere    10           that they have the AOL service and you could have a    11           simultaneously -- simultaneous live, you know, conversation    12           sort of conference call.    13                    But the only people that can access those rooms are    14           the ones that actually know the name of the room, they'd have    15           to affirmatively type it in.  So it's kind of like a little    16           secret, you know, password or the password into the    17           clubhouse, so to speak.    18                    JUDGE SLOVITER:  How would you know the content of    19           those private chat rooms?    20                    THE WITNESS:  We don't.  We cannot, unless we --    21           first of all, we don't know the names of those rooms.  I    22           would not know, our service would not know, for example, your    23           Honor, that you maybe created a private room with your last    24           name, for example, we wouldn't know that.  So --    25                    JUDGE SLOVITER:  Very small.                                                                            37     1                    THE WITNESS:  Pardon me?     2                    JUDGE SLOVITER:  Would be a very small room --     3                    (Laughter.)     4                    JUDGE SLOVITER:  Go ahead.     5                    THE WITNESS:  If -- well, you'd have to tell     6           somebody about it, too.  But if they, you know, let's say     7           there were four of you in there talking, I mean unless we     8           happen to stumble across there, somebody said, you know, this     9           room name has been created, we would not have any way of    10           getting into that room and knowing the content.    11                    JUDGE SLOVITER:  But to get at the heart of this    12           case instead of all of this, if it's all right, is there    13           anything that would prevent private people on this little    14           private chat room from exchanging what would be obscene?     15           Leave aside what may be patently offensive or indecent, would    16           there -- what would, other than your Rules of the Game, what    17           is there that would prevent electronic transmission of such    18           material?     19                    THE WITNESS:  Well, first of all, your Honor, that's    20           a very good question.  There are a number of mechanisms    21           there.  First of all, and if you're talking about the private    22           room context right now, they cannot --    23                    JUDGE SLOVITER:  Yeah.    24                    THE WITNESS:  -- people can't exchange graphics    25           files, for example, in a private room, it's just merely                                                                            38     1           discussion back and forth.  You have to type out a sentence     2           and then send it and somebody else types out a sentence and     3           responds.  You can't send things, so to speak, back and forth     4           in that context.      5                    JUDGE DALZELL:  Well, I think Judge Sloviter's     6           question was you could send obscene language, I assume?     7                    THE WITNESS:  I -- yes, as I -- yes, you could,     8           certainly.     9                    JUDGE SLOVITER:  You could describe sexual activity.    10                    THE WITNESS:  You could, in a private room, yes, you    11           could.  The -- but the beauty of at least with the America    12           Online and most of the other services is that  a parent has    13           the ability, in the context of this case that we're talking    14           about, to go into our parental control tools, which I believe    15           we'll be discussing, and block access to all of those rooms.     16           They can block access just to private rooms, if they want, so    17           that their kids could never even get into a private room.    18                    They can block access to member-created rooms only.     19           They may want their kids to have access to the AOL rooms    20           because we monitor those much more closely because they're    21           our rooms  or they might say I don't want my children to have    22           access to any of the chat rooms that America Online offers,    23           so you just click on that button and your children cannot get    24           into these rooms.    25                    JUDGE SLOVITER:  Should these all have a prefix?  Is                                                                            39     1           there some way in which you can distinguish, it came up in     2           your declaration and it was unclear, is there some way you     3           can distinguish between America Online created chat rooms     4           which are presumably checked at least for -- well, checked     5           for content and other chat rooms which are checked for title     6           and these very private sort of coded chat rooms, how would a     7           parent know so that the parent could block out one but not     8           the other?     9                    There was some suggestion that that could be done,    10           how could that be done technically?    11                    THE WITNESS:  Yes, your Honor.  Let me describe that    12           sort of, if you will, from both ends, meaning when you're a    13           user in this -- you click on people connection and now you    14           have before you the three possible kinds of chat rooms we    15           just discussed.    16                    You'll know when you're in AOL room because that's    17           what you first get into, you very first are in the lobby and    18           you can look through existing room names that we've created.     19           And we've changed them from time to time, but they are there    20           and you know that's where you are.  Then you can click on    21           another button that says member rooms and that's where you    22           can see what currently is -- you know, and they change    23           literally by the second.  I mean, during the evening there's    24           just, they come, they go, people create them, people close    25           them down.  And that's why I said there's anywhere from 800                                                                            40     1           to, you know, up to 1500 of these rooms and then you also     2           have a chance to click on a button that says create private     3           room.      4                    Now, that's from the user perspective, from the     5           parents' perspective, when they're utilizing our parental     6           control tools, they have a very simple screen in front of     7           them.  And maybe I can, if I may, can I refer to the -- my     8           plaintiffs exhibit there to show that screen?  I think it     9           might be helpful.  This is Plaintiff's Exhibit 285 which is    10           the parental control screen shots, 285.    11                    MR. COPPOLINO:  Your Honor, does the Court wish to    12           do this now?  I was going to ask some questions about this.    13                    JUDGE SLOVITER:  Well, yeah.  You're not -- you've    14           answered my question and I think this is Mr. Coppolino's    15           questioning.     16                    MR. COPPOLINO:  Thank you, your Honor, that's fine.    17                    JUDGE SLOVITER:  With the assistance of the Court or    18           otherwise.  Go ahead, Mr. Coppolino.    19                    MR. COPPOLINO:  Okay, we will get that exhibit to    20           you very shortly because I do want the Court to see that.    21                    THE WITNESS:  Right.    22           BY MR. COPPOLINO:      23           Q   But let me just wrap up a couple of points here on chat    24           rooms, first of all.    25           A   Mm-hmm.                                                                            41     1           Q   The -- the topics for AOL-created chat rooms and member     2           chat rooms are available or viewable by all AOL subscribers,     3           is that correct?     4           A   That's correct unless they have their access blocked to     5           those rooms.     6           Q   And the messages that are going back and forth in these     7           chat rooms on the AOL-created and the member chat rooms are     8           also viewable on the screens, is that correct?     9           A   If a member who's not had access blocked were to go into    10           a room, yes, they could see the chat going back and forth,    11           yes.    12           Q   A moment ago I asked you about your policy with respect    13           to sexually explicit graphical images.  Could you describe    14           for the Court what sexually explicit images means under    15           America Online's Rules of the Road?    16           A   It's a -- a term that certainly would include child    17           pornography, what I think we would all agree in terms of the    18           legal obscenity.  Generally speaking, the rule of thumb for    19           us is any kind of full frontal nudity we would consider to be    20           sexually explicit.    21           Q   I believe I also asked you at your deposition whether you    22           thought that would also include depictions of actual sexual    23           conduct, is that correct?    24           A   If it was depicted as, yes, I mean if it was clear what    25           it was.                                                                            42     1           Q   Let's take a look at Page 14 of the Burrington     2           declaration.  Paragraph 14 indicates that, at the outset that     3           the most basic parental control is the membership system     4           itself, that no one can become a member without furnishing a     5           credit card or, on some occasions, a checking account to be     6           debited for payment and that the applicant must also certify     7           that he or she is over 18.  Is that correct?     8           A   That is correct.     9           Q   Then it then indicates that the person who signs up with    10           a credit card becomes a master account holder and holds a    11           master password, is that correct?    12           A   Yes.    13           Q   We're going to get into some of the specific workings of    14           the controls in a moment, but would you just simply indicate    15           for now whether America Online has parental controls that    16           apply to Internet Usnet groups?    17           A   Yes.  America Online does have parental controls that    18           apply to the news groups.    19           Q   And I believe you just testified that America Online has    20           parental controls that apply to so-called chat rooms, is that    21           correct?    22           A   That's correct.    23           Q   America Online also has a parental control feature known    24           as Kids Only, is that correct?    25           A   That's correct.                                                                            43     1           Q   And that is an area of America Online which has been     2           created by America Online containing content suitable for     3           children between six and 13, is that correct?     4           A   I believe six and 12, actually, but that's correct.     5           Q   So news groups, chat rooms and kids only, those are the     6           major services to which America Online controls apply, is     7           that correct?     8           A   There are a few additional ones in addition to those, one     9           is the so-called what we call binary downloads which are,    10           again, if you're in a news group and you can get a graphics    11           file, you can actually go in there and get a graphics    12           computer file and download it into your computer so you can    13           view it.  You can block access to all of those on the    14           Internet.     15                    You also can block access to what we call Instant    16           Messaging or IM and Instant Messaging is again just a feature    17           of our private service which allows me to, if I know your    18           screen name, to send you an instant message, it will pop up    19           on your screen saying, you know, hi, how are you, and then    20           you can have a conversation back and forth.    21                    Our parents and our research and continuing dialogue    22           with parents, we've been told that they would like the    23           ability to prevent their children or sometimes adults don't    24           want to get hassled with instant messages popping up on their    25           screen, so those are the two additional features.                                                                            44     1           Q   Now let's take a look at Exhibit 285, this is Plaintiffs'     2           Exhibit.  I'm just going to refer you to the first screen,     3           the first page of 285.  Do you have that, Mr. Burrington?     4           A   Yes, I do.     5           Q   The caption is "Parental Controls," is that correct?     6           A   That's correct.      7           Q   In the lower right-hand corner there are three Icons.      8           One says "Block all but kids only," one says "Chat controls"     9           and one says "News group controls."  Are those the three    10           major categories of parental controls available on America    11           Online?    12           A   At this time, yes.    13           Q   Other than for USNet groups that we discussed a moment    14           ago, does America Online presently have parental controls    15           that apply to Internet sites such as the Worldwide Web?    16           A   We do not at this time have specific blocking for    17           Worldwide Web, but I think to be fair in that answer, a    18           number of the other on-line companies such as Prodigy and    19           Compuserve have entered into agreements with Cyber Patrol and    20           there are other third-party software programs out there that    21           do specifically allow the blocking of Worldwide Web sites.    22                    And we will be very shortly, since this is a very    23           rapidly evolving technology and industry, will be offering    24           those as well sometime this summer.    25                    So that to be accurate, you will be able to block                                                                            45     1           access to Worldwide Web sites.     2           Q   Presently the only controls that America Online has for     3           the Internet concern the USNet groups, is that correct?     4           A   The USNet news groups and the binary download, graphic     5           file download feature we talked about, yes.     6           Q   Binaries that are on the USNet news groups?     7           A   That's correct.     8           Q   Take a look at the sixth page of this Exhibit 285, they     9           are not numbered, but it is the page that says "News Groups,"    10           news groups on it, there's actually three subpages, it's    11           "Parental Controls, News Groups Controls" and then the third    12           page is "News Groups."  I believe it's the sixth page in.     13           This is the one I'm referring to.    14                    JUDGE DALZELL:  The one that says "News Groups" or    15           "News Group Controls?"    16                    MR. COPPOLINO:  News Groups.     17           BY MR. COPPOLINO:      18           Q   Do you have that, Mr. Burrington?    19           A   Yes, I do.    20           Q   Is this what the news group menu looks like on America    21           Online?    22           A   Yes, it does.    23           Q   Does America Online make available to its subscribers    24           virtually all of the USNet news groups, is that correct?    25           A   That's correct.                                                                            46     1           Q   If you look at Defendants' Exhibit 119 which is in that     2           third volume that I provided you, I'm not going to read every     3           word of this but I just wanted to refer the witness to it.     4                    Exhibit 119, do you recall testifying at your     5           deposition that this is a long list of what appears to be the     6           type of news groups that America Online makes available to     7           its subscribers, correct?     8           A   Yes, these are the types of news groups that are     9           available out on the Internet that all of the on-line    10           services provide some sort of access to.    11           Q   Thank you.    12                    MR. COPPOLINO:  That's all I'm going to do with that    13           exhibit, your Honor.    14           BY MR. COPPOLINO:      15           Q   The -- the Icon called Search All Newsgroups --    16                    JUDGE SLOVITER:  How many are there -- excuse me,    17           how many are there of these, does he have any idea, roughly?     18           It seems to be a lot in --    19                    THE WITNESS:  Your Honor, that is accurate, there    20           are probably around up to 20,000 news groups today.  They    21           again come and go, they can be created right as we're sitting    22           here or they can be deleted.    23                    JUDGE DALZELL:  I thought it was stipulated that    24           there were about 30,000?    25                    MR. COPPOLINO:  I thought it was 15,000, your Honor,                                                                            47     1           but we have a stipulation.     2                    JUDGE SLOVITER:  Well, they are not.         3                    JUDGE DALZELL:  It's in the stipulation.     4                    JUDGE SLOVITER:  In the vernacular.      5                    (Laughter.)         6           BY MR. COPPOLINO:       7           Q   The option on the right called -- the lower right called     8           "Search All News Groups," does this enable an America Online     9           user to search all of the Internet news groups such as those    10           listed in Exhibit 119?    11           A   Yes, I -- with the qualification of the, when you become    12           an AOL subscriber by default the index, the so-called index    13           of -- much like what you just showed in the previous exhibit,    14           is not readily available.  You actually have to go into    15           parental controls and opt to have that index become visual.     16           In other words, it's out there but it doesn't visually appear    17           unless you affirmatively opt in to have that happen.     18                    But then you are able to, once you've done that, you    19           would click on the Search All News Groups and put in key    20           words and you would pull up news groups.    21           Q   And is it correct that once an AOL member has picked the    22           news groups that he or she wishes to read regularly, they    23           click on the Icon that says "Read My News Groups" and a    24           listing of the news groups they had chosen would appear, is    25           that correct?                                                                            48     1           A   Yes, had they used the what's called Expert Ad feature,     2           which would basically -- Expert Ad just allows you to     3           customize your list of news groups.  And you have to type in     4           the full name of the news group and then that will be added     5           to your list, yes.     6           Q   Once that news group is made -- that the user selects, a     7           particular news group, he can then further click on the news     8           group and read the articles and messages that are posted     9           there, is that correct?    10           A   That's correct.    11           Q   The articles and messages in the news groups often appear    12           to look as if they were electronic mail messages, isn't that    13           correct?    14           A   Yes.    15           Q   And once inside the news group the various articles and    16           messages are listed separately, is that correct?    17           A   That's correct.  Within each individual news group there    18           will be anywhere from, you know, a couple hundred to    19           thousands of individual postings.     20           Q   And to your knowledge most of the messages have what    21           purports to be a short description of its content provided by    22           the person who posted the message, is that correct?    23           A   That's correct.    24           Q   USNet news group articles can contain both text as well    25           as graphical images or pictures, is that correct?                                                                            49     1           A   Yes, that's correct, you can attach to a -- a news group     2           a posting, an actual graphics file that someone can download,     3           yes.     4           Q   For example, on Exhibit 119, if you'd like to refer to     5           it, there is a news group on Page 750 called Alt Binaries     6           Pictures.  Is it your understanding that binaries may include     7           graphical images or pictures, is that correct?     8           A   Right.  Generally speaking the term binaries means it is     9           a graphic file and that's why when we have the "Block All    10           Binaries" box we can prevent that.    11           Q   Leaving side the content of the pictures for a moment,    12           does America Online provide its subscribers with the means to    13           download or view a picture from a news group?    14           A   Yes, it does.    15           Q   Could you describe the process whereby a user can go into    16           a news group and click on a particular message and view and    17           download a picture?    18           A   Again, assuming those news groups are not blocked or if    19           they are unblocked but the parent or someone has blocked to    20           prevent binary downloads, let's assume that all of those    21           blocking features are off, then you could go into a news    22           group on any given topic, scroll through the hundreds of    23           postings that may be in there and click, double click on one    24           of those postings, open it up and there will be a little    25           screen that will pop up, it will either have just text which                                                                            50     1           is the, you know, the text of the message and/or there may be     2           attached to it a graphics file.  And you'll be -- you'll see     3           on the bottom of your screen to click, you can click on that     4           little box that says "download."  And then over a period of     5           time the image will be downloaded  into your computer.     6           Q   And the picture is actually -- comes up on the user's     7           screen as the image is downloading, is that correct?     8           A   As the image is downloading, the screen, your computer     9           screen would be painted, in a manner of speaking, with that    10           picture, provided you had not used the blocking capabilities.    11           Q   As a technical matter can America Online prevent its    12           members from accessing a specific news group?    13           A   Yes, we can.    14           Q   In fact, I believe you testified at your deposition that    15           America Online had removed certain news groups that contained    16           child pornography, is that correct?    17           A   There are a very, very small number of news group titles    18           that were so obvious on their face, in our judgment, in terms    19           of in one way or another dealing with illegal child    20           pornography that we have chosen to block access to those    21           rooms.    22           Q   Do some of the other news groups that are available    23           through America Online to your knowledge contain sexually    24           explicit material, including graphical images?    25           A   I believe they do, yes.                                                                            51     1           Q   In the course of your own professional research and     2           duties have you ever searched a news group, any news group?     3           A   Yes,  I have.     4           Q   And in the course of your duties have you ever     5           encountered a news group which would contain a nude graphical     6           image?     7           A   Yes, I have.     8           Q   And in the course of your duties have you ever     9           encountered a news group which contains a sexually explicit    10           graphical image?    11           A   I have not personally recalled seeing those, but I'm sure    12           that they're there.    13           Q   Turning to Paragraph 15, referring to the sentence on    14           Page 8, second, the last sentence, it says that "The adult    15           member's master password must be entered in order to turn the    16           parental controls on and off to alter their settings," is    17           that correct?    18           A   That's correct.    19           Q   Is it correct to say that the basic concept underlying    20           America Online's parental controls is the establishment of a    21           separate screen name and password for children by whoever is    22           the master account holder, is that correct?    23           A   Right, for both America Online and some of the other    24           commercial services you, in order to sign up as we discussed    25           earlier, you have to be 18 years of age or older with a                                                                            52     1           credit card or, in our case, we also offer checking account     2           debiting.  And once you select that screen name, your initial     3           screen name is the master account holder, the adult 18 years     4           of age or older, you can never -- you can never change it.      5           You can never, ever change that screen name and then you're     6           allowed to create an additional four screen names under that     7           master account that could be designated for your children and     8           they could each have their own password as well.     9           Q   And again the key concept of the parental controls is the    10           establishment of a separate screen name for children, is that    11           correct?    12           A   That's correct, because the controls are applied to those    13           screen names and, I might add, some adults choose to apply    14           them to themselves as well.    15           Q   Looking back at Exhibit 285 it's the page immediately    16           following the news group page I just referred to.  This is    17           plaintiffs' exhibit and those particular pages are not    18           numbered, but it's the page which has the word "Parental    19           Controls" on top, edit parental controls for which screen.      20                    Do you see that, Mr. Burrington?    21           A   Yes, I do.    22           Q   Does this page show how a parent can edit news group    23           controls for a child with a separate screen name?    24           A   Yes, in the example before you in this exhibit the master    25           account holder in this case is the screen name R. Gersky, and                                                                            53     1           then they have created a fictional children's sub-account     2           screen name called Child Demo.     3           Q   Will you look at the next page, please, says blocking     4           criteria?  Is it fair to characterize this that the master     5           account holder has the option of blocking all news groups,     6           blocking binary downloads, blocking news groups based on     7           certain names in the title or blocking specific news groups.      8           Is that an accurate summary of the options available there?     9           A   Yes, it is.    10           Q   Do you understand, as a technical matter, how the    11           blocking of news groups works, that is what is actually    12           happening on the network system that allows the groups to be    13           blocked?    14           A   Are you speaking now in terms of the inner workings of    15           what the computers --    16           Q   Yes.    17           A   -- are doing --    18           Q   Yes.    19           A   -- inside of themselves?  No, I do not know precisely how    20           that works.    21           Q   If a separate screen name is not established for a child    22           and the child is on-line through the master account holder's    23           password, could the parental control features be altered?    24           A   If -- and this is why we educate parents to not allow    25           their children to use their master account and the key to                                                                            54     1           that is keeping your password private.  And we regularly     2           remind parents and subscribers as they sign on and sign off     3           of AOL to change their password frequently.  Yes, it is     4           possible if a parent were to allow their children to have     5           access to that screen name, their own screen name, and give     6           them the password, that they could access it similar to --     7           Q   Is -- sorry.     8           A   -- similar to leaving keys in the car in the garage.      9           Q   If the child is on line through the master account    10           holder's password the parental control features can be    11           altered, is that correct?    12           A   The person who is using the master account, yes, could go    13           in conceivably and alter the settings for these parental    14           controls.    15           Q   The person who was on line through the master account, is    16           that correct?    17           A   Yes, yes.    18           Q   And the controls could also be disabled, is that correct?    19           A   That's correct.    20                    JUDGE SLOVITER:  Is that a technical -- is that the    21           technically difficult thing to do or is it just like turning    22           a switch?    23                    THE WITNESS:  Assuming, your Honor, that you have    24           the password to get into that master account, which is    25           critical here, then once you're in there the interface, as                                                                            55     1           we've seen from some of these screen shots, is fairly simple     2           and you're clicking off and clicking on.     3           BY MR. COPPOLINO:       4           Q   In fact, if you look at the two pages I just referred you     5           to on parental controls, the user could, assuming you're on     6           through the master account holder, the user could go into the     7           edit mode and simply click off where the controls are enacted     8           for the particular child, is that correct?     9           A   Right.  I mean you're speaking hypothetically.  We have    10           not in our experience had that as a practice, that parents    11           are frankly handing out their password to their children.     12           Q   I'm asking as a technical matter how it's done.    13           A   As a technical matter?    14           Q   I'm asking as a technical matter because Judge Dalzell    15           had-- I mean, excuse me -- Judge Sloviter had asked the    16           question as to how easy it is to do.    17                    JUDGE SLOVITER:  He's more restrained today.    18                    (Laughter.)    19                    MR. COPPOLINO:  Excuse me.    20           BY MR. COPPOLINO:      21           Q   For this screen that I'm referring to in Exhibit 285 you    22           simply click off the screen that's marked with a dark -- with    23           a dot in that circle, is that correct?    24           A   With the -- I'm sorry, you're on a different page than I    25           am now.                                                                            56     1           Q   Yes, let's look at the page --     2           A   Okay.     3           Q   -- with the "Edit Parental Controls" for which screen     4           name.     5           A   Mm-hmm.     6           Q   Simply edit that out, is that correct, by removing -- you     7           can hit the edit function and remove the dot for where it     8           says "Child Demo One"?     9           A   No, that's not how that would work. You have to    10           affirmatively click on the particular subscreen name that you    11           want to edit, then you would have to go in and actually edit    12           it.    13           Q   Well, let's look at the next page on blocking criteria    14           then. You can edit each one of these blocking criterias by    15           removing the X in the box, is that correct, where it says    16           "Block expert ad, block news groups?"    17           A   That's correct.    18           Q   Block binary downloads, you simply go in and click off    19           the X, is that right?    20           A   You can click off the X's or, in the case of the two    21           boxes below, you could delete the text that's in there.    22           Q   Is it fair to say that the establishment of a separate    23           screen name and password for a child must be done or must be    24           undertaken in order for the parental controls to be    25           effectively utilized?                                                                            57     1           A   Well, that's generally true unless the parent -- the     2           parents wants to -- the master account holder parent wants to     3           sit with their child while they're on their own master     4           account screening, which frequently our parents do.  But the     5           other option, depending on the age of the child, is to give     6           the child their own screen name and their own password and     7           that is what these controls would apply to.     8           Q   But is it fair to say that the establishment of a     9           separate screen name and password is necessary for the    10           controls to be effectively utilized?    11           A   That is -- that is an accurate statement, yes; it is not    12           the only option.    13           Q   Paragraph 25 of your declaration indicates that --    14           looking at the very first sentence -- indicates that    15           Compuserve and Prodigy give their subscribers the option of    16           blocking all access to the Internet.  Does America Online    17           provide that option for all subscribers?    18           A   As I test-- as I testified earlier, we at this time do    19           not.  We do provide partial blocking, but I indicated to you    20           that many of us, because this has become a competitive issue,    21           are essentially offering a lot of the same tools, so by early    22           this summer we will have that feature.    23           Q   Paragraph 25 also indicates that Prodigy requires a    24           parent to affirmatively turn on access to Internet news    25           groups.  Does America Online have this feature?                                                                            58     1           A   In a manner of speaking, as I testified earlier, there     2           is, we do not make the index of all the rooms available, you     3           have to affirmatively turn that list on.  So you would have     4           to know the actual full name of the news group and enter it     5           into "Expert Ad" in order for you to be able to access it if     6           it was not blocked by us.     7           Q   Well, I understand you're also testifying on behalf of     8           the industry in general so let me see if you have an answer     9           to this question regarding Prodigy.  Do you know if Prodigy's    10           particular option here means that when you go on line, all of    11           the -- all access to news groups is effectively off and you    12           have to turn it on affirmatively?    13           A   I believe that is the case, yes.    14           Q   So that the default on Prodigy is that news groups are    15           off, is that correct?    16           A   That's correct.    17           Q   To your knowledge is that particular type of system where    18           the default is off technically feasible on America Online?    19           A   I believe it is, yes.    20           Q   Do the news group controls that we've just been    21           discussing, for example, those that block binary downloads,    22           do those controls apply to graphical images that are    23           transmitted over electronic mail?    24           A   I do believe that, and I'm part of a team within AOL that    25           is looking at enhancing a variety of aspects of our service                                                                            59     1           including parental controls, and I do believe that there is     2           and will be soon the capability to -- for any user, adult or     3           child, to -- you can receive an E-mail but you wouldn't be     4           able to download whatever was attached to it.  And the reason     5           that we are developing that is that there are given the     6           incredible volume and growth globally of this medium, there     7           are a number of files that are transmitted that contain     8           viruses.  And you could unknowingly download a graphic file     9           containing a computer virus onto your own computer which    10           would not be a good thing.    11           Q   Just to clarify the point, as of today do the parental    12           controls which block binary downloads apply to electronic    13           mail transmissions on America Online?    14           A   My understanding is that they only apply to news groups.    15           Q   Could a America Online subscriber send an E-mail to    16           another America Online subscriber that contains a sexually    17           explicit graphic image?    18           A   They could but it would be violative of our terms of    19           service.    20           Q   I believe you testified that the parental control    21           measures we've been discussing do not currently apply to    22           Worldwide Web sites on the Internet other than the news    23           groups, is that correct?    24           A   If you're speaking of America Online?    25           Q   Yes.                                                                            60     1           A   Directly, yes, that is true.     2           Q   Are you familiar with the entity called Surfwatch?     3           A   Yes, I am generally.     4           Q   Could you take a look at Exhibit 109, this is Defendants'     5           Exhibit 109 in the Volume 3 that I gave you?     6                    (Pause.)     7           Q   If you recall, I showed you this exhibit at your     8           deposition.     9           A   Yes, I do.    10           Q   It indicates that in July of 1995 Surfwatch announced    11           that it signed a letter of intent with America Online to    12           provide additional capability to AOL's parental control    13           feature.  Do you recall testifying at your deposition that    14           America Online's discussions with Surfwatch in connection    15           with that letter of intent had ended, do you recall that?    16           A   Yes, I do.    17           Q   And do you recall testifying that they had ended because    18           of significant technical hurdles or obstacles that Surfwatch    19           could not overcome in order to be compatible with America    20           Online's system, do you recall that testimony?    21           A   Yes, I do.  At that time which was, what, about nine    22           months ago which in this business is a lifetime, at that time    23           nine months ago we were having some technical compatibility    24           problems which I believe have since been corrected, so we are    25           discussing things with them again.                                                                            61     1           Q   There are new discussions with America Online in order to     2           extend parental controls to Internet Websites, is that     3           correct?     4           A   That's correct.  Since that time in July of '95 we've had     5           a working group that I've been involved with exploring the     6           variety of third-party software applications that are on the     7           market today or in development.  And because of the size of     8           our network and a number of other complicated technical     9           reasons, we've had to very carefully look at each one to see    10           which would be compatible and which would not.    11           Q   I could refer you to the exact page if you need me to,    12           but do you recall also testifying that America Online hopes    13           to have the additional parental controls that you've just    14           been discussing available for the Internet sites by July of    15           1996, was that your testimony?    16           A   That is my understanding as of, in fact, last week we had    17           come very close to nailing down the exact configuration of    18           software we would offer free to  our members.    19           Q   Let me back up to a point I should have covered a moment    20           ago.  With respect to the sexually explicit images that may    21           be E-mailed over the electronic mail service, have users ever    22           complained to America Online to your knowledge regarding the    23           transmission of sexually explicit images over E-mail?    24           A   We have received complaints and the way we operate, as I    25           mentioned earlier, as a community, we have places that people                                                                            62     1           can go to turn in those complaints and then we will look at     2           the material, provided we have it, and if it violates our     3           terms of service, the member will be terminated.  If it's     4           something considered illegal, we will turn that information     5           over to the Federal law enforcement authorities.     6           Q   Are you able to give the Court a sense of how often, how     7           frequently such complaints are received?  Is it many, few,     8           what's your estimate on that?     9           A   My estimate would be, based on being directly involved    10           with a lot of these, is that it's a relatively small, it's a    11           few complaints but the key is we try to -- we try to    12           encourage our members, as in any community, to go out and be    13           aware of their surroundings and report suspicious activity.    14                    And in an interesting way out of a city of five    15           million people, if you look at it that way, our sort of    16           informal electronic neighborhood watch program is working    17           frankly much better than it does in my neighborhood in    18           Washington, DC, in the physical world.    19           Q   Referring to Paragraph 26 of your declaration, it    20           indicates that Compuserve currently provides subscribers with    21           free copies of Cyber Patrol and Prodigy will do so as well,    22           is that correct?    23           A   That's correct.    24           Q   Do you know if Cyber Patrol is actually integrated into    25           the Compuserve and Prodigy systems?                                                                            63     1           A   I do not know offhand, but I know that that's what has     2           slowed up our consideration of these is we want to make this     3           as simple and seamless as possible so that when you click on     4           like our parental control screens, it will look very similar     5           so that we don't confuse parents.     6           Q   Do you know with respect to Cyber Patrol and Compuserve     7           if the program has to be affirmatively turned on by     8           subscribers who subscribe to those services?     9           A   I do not know that directly, no, I don't.    10           Q   Do you know if it is technically possible to configure    11           that type of software on systems such as America Online and    12           Compuserve and Prodigy such that it is on when the user signs    13           on?    14           A   I think it's possible technically to do that.  I think it    15           becomes a business question, quite frankly, as to whether you    16           wanted to do it that way or you want to, you know, make the    17           vast majority of users have to unblock or disable that every    18           time that they sign on.    19           Q   Take a look at Exhibit 285 again, please, the first    20           screen or the first page of Exhibit 285, which is the    21           parental control screen, is that correct?    22           A   Yes.     23           Q   There is a separate Icon on the screen called Message    24           Boards, is that correct?    25           A   Yes.                                                                            64     1           Q   Is this an area where messages can be sent back and forth     2           between subscribers and America Online with questions and     3           answers regarding parental controls?     4           A   Yes, as part of our what we call our Community Action     5           Program, we encourage parents to dialogue with each other as     6           well as with our parental control staff people about     7           questions they may have.  We have a number of places on the     8           service where they can lodge those questions.     9           Q   Do you recall at your deposition we went through a number    10           of messages like this that I represented to you were    11           downloaded from the Message Board area, do you recall that?    12           A   I do recall that, yes.    13           Q   I want to ask you about just two or three of them today.     14           Would you take a look first at Exhibit No. 96 of defendants'    15           exhibits?    16                    Do you have Exhibit No. 96, Mr. Burrington?    17           A   Yes, I do.    18           Q   To your knowledge is this an accurate description of how    19           to remove America Online's parental controls after they've    20           been installed?    21           A   Yes, it is.    22           Q   Keep the book handy because I have just a couple I also    23           am going to refer to but, first, let me ask you, have you    24           yourself ever been asked questions by parents as to the how    25           the parental control features on America Online's on line                                                                            65     1           actually work?     2           A   Have I personally?     3           Q   Yeah, have you personally?     4           A   In the course of my -- the kind of work I do in public     5           affairs and externally I have talked to parents over time,     6           yes.     7           Q   If you could take a look at Exhibit No. 97 which, as you     8           can see, was also Exhibit No. 12 at your deposition.  Have     9           you ever been asked a question such as this by a newer user    10           of America Online as to how Parental Controls work?    11           A   Yes, in terms of the question of how do I create    12           subscreen names and how do I create passwords for those, yes,    13           I've answered those types of questions.    14           Q   All right.  And we're not going to go through all of them    15           again but take a look at No. 99 as well?  This was Exhibit    16           No. 14 to your deposition.    17           A   Mm-hmm.    18           Q   Again, have you been asked questions such as this by    19           parents as to how to set up a separate screen name and    20           password for a child?    21           A   Yes, as I just testified, I have been.    22                    JUDGE SLOVITER:  Mr. Coppolino, are you going to be    23           much longer?     24                    MR. COPPOLINO:  No, I'm not, your Honor.    25                    JUDGE SLOVITER:  I just want to know when counsel                                                                            66     1           would like a break.     2                    MR. COPPOLINO:  I think if we went straight through     3           we could be done in about 15 or 20 minutes.  If you wanted to     4           break now, I could finish after the break.     5                    JUDGE SLOVITER:  Oh, the panel wants to take a break     6           now.     7                    THE COURT CLERK:  All rise, please.     8                    JUDGE DALZELL:  We'll be back in 15 minutes.     9                    (Court in recess; 10:49 to 11:07 o'clock a.m.)    10                    THE COURT CLERK:  All rise, please.    11                    JUDGE DALZELL:  Be seated, everyone.  Moving right    12           along.    13           BY MR. COPPOLINO:      14           Q   Mr. Burrington, does America Online have a Kids Only    15           section?    16           A   Yes, it does.    17           Q   Could you describe it for the Court?    18           A   We created a Kids Only section not real long ago, it's    19           called the Kids Only Channel.  And we have separate producers    20           for that and we basically have hand-picked content that we    21           feel is appropriate for children from the year -- ages of 12    22           and under based on work with parental groups that we deal    23           with.  And we have a parental advisory panel that helps us    24           recommend appropriate content and that content is drawn from    25           some of our own content providers like Nickelodeon which has                                                                            67     1           tremendously great stuff for kids and other types of content     2           within AOL.     3                    And then we also have pre-selected a few Worldwide     4           Websites that particularly contain educational or valuable     5           material for children of that age.     6           Q   I've opened your exhibit book to Exhibit 118 which is     7           Defendants' Exhibit 118 which is a chapter from the America     8           Online guide describing the Kids Only section.  Does Exhibit     9           118 describe the types of information AOL makes available    10           specifically for children?    11           A   Yes, in a general sense, with one caveat that this book    12           was published a while back and a number of changes have been    13           made to that area, they're made frequently.    14           Q   Paragraph 16 of your declaration, you state at the    15           beginning that for parents who want to eliminate their    16           children's risk of viewing objectionable material altogether,    17           AOL has established an on-line area designed specifically for    18           children.  Was there an incident recently where an individual    19           E-mailed a sexually explicit image to subscribers who were in    20           a Children Only chat room on America Online?    21           A   Yes, as reported, I believe, in the Wall Street Journal    22           and The Washington Post, there was an incident in which a AOL    23           subscriber who we later found out was an adult was able to    24           get screen names from chat room area, there's also a chat    25           area for kids only that's heavily moderated by both parents                                                                            68     1           and AOL staff, but that person was able to essentially     2           capture some of the screen names and then send those children     3           private electronic mail messages with graphic files attached.      4           It's the --     5                    JUDGE DALZELL:  How in the world did he do that?     6                    THE WITNESS:  Well, he did it by going into the chat     7           area and just -- and writing down, we don't know exactly but     8           writing down --     9                    JUDGE DALZELL:  In the AOL chat area or the parent,    10           the family chat area?    11                    THE WITNESS:  Right, within the Kids Only Channel    12           there is a chat area and he was able to go in there and write    13           down the screen names.  We had that reported to us    14           immediately and it's important to know what we did with that    15           information.  This is the first such incident we've ever had    16           in the Kids Only Channel area, we immediately located that    17           member and terminated his account.  And we're now cooperating    18           with Federal law enforcement authorities on this issue.    19                    And since that time, also, we've set up a new    20           feature, and again, I don't mean to digress here, but I think    21           it's important to note that we are trying very hard, since    22           this is a medium in progress as we sit here today, to make    23           enhancements and changes that we can as we become aware of    24           problems.  That was not something that we had anticipated    25           happening, but as soon as it did happen, we dealt with it                                                                            69     1           directly and swiftly and have since then bolstered the number     2           of staff members that are in that area all day long and have     3           also sent a special -- our CEO sent a special letter to all     4           of our five million members to explain to them, and     5           particularly parents, that there are going to be some     6           potential risks sometimes, as there are in the physical     7           world.  We can't create this absolutely perfect vacuum, and     8           so there is some common sense required there.     9                    For example, if your child gets an electronic mail    10           message and there is a file attached to it and you don't know    11           who it's from, we've made it very simple now at a click of a    12           button to send that to our staff members who will actually    13           open up that message, with the member's permission, and look    14           at the graphic file for either a virus or, if it's    15           inappropriate material, and they will not -- they won't send    16           it back, if it is.  In other words, there's an easy mechanism    17           now.    18                    But a lot of this is common sense again which is    19           trying to educate parents which we're doing in a variety of    20           ways, the industry is and a number of other groups we're    21           working with, to say, you know, just because you're in front    22           of a computer screen doesn't mean that you, you know, throw    23           common sense out the window and that there are a lot of    24           parallels between the physical world and the cyberspace or    25           electronic world.  You don't leave your child alone in a                                                                            70     1           shopping mall, you don't -- tell your child, oh, if somebody     2           comes up to you, a stranger in the park, you don't tell them     3           your phone number and your address.     4                    So we try to drive home to parents that those same     5           basic common sense types of things apply in the cyberspace     6           world and that the responsibility is just as great as it     7           would be in other media, whether it's a television or cable     8           or what have you.     9                    JUDGE DALZELL:  But it's your testimony that the CEO    10           of America Online sent a letter to all five million    11           subscribers about this incident?    12                    THE WITNESS:  That's correct, Steve Case, our    13           chairman and CEO, we sent out what are called community    14           updates.  Again, this is not a corporate gimmick, it's part    15           of our culture of both our members and the company, which is    16           we sent out a special community update the day that that    17           incident happened in which we explained what happened.  And    18           that's our policy, is to be very up front and direct and to    19           tell people what happened and how it happened and what we    20           were doing about it and if they had any questions they could    21           easily contact us and we'd provide them more information.    22                    JUDGE DALZELL:  Well, it wasn't just being a nice    23           guy, you have a powerful marketing interest to do that, don't    24           you?    25                    THE WITNESS:  We absolutely do.  I mean Steve is a                                                                            71     1           very nice guy but we really do have an interest in making     2           sure parents, and particularly in this case, parents are     3           comfortable that they are dealing with an entity and a medium     4           that there is some control and that there are responsible     5           people involved who are trying to make it better.      6                    so clearly it was designed to not panic people and     7           also, frankly, to send a message that this sort of activity     8           will not be tolerated on America Online.     9                    JUDGE SLOVITER:  When he sent the letter was this an    10           electronic letter?    11                    THE WITNESS:  That, yes, your Honor, it was a little    12           button you could -- when you signed on initially to AOL, and    13           people read these, it's amazing the number of people who    14           actually do read that.     15                    JUDGE SLOVITER:  I just wanted to know what kind of    16           button.  Okay.    17                    THE WITNESS:  Just a button.    18           BY MR. COPPOLINO:      19           Q   Mr. Burrington, take a look at Exhibit 105, 105.  Is this    20           the letter you were just referring to in response to the    21           Court's questions from Mr. Case to America Online subscribers    22           in connection with the incident you've just been testifying    23           about?    24           A   Yes, that is correct.    25           Q   So it's Exhibit 105.                                                                             72     1                    JUDGE DALZELL:  Thank you, Mr. Coppolino.  And that     2           was March 19, 1996, so that's pretty recent.     3                    THE WITNESS:  That's correct.     4           BY MR. COPPOLINO:       5           Q   Mr. Burrington, just to finish the point on this subject,     6           the fact that this is a kids only area does not mean that     7           adults cannot enter it, is that correct?     8           A   Yes, that's correct.  A number of parents do choose to     9           accompany their children into that area.    10           Q   Or any other adult or any other person, is that correct?     11           A   Or any -- that's correct.    12           Q   And as you, I believe you indicated that you can obtain    13           the screen names of the people who are in, for example, the    14           children's only chat area because those are available on the    15           screen, is that correct?    16           A   In the event that a child -- partially correct.  In the    17           event that a child is actually in a chat room, which not all    18           children choose to chat with other children in that    19           environment, someone could, I suppose, write down the screen    20           names of people and some of those feed-ins may be in fact    21           children, some could be adults, some could be parents.    22           Q   To your knowledge have parents ever complaint to America    23           Online about the nature of the chat that's going on in these    24           children's only chat rooms?    25           A   Other than this particular incident that we had, I'm not                                                                            73     1           aware of any major complaints.  I think that people have had     2           questions and that's why we've set up a process where they     3           can immediately get to a live human being to ask questions or     4           lodge complaints, if there are some, if they see something     5           that they think is inappropriate.     6           Q   You're not aware of any other complaints by parents with     7           respect to the chat in children's chat rooms?     8           A   To my knowledge I'm not aware of any directly, no, I'm     9           not.    10           Q   Would you look at Paragraph 29, please?    11           A   Of?    12           Q   Your affidavit, I'm sorry, your declaration.  This is the    13           last line of questioning.    14                    In Paragraph 29 you testified all of the major on-    15           line service providers are actively participating and    16           facilitating the use of the so-called PICS standards, P-I-C-    17           S, which stands for Platform for Internet Contents Selection,    18           is that correct?    19           A   That is correct.    20           Q   Is America Online planning to incorporate a Webbrowser in    21           its service that is compatible with a rating service such as    22           PICS?    23           A   Yes, we were, along with Prodigy and Compuserve and    24           Microsoft, the founding members along with several other    25           companies to encourage MIT to develop these standards.  So we                                                                            74     1           will, we have agreed by being part of this process to make     2           sure that our service is compliant or with those technical     3           standards that will be developed.     4           Q   And would that be through your -- through a Webbrowser     5           available on America Online?     6           A   Yes.     7           Q   And just for clarity sake, a Webbrowser is software     8           through which a user can search the Worldwide Websites for     9           information and graphical images, is that generally accurate?    10           A   That's generally accurate, yes.    11           Q   America Online already has a Webbrowser built in its    12           software, built into its software, is that correct?    13           A   That -- that's correct.    14           Q   Is it also correct that America Online has recently    15           entered into a licensing agreement with Microsoft which    16           provides that the Microsoft Internet Explorer Webbrowser will    17           be the standard browser built into America Online, is that    18           correct?    19           A   It will be the standard and you'll also have an option to    20           use the Netscape browser as well.    21           Q   Yeah, that's correct, in addition America Online has    22           entered into a licensing agreement with Netscape which    23           provides that the Netscape Navigator Webbrowser would also be    24           available to AOL subscribers as part of your software?    25           A   There will be an option to download that, yes.                                                                            75     1           Q   So that America Online subscribers would have a choice     2           between these two browsers, is that correct?     3           A   That's correct.     4           Q   Is it also the case that Microsoft will incorporate the     5           America Online software package into its Windows 95 software?     6           A   That was part of the negotiated deal, yes.     7           Q   When you testified a moment ago that America Online is     8           developing software programs that would be compatible with     9           rating standards such as PICS, would this include the    10           Microsoft and Netscape Webbrowsers that we just talked about?    11           A   Yes, it would because both of those companies are as    12           committed as we are to this project.    13           Q   Is it your understanding that this technology will be    14           available by early summer, is that correct?    15           A   That's my understanding, yes.    16                    MR. COPPOLINO:  I have no further questions.    17                    JUDGE SLOVITER:  Thank you very much, Mr. Coppolino.    18                    Mr. Ennis?    19                    MR. ENNIS:  Unless there are any questions from the    20           Court, your Honor, I have no further questions on redirect.    21                    JUDGE SLOVITER:  Okay, let the Court look at its    22           notes which is the whole point of this.    23                    (Pause.)    24                    JUDGE SLOVITER:  Stewart, do you have a couple                                                                            76     1           questions?  I have a couple but you go ahead.     2                    JUDGE DALZELL:  Hmm?     3                    JUDGE SLOVITER:  Do you have a couple questions?     4                    JUDGE DALZELL:  Yes.     5                    Looking at Paragraph 7 of your declaration, Page 4.      6           Just out of curiosity, you say that the daily number of     7           messages that's posted to AOL Bulletin Board is at between     8           200,000 and 250,000 daily.  How do you get that number?     9                    THE WITNESS:  Well, we've actually, I was just    10           informed this morning by my assistant who is here, we have    11           now like ten -- I think I had said earlier there might be 800    12           or over a thousand message boards and I was told that we've    13           hit an all time record of something like 15,000.  And so we    14           are able to track in a sort of just an aggregate way the    15           amount of volume that's occurring on our boards or in our    16           chat rooms or amount of the, the sort of aggregate data on,    17           you know, how many E-mail messages were sent today or how    18           many people actually were logged into a chat room at some    19           point during the day or how many specific message board    20           postings there were or categories of those postings.    21                    JUDGE DALZELL:  This is within, to use your analogy,    22           the AOL swimming pool?    23                    THE WITNESS:  Yes, exactly.    24                    JUDGE DALZELL:  Can you make these counts more -- we    25           heard testimony last -- the first two days here that it's                                                                            77     1           very difficult to count hits, as they're called.  Are you     2           more accurate within your swimming pool than outside in the     3           ocean?     4                    THE WITNESS:  I think if you're talking again that     5           this is a functional sort of analysis, if you're talking     6           about electronic mail that is sent or received within AOL or     7           the message boards, as I said, that is more accurate.  It's     8           still not precisely accurate, but when you get out into the     9           Internet and you start talking about the number of people    10           who've actually clicked on a particular Website, it's much    11           less accurate information.    12                    And in fact the industry, and I chair a group within    13           the industry that -- of all the major on-line Internet    14           companies.  One of the things we're looking at is developing    15           more accurate data as to, you know, some more accurate    16           measure because as this business model continues to evolve,    17           clearly the great promise is that there will be more commerce    18           on the Internet.  And we need to come up with sort of the    19           like Albitron or the -- I forget the television -- Nielsen    20           rating systems, a way to more accurately measure how many    21           people are actually in an area or visit an area each day.    22                    JUDGE DALZELL:  I'd like to just flesh out, and then    23           I'll be done, an area that we got into in some detail with    24           Mr. Bradner.  I don't know if you've read the testimony or    25           not.                                                                            78     1                    THE WITNESS:  No, I have not directly, no, your     2           Honor.     3                    JUDGE DALZELL:  But we were talking about caching,     4           and for the record since I noticed in glancing at the     5           transcript that it was consistently misspelled C-A-S-H-I-N-G,     6           we're not talking about --      7                    (Laughter.)     8                    JUDGE DALZELL:  We're not talking about ATM     9           machines, we're talking about the Internet and it's C-A-C-H-    10           I-N-G.    11                    Does AOL do caching for its subscribers?    12                    THE WITNESS:  Yes.  We do cache on our AOL servers    13           and also members who download, for example, if you're out on    14           the Worldwide Web and you access a Webpage the very first    15           time, it's going to take a while, and that information is    16           downloaded onto your hard drive or it's cached.  And there's    17           actually an area where you can go and purge your cache every    18           now and then to get rid of, you know.  But for example, if I    19           go on today and get into a Webpage and I come back two hours    20           later, it's quicker if most of that information is residing    21           already on my computer.    22                    JUDGE DALZELL:  But if I were accessing, say, the    23           British Library through AOL and obviously that site is in    24           London, it -- would AOL cache the British Library card    25           catalogue for a finite period of time so that the next time I                                                                            79     1           dial in, say an hour later, it's not a long-distance call for     2           you guys, not for me?     3                    THE WITNESS:  Yes.  I mean, that's accurate, we do     4           cache those kinds of sites just again to cut down on cost, to     5           make it more convenient for our members.  Worldwide     6           universally everybody does that, so that's how the system     7           kind of works.  It's no formal convention, it's just that out     8           of practice everybody does that that has a server.     9                    JUDGE DALZELL:  It's in your commercial interest to    10           do that, is it not?    11                    THE WITNESS:  That's correct.    12                    JUDGE DALZELL:  Because it lowers your cost?    13                    THE WITNESS:  It lowers both our costs and our    14           members, it increases their patience level, shall we say, and    15           makes them less impatient because they don't have to wait so    16           long.    17                    JUDGE DALZELL:  Because the second time they get it    18           faster?    19                    THE WITNESS:  Right, exactly.    20                    JUDGE DALZELL:  Okay.  That's all I have.    21                    JUDGE SLOVITER:  Judge Buckwalter?    22                    JUDGE BUCKWALTER:  Yes, I do.      23                    Mr. Burrington, just a housekeeping matter, did you    24           graduate from St. Lawrence University?    25                    THE WITNESS:  No, I actually --                                                                            80     1                    JUDGE BUCKWALTER:  Oh, is that Lawrence, is that     2           correct, Lawrence?     3                    THE WITNESS:  Lawrence in Appleton, Wisconsin,     4           right.     5                    JUDGE BUCKWALTER:  Oh, I didn't know there was a     6           Lawrence University.     7                    THE WITNESS:  Yes, there is.     8                    JUDGE BUCKWALTER:  I'm glad I asked that question,     9           okay.  For your alma mater's --     10                    THE WITNESS:  And I did graduate.    11                    JUDGE BUCKWALTER:  -- for your alma mater's sake,    12           okay.  The thrust of your testimony, I gather, is that you    13           are continuing to make efforts to in some way edit the    14           content of what goes on your service in some way and you're    15           making an effort to see that it's not available, some of it,    16           to people under 18.  Is that correct?    17                    THE WITNESS:  That's -- it's a reasonable statement,    18           your Honor.  I think that what we're doing, to clarify a    19           little bit, is that on those areas, like I said, where we    20           have contracts with third parties, for example, or special    21           areas like the Kids Only area, we can be a little bit more    22           proactive on the reality as given the sheer volume, you know,    23           five million members, hundreds of thousands of postings,    24           people coming in and out from the Internet, so on and so    25           forth, we simply operate, I think -- and I have to use this                                                                            81     1           analogy like any, picture any major city of five million     2           people, there are bound to be some bad actors.     3                    JUDGE BUCKWALTER:  Right.     4                    THE WITNESS:  We have a police force, so to speak,     5           but they can't be everywhere at a time, so we rely on a     6           system of our members complaining to us which works very well     7           and then we're on top of it and we deal with it.     8                    JUDGE BUCKWALTER:  Now, even prior to CDA, which is     9           the act, you were concerned about I think you had a program    10           whereby the applicant had to certify he or she was over 18.     11           This was way before the CDA was ever thought of that you had    12           this provision, is that correct?    13                    THE WITNESS:  That's correct.  And really all the    14           on-line services, the commercial ones and many pure Internet    15           access providers well before, I mean our parental controls,    16           Prodigy's, Compuserve's have been out there and in    17           development in one stage or another for actually several    18           years, way before this became a sexy topic on Capitol Hill,    19           so to speak.  And I think the reality is we've been using    20           those tools and refining them and all of the services, as far    21           as I know, have always required that you have to be 18 years    22           of age or older to sign up.  And that makes sense for a    23           number of reasons because somebody's got to pay the bill,    24           somebody's got to be responsible for the charges on the    25           credit card or the checking account debit.                                                                            82     1                    JUDGE BUCKWALTER:  Is it your opinion, Mr.     2           Burrington, that the industry can't come up with an effective     3           way, I mean America Online can't come up with an effective     4           way of preventing certain access, preventing access to minors     5           of certain material and that indeed it has to come through     6           the parents?     7                    THE WITNESS:  Right.  I mean this whole debate --     8                    JUDGE BUCKWALTER:  Despite PICS and all these other     9           advancements, is that your opinion?    10                    THE WITNESS:  Our opinion, I think, is at least from    11           America Online's perspective, and I do believe I can speak    12           for my colleagues, is that we are trying to find a package of    13           tools that work, give them to parents, give them the    14           education they need to use them.  Remind parents that this    15           is, just because it's cyberspace it's not any different than    16           the physical world and your children may run into things that    17           are inappropriate.  And we will give you the tools and we'll    18           make them simple, we'll make them cheap, but ultimately the    19           most effective way to deal with this issue is for the parents    20           to take that responsibility and we will help them, as we have    21           been.    22                    JUDGE BUCKWALTER:  And you're a lawyer as well, do    23           you think you are complying with the good faith defenses of    24           the-- that the act sets forth?    25                    THE WITNESS:  Well, right now, your -- I'm sorry?                                                                            83     1                    JUDGE BUCKWALTER:  You think you're complying with     2           the good faith defenses that the act sets forth in the manner     3           in which you're approaching this?     4                    THE WITNESS:  That's a very good question, you know,     5           there is so much that's not clear about this act and not     6           clear about some of the definitions.  We have met internally,     7           I and some of my colleagues, to say what are the legal     8           liabilities here, what can we do to try to comply with this     9           particular law if it was upheld, and frankly, we're not sure,    10           we don't know.    11                    And, more importantly, our five million members, I    12           don't think know either because they don't have 20 lawyers in    13           house to advise them.    14                    JUDGE BUCKWALTER:  Okay, I don't want to ask -- take    15           any more time.  Thank you, sir.    16                    JUDGE SLOVITER:  In your Rules of the Road that you    17           were referring to before, you said you reserved the right to    18           remove content.  Now, leaving aside the surveillance that you    19           do of the Kids Only or the Kids Network material, what do you    20           do other than respond to complaints with respect to -- to    21           effectuate that right that you have reserved to yourselves?    22                    THE WITNESS:  If your Honor -- your Honor, if you'll    23           permit me about a minute, let me try to, because there are a    24           couple of different avenues here.    25                    JUDGE SLOVITER:  And how many people does it take                                                                            84     1           and how much money does it take?     2                    THE WITNESS:  A lot and a lot.      3                    (Laughter.)     4                    THE WITNESS:  To be honest with you, but what we do     5           is in a couple of ways, your Honors, we -- let's look at     6           private electronic mail.  And I'm sure -- I haven't  read the     7           record, but I'm sure the Electronic Communications Privacy     8           Act may have been raised here which is, you know, we cannot     9           look at private E-mail, it's against Federal law, so we don't    10           know what people are doing amongst themselves, just as with    11           regular mail.    12                    JUDGE SLOVITER:  It's against Federal law?    13                    THE WITNESS:  It's against Federal law under the    14           Electronic Communications Privacy Act for our company or for    15           anybody to go in and look into somebody's mailbox just like    16           it would be at the end of your -- at your mailbox at your    17           home unless we receive a court order or a subpoena to do so.     18           And we have in fact in some cooperative efforts with the    19           Justice Department have cooperated in those cases.    20                    Then when you look at the Message Boards, we have    21           talked about chat rooms, the three different kind AOL,    22           member, private.  On the AOL rooms and on the member rooms we    23           have staff 24 hours a day, seven days a week who sit there in    24           front of a screen and scroll through these names of rooms and    25           if there's something that looks, you know, on its face that                                                                            85     1           would be, you know, free Microsoft Windows here or child     2           pornography here, if there's such a room we will -- we delete     3           the room, a name, we basically destroy the room and the     4           members are thrown back into the lobby.     5                    If it's really clear or we get a complaint sometimes     6           in the process of Live Chat somebody can, it's sort of like     7           an electronic 911, somebody can send us a message and we'll     8           go in and look.  And if we think it's clearly -- and it's     9           hard for these people to make these judgments, but if it's so    10           clear on its face that it's, for example, illegal child    11           pornography, we will then capture that data, we will record    12           the name of the members and we will terminate them and turn    13           that information over to Federal authorities.    14                    Then in the content area that I think, you know, the    15           vast majority of AOL content again within cooperation with    16           our information providers together we say, you know, just to    17           give you an information provider doesn't mean you have no    18           rules.  They have to also abide by our terms of service and    19           we put the burden on them as well to make sure that the kind    20           of content that they're putting up is not violative of those    21           terms.    22                    But, so it's really a combination, in some areas    23           where it's practical both economically and in terms of    24           staffing to sort of -- and I hate to use this term because we    25           don't look at it this way -- but sort of to hire a police                                                                            86     1           force, if you will, in parts of our community where we know     2           there's going to be potential problems, we can and we do do     3           that, to an extent.     4                    JUDGE SLOVITER:  How many people, this is an area     5           that you have some expertise in, how many people does it take     6           to do the kind of surveillance that you have currently     7           undertaken?     8                    THE WITNESS:  Well, the sort of -- I wouldn't like     9           to use the term "surveillance," your Honor, but just in terms    10           of the --    11                    JUDGE SLOVITER:  I don't know what else it is,    12           but...    13                    THE WITNESS:  The patrolling, maybe, in terms of    14           the, because the surveillance, our members are kind of    15           sensitive to that.  And I think that what we do, your Honor,    16           as far as I know our Terms of Service Department I think has    17           added a number of people, I am estimating here totally but    18           around 50 to 60 people full time who are there to not just    19           patrol but to respond to complaints.    20                    And I don't know, I've never looked, it would be    21           interesting to see out of how many cities of five million    22           people, you know how many police officers there are in a city    23           of five million people, but we don't have anywhere near that    24           because it's just -- it's impossible.    25                    JUDGE SLOVITER:  Some of this case obviously hinges                                                                            87     1           on technical matters which at least this member of the panel     2           is less familiar with than you and maybe the other members,     3           and I just want to see if I can get down to the nub of the     4           difference set forth mostly in Paragraphs 26 through 28 of     5           your declarations between being on a services server computer     6           or on Cyber Patrol?  Am I correct that there's a technical,     7           that there are two ways to do this and that America Online     8           and Prodigy -- well, America Online and Microsoft Network     9           represent one way and Prodigy and Compuserve represent the    10           other?  Is that correct?    11                    THE WITNESS:  That's -- that's almost an accurate    12           statement, let me maybe clarify it.    13                    JUDGE SLOVITER:  I want to know what the difference    14           is, if you can do it sort of in terms that --    15                    THE WITNESS:  Quickly?    16                    JUDGE SLOVITER:  Yeah, and terms that we can    17           understand.    18                    THE WITNESS:  Okay, let me try and do that.    19                    JUDGE SLOVITER:  And the effect for this case, I    20           mean, not -- you know.    21                    THE WITNESS:  Let me do it by way of example just    22           with AOL and this would be true also for our colleagues or    23           competitors.    24                    We have our Parental Control Tools we talked about    25           here.  Those reside on our, they're part of our service, it's                                                                            88     1           part of the thing that you get when you get your disk, it's     2           already in the system but it resides, as does all of this, on     3           a host computer back in Reston, Virginia, where all of our     4           computers are located.       5                    So the member just has that, just like they can     6           access New York Times, they can access Parental Controls.     7                    Now, let's say we were to offer Cyber Patrol or     8           Surfwatch.  There are two ways we can do that.  We can either     9           make it just like --    10                    JUDGE SLOVITER:  That's the other way?    11                    THE WITNESS:  That's -- that's, well --    12                    JUDGE SLOVITER:  That's the alternate, is that the    13           alternate?    14                    THE WITNESS:  It's the alternate but it's -- it's    15           really, it's an enhancement, it's not an either/or, they're    16           really a package.  And what I mean by that is if you notice    17           as we walk through AOL's Parental Controls which are very    18           similar to the other services, they really address most    19           squarely the kind of content we provide.  Like, I mean it    20           addresses that closed swimming pool, mostly.  Those are the    21           lifeguards, if you will, and to some extent it encompasses a    22           little bit of the Internet when we say we can block binary    23           downloads or you can block access to all news groups.    24                    What Surfwatch or Cyber Patrol do is it's an added    25           feature to allow you to block access to specific Websites and                                                                            89     1           to other places on the Internet. So when you put them     2           together, you sort of have this in effect, the attempt is     3           sort of full coverage to cover the pool as well as the ocean.     4                    Now, that's sort of the distinction.  When Prodigy     5           announced or Compuserve announced what they're doing, I     6           suspect what they're doing is packaging within their existing     7           Parental Controls they did a license, you know, with Cyber     8           Patrol and they're going to package that same stuff in     9           together.  The reason it's taken us a little bit longer is    10           we're trying to find a way to make it so seamless and    11           transparent that the member never knows.  They get the    12           benefits of Cyber Patrol but it's going to be the same    13           interface, it's going to all look the same as it does now    14           with Parental Control.  And that means that that software    15           will actually reside on our computers in Reston, we're not    16           going to send a disk out to every single member.  It will sit    17           on our computers and they'll access it just like our regular    18           Parental Controls.    19                    And there's -- there are two important reasons for    20           keeping it in our -- on our host server: one is, frankly, a    21           marketing and an ease of use, the kind of research we've done    22           internally both with our own people and with consultants is    23           that parents don't want to have to switch into this and then    24           switch into that and have to load things and get -- it gets    25           all complicated.                                                                             90     1                    We want them to be familiar with what they've     2           already been working with which is Parental Controls and the     3           other reason is a security reason, which is it's a lot harder     4           for people to disable or to, you know, try to shut off     5           something like the Cyber Patrol or for hackers and that kind     6           of thing.     7                    JUDGE SLOVITER:  Okay.  You say or said that PICS     8           will increase the ease and effectiveness of user-based     9           parental control of minors' on-line access.  I may have    10           gotten it wrong because I was trying to take it -- I can't    11           write so I was typing, I was trying to take it down.  How, I    12           mean does PICS do anything, do PICS do something technical or    13           does it just rate?    14                    THE WITNESS:  PICS is a -- is a --    15                    JUDGE SLOVITER:  But I think, you know, a short    16           answer, please.    17                    THE WITNESS:  Yeah.  It's hard on this one though,    18           your Honor, these are -- these are very complicated.  I think    19           that --    20                    JUDGE SLOVITER:  Well, if the parties are going to    21           have some more about PICS then I don't think  I have to ask    22           you, but...    23                    THE WITNESS:  Do you know?    24                    MR. COPPOLINO:  We are, your Honor.    25                    JUDGE SLOVITER:  Okay, well, then we'll -- an                                                                            91     1           expert, Mr. --     2                    MR. COPPOLINO:  Well, plaintiffs' expert, plaintiffs     3           have a witness, Mr. Basa (ph.) from MIT, I believe, who is an     4           expert in PICS.     5                    JUDGE SLOVITER:  I'm not asking for him to testify.      6           I just don't want to ask duplicative questions.     7                    MR. MORRIS:  Plaintiffs' expert Albert Zosa who is     8           one of the people involved in the creation of PICS at MIT     9           will be testifying on behalf of plaintiffs.  The Government    10           has agreed to allow him, because of the schedule, to testify    11           during the Government's trial days.    12                    THE COURT:  Oh, okay.  Then I won't -- then I'm    13           finished with questions.    14                    And have my questions elicited any or any of the    15           Courts' questions elicited any questions from the --    16                    MR. COPPOLINO:  Just a couple, if I may, your Honor.    17                    JUDGE SLOVITER:  Sure.      18                             FURTHER CROSS-EXAMINATION    19           BY MR. COPPOLINO:      20           Q   Mr. Burrington, Judge Dalzell asked you a couple of    21           questions about caching and in your response were you    22           referring to the caching of information that was available on    23           Worldwide Websites or were you referring to information    24           available through AOL's own on-line content or both?    25           A   I was -- I think the question to me was -- was phrased as                                                                            92     1           the Internet or Worldwide Websites, I believe, and that's     2           what I was referring to.     3           Q   Okay.  And that information is cached on AOL's servers     4           for the convenience of your subscribers?     5           A   That is correct.     6           Q   How man -- I believe you testified in your declaration     7           that AOL has 4,000 employees, is that correct?     8           A   Today, at the rate we're going, it could be 4500 as of     9           today.    10           Q   You used the term "police force" a couple of times in    11           response to questions from the panel.  Were you referring to    12           your Terms of Service advisors?    13           A   Our Terms of Service staff, yes.    14           Q   Do you know approximately how many Terms of Service staff    15           advisors you have?    16           A   I think I testified, and it's a very much of a rough    17           estimate because I haven't -- it changes rapidly, is about    18           60, I thought, full time.    19           Q   And could you just indicate what types of services they    20           monitor, do they monitor chat areas, for instance?    21           A   Yeah, mostly they monitor the chat rooms, certainly the    22           member-created rooms as well as the AOL room.  They are    23           available in the Kids Only area, anywhere where there's more    24           likely to be questions.  And there is a, you know, they're    25           universal, if you will, Cyber 911 capabilities on AOL which                        WT02-B05-95IA095-001027-B015-236http://www.cdt.org:80/ciec/transcripts/April_1_Donaldson.html 205.177.10.31 19970215013221 text/html 10591HTTP/1.0 200 OKDate: Sat, 15 Feb 1997 01:30:57 GMTServer: Apache/1.1.1Content-type: text/html    Testimony of Stephen Donaldson Testimony of Stephen Donaldson -- president, Stop Prisoner Rape April 1, 1996     20                    JUDGE SLOVITER:  Next witness.    21                    MS. HEINS:  Good morning, your Honors.  I'm Marjorie    22           Heins, one of the attorneys representing the ACLU plaintiffs    23           and our next witness is Stephen Donaldson.  He's the    24           president of Stop Prisoner Rape.    25                    (Pause.)                                                                            94     1                    MS. HEINS:  Mr. Donaldson's direct testimony     2           declaration was signed on March 17th and filed with the Court     3           on March 28th and at this point I would move it into     4           evidence.     5                    JUDGE SLOVITER:  Do you have any objection?     6                    MR. COPPOLINO:  No objections, your Honor.     7                    JUDGE SLOVITER:  Okay, it's accepted, received.     8                    MR. COPPOLINO:  Your Honor, if I may introduce to     9           the Court my colleague, Mary Kustel, who will be handling the    10           cross-examination of this witness.  Thank you.    11                    THE COURT CLERK:  Mr. Donaldson, would you please    12           stand and raise your right hand?    13                    STEPHEN DONALDSON, Plaintiffs' Witness, Sworn.    14                    THE COURT CLERK:  Thank you, please be seated.     15           State and spell your name.    16                    THE WITNESS:  Stephen Donaldson, S-t-e-p-h-e-n     17           D-o-n-a-l-d-s-o-n.    18                    JUDGE DALZELL:  Proceed.    19                    MS. KUSTEL:  Good afternoon, your Honors.    20                                 CROSS-EXAMINATION    21           BY MS. KUSTEL:      22           Q   Good afternoon, Mr. Donaldson.  You are the president of    23           Stop Prisoner Rape, correct?    24           A   That is correct.    25           Q   And Stop Prisoner Rape is a non-profit organization                                                                            95     1           committed to combating prison rape, is that correct?     2           A   That is correct.     3           Q   It also is committed to providing assistance to the     4           victims of prisoner rape, correct?     5           A   Yes.     6           Q   You are concerned that Stop Prisoner Rape might be     7           prosecuted under the Communications Decency Act for material     8           that it posts on its web site, correct?     9           A   Yes.    10           Q   Stop Prisoner Rape posts material on its Website that    11           discusses prisoner rape, correct?    12           A   Yes.    13           Q   And it often discusses that topic in graphic detail,    14           correct?    15           A   We include on our site discussion in graphic detail, not    16           necessarily originated by us but often by prisoners, former    17           prisoners.    18           Q   But there is material on your site that is discussing    19           prisoner rape in graphic detail, correct?    20           A   Yes.    21           Q   And would you also describe some of the language in the    22           material on your site as street language?    23           A   Yes, yes.  Prisoners in particular are not educated in    24           Latin and tend to use Anglo-Saxon English.    25           Q   One of the purposes of Stop Prisoner Rape's Website is to                                                                            96     1           educate the public about the phenomenon of prisoner rape, is     2           that right?     3           A   That's correct.     4           Q   And among the things that the Website does is to provide     5           data about prisoner rape, is that correct?     6           A   That's correct.     7           Q   And it also provides a forum for the victims of prisoner     8           rape to discuss their recollections and experiences, correct?     9           A   Yes.    10           Q   And it also provides information about the spreading of    11           AIDS as a result of prison rape, is that correct?    12           A   Yes, and prevention of the spreading of AIDS.    13           Q   For example, could you please turn to Exhibit Number 145    14           in the Defendants' Exhibits Volume 3?    15           A   I'm not sure which of these volumes Defendant's...    16                    MS. KUSTEL:  May I approach the witness to help him?    17                    JUDGE DALZELL:  Yes, you may.    18                    JUDGE SLOVITER:  Sure.    19                    THE WITNESS:  143?    20           BY MS. KUSTEL:      21           Q   145.    22           A   145?    23           Q   Yes, 145.    24           A   Yes.    25           Q   Do you recognize this as the hard copy of some material                                                                            97     1           that appears on the Stop Prisoner Rape Website?     2           A   AIDS advice for the prisoner rape survivor, right.     3           Q   And you recognize it as something that appears on the     4           Website, correct?     5           A   That is correct.     6           Q   You're concerned that Stop Prisoner Rape might be     7           prosecuted under the Act for posting this on its Website,     8           correct?     9           A   Yes.    10           Q   And Stop Prisoner Rape's purpose in posting this material    11           on its Website is to give practical advice to potential    12           prisoner rape victims, correct?    13           A   That is part of the purpose.  Another part of the purpose    14           is to educate professionals who must deal with these issues    15           as to what the reality of the situation is and for that    16           purpose we have in effect given them a copy of the advice    17           that we give to prisoners directly.    18           Q   So, the purpose, Stop Prisoner Rape's purpose is both to    19           give advice to potential victims and to educate professionals    20           and other people?    21           A   Right, also to provide support for those who have already    22           become victims.    23           Q   Would you characterize the material in this exhibit as    24           using street language?    25           A   Yes, I counted 11 instances of language that might be                                                                            98     1           considered objectionable by some people.     2           Q   And you would characterize it as street language?     3           A   Yes; Anglo-Saxon English, in other words.     4           Q   Stop Prisoner Rape's purpose in using street language in     5           this exhibit is to educate people who might not otherwise     6           understand other language, is that correct?     7           A   Yes.  Since the document concerned was written for     8           prisoners we have had to write it in language that even     9           uneducated prisoners, some of whom can even barely read,    10           would understand.    11           Q   Does Stop Prisoner Rape also post statistics concerning    12           prisoner rape on its Website?    13           A   Yes, we have a statistical report now in its seventh    14           edition.    15           Q   Could you please turn to Exhibit 138?  Is this one of the    16           statistical reports that Stop Prisoner Rape posts on its    17           Website?    18           A   Correct, it's called "Rape of Incarcerated Americans, a    19           Preliminary Statistical Look."     20           Q   Thank you.  Could you please turn also to Exhibit 143?     21           Do you recognize this as material that is posted on the Stop    22           Prisoner Rape's Website as well?    23           A   Yes, this is the program statement on sexual assault    24           prevention intervention programs by the Federal Bureau of    25           Prisons.                                                                            99     1           Q   Stop Prisoner Rape has a person its board of directors     2           that's responsible for maintaining the Website, correct?     3           A   That is correct.     4           Q   That person is Ellen Spertus?     5           A   Ellen Spertus, and her title is Webmaster.     6           Q   Ms. Spertus is a doctoral candidate in computer science     7           at MIT, correct?     8           A   That is correct.     9           Q   Would you agree that she's very knowledgeable about    10           computers?    11           A   Yes, I would.    12           Q   Do you know if Ms. Spertus knows HTML or hypertext mark-    13           up language?    14           A   She does.    15                    MS. KUSTEL:  Your Honors, may I have a moment to    16           confer with counsel?    17                    JUDGE DALZELL:  Yes.    18                    (Pause.)    19                    MS. KUSTEL:  Thank you, Mr. Donaldson.  I have no    20           further questions.    21                    JUDGE SLOVITER:  Thank you.      22                    MS. HEINS:  Nothing -- no redirect at this time.    23                    JUDGE SLOVITER:  Okay.  Does the Court...    24                    JUDGE DALZELL:  No.    25                    JUDGE BUCKWALTER:  I don't believe I do, thank you.                                                                           100     1                    JUDGE SLOVITER:  Okay, I don't.  Thank you very     2           much.     3                    THE WITNESS:  Thank you very much.     4                    (Witness excused.) Back to Hearing Transcripts index Back to Citizens Internet Empowerment Coalition Page WT02-B05-96IA095-001027-B015-258http://www.cdt.org:80/ciec/transcripts/April_1_Anker.html 205.177.10.31 19970215013235 text/html 32871HTTP/1.0 200 OKDate: Sat, 15 Feb 1997 01:31:15 GMTServer: Apache/1.1.1Content-type: text/html    Testimony of Andrew Anker Testimony of Andrew Anker, president/CEO of Hotwired Adventures April 1, 1996      5                    JUDGE SLOVITER:  The next witness?     6                    (Pause.)     7                    MS. KAPPLER:  Thank you, your Honors.  Ann Kappler     8           for the ALA plaintiffs.  Plaintiffs next call Andrew L.     9           Anker, who is president and CEO of Hotwired Adventures, LLC,    10           one of the plaintiffs in this action.    11                    THE COURT CLERK:  Would you please raise your right    12           hand?    13                    ANDREW L. ANKER, Plaintiffs' Witness, Sworn.    14                    THE COURT CLERK:  Thank you, please be seated.     15           Please state and spell your name.    16                    THE WITNESS:  Andrew L. Anker, A-n-k-e-r.    17                    MS. KAPPLER:  At this time, your Honors, plaintiffs    18           move into evidence the declaration of Andrew L. Anker as his    19           direct trial testimony, the declaration was executed on the    20           26th of March and submitted to this Court on the 28th of    21           March.    22                    JUDGE SLOVITER:  Thank you.  Does the Government    23           have any objection?    24                    MR. COPPOLINO:  We have no objection, your Honor.     25           Mr. Anker's cross-examination will be handled by my                                                                           101     1           colleague, Craig Blackwell, Judge Dalzell signed his pro hac     2           vice petition this morning.     3                    JUDGE SLOVITER:  That's fine, thank you.  Nice to     4           get a chance to see you all, hear you all.     5                    MR. BLACKWELL:  Good morning, your Honors.     6                    JUDGE DALZELL:  Good morning.     7                    JUDGE SLOVITER:  No, it's afternoon.     8                    (Laughter.)     9                                 CROSS-EXAMINATION    10           BY MR. BLACKWELL:      11           Q   Good afternoon, Mr. Anker.    12           A   Good afternoon, Mr. Blackwell.    13           Q   What is your position at Hotwired?    14           A   I am president and CEO.    15           Q   And you described Hotwired in your affidavit as an on-    16           line news and entertainment service, correct?    17           A   Yes.    18           Q   Could you turn to Government's Exhibit 122 in the binder    19           in front of you?    20                    (Pause.)    21           Q   This is Hotwired's home page on the Web, correct?    22           A   Yes.    23           Q   And the content on Hotwired's site is grouped in terms of    24           topics into the -- into seven subject matters that are listed    25           on this page, correct?                                                                           102     1           A   Right now it is, yes; that changes on a regular basis,     2           but at this point, correct.     3           Q   This is the current?     4           A   Yes.     5           Q   Directing your attention to the exhibit, I want to go     6           briefly over the seven topic areas.  There's Worldbeat,     7           right?     8           A   Correct.     9           Q   And that's information relating to travel?    10           A   Correct.    11           Q   There's Signal --    12           A   Correct.    13           Q   -- which is news and news and commentary section?    14           A   Correct.    15           Q   Which is information about things like Wall Street...    16           A   Politics, the Net, that kind of thing.    17           Q   There's Renaissance, correct?    18           A   Yes.    19           Q   Which is information about arts and entertainment?    20           A   Right.    21           Q   And that includes things like reviews and coverage of    22           arts events?    23           A   It includes that, yes.    24           Q   Then there's Cocktail --    25           A   Right.                                                                           103     1           Q   -- which is information about how to make different types     2           of drinks?     3           A   Again, among other things, yes.     4           Q   Then there's Piazza --     5           A   Right.     6           Q   -- which has on-line chat and thread discussions relating     7           generally to the other topics on Hotwired's site, correct?     8           A   It relates to that and to some larger discussions that     9           don't necessarily have to pertain to Hotwired's specific    10           content.    11           Q   About political issues...    12           A   Broad-based issues that concern our community.    13           Q   Political issues?    14           A   That would certainly be one.    15           Q   Social issues?    16           A   Correct.    17           Q   Just for the record, a thread discussion is a form of    18           asynchronous communication postings by users, correct?    19           A   Right.    20                    JUDGE SLOVITER:  That wasn't in my dictionary when I    21           read it last night --    22                    (Laughter.)    23                    JUDGE SLOVITER:  -- and I didn't have a chance to    24           look at the big one, is somebody going to tell us what that    25           is?  Do you know?                                                                           104     1                    THE WITNESS:  May I?  Yes, sure.     2                    JUDGE SLOVITER:  Judge Dalzell probably knows.     3                    JUDGE DALZELL:  Not at the same time.     4                    THE WITNESS:  The distinction is made asynchronous     5           versus real-time.  Asynchronous is not in real time, so     6           asynchronous discussion is where I may go and post and then     7           it remains on the discussion board, equivalent to what     8           American Online has, then someone else at another time will     9           come and see that.  The distinction is real-time chat, which    10           is -- it's actually happening there, I'll type something, if    11           you're in the room you'll see it and if you came to the room    12           five minutes later you wouldn't actually see it.    13                    JUDGE SLOVITER:  Thank you both for elucidating.    14           BY MR. BLACKWELL:      15           Q   And Hotwired includes both sites that you have described?    16           A   Correct.    17           Q   And, finally, there's Wired Magazine, which is the on-    18           line version of Wired Magazine, correct?    19           A   Yes, I think you skipped Netizen (ph.), which is our    20           election and politics coverage, but that's correct.    21           Q   There's Netizen and then the final category is Wired?    22           A   Correct.    23           Q   And Wired is a nationally-distributed magazine, correct?    24           A   Yes.    25           Q   With a circulation of over 300,000?                                                                           105     1           A   Yes.     2           Q   Mr. Anker, I'd like you to direct your attention to     3           Defendant's Exhibit 125, which is in the same notebook in     4           front of you, do you see it there?     5           A   Yes.     6           Q   Did this appear in the Renaissance program section that     7           we just described?     8           A   Right.  We call them channels, but, yes, it was a piece     9           of the Renaissance channel.    10           Q   And this is a feature Hotwired ran on two artists,    11           correct?    12           A   Correct, Allen Ginsberg and Francesco Clemente.    13           Q   And Ginsberg is a poet?    14           A   Yes.    15           Q   And Clemente is a painter?    16           A   Correct.    17           Q   And this feature combines original paintings by Clemente    18           with original text by Ginsberg, correct?    19           A   Correct.  I don't think either one of them was actually    20           created specifically for Hotwired, but these have been around    21           for a while.    22           Q   These are their original works of art?    23           A   Correct.    24           Q   And you are concerned, sir, that Defendants' Exhibit 125    25           may be covered by the Communications Decency Act, correct?                                                                           106     1           A   Given that I don't understand what patently offensive or     2           indecent means, and I don't understand under which     3           communities they may be prosecuted, it's fair to say that I     4           am concerned by this exhibited.     5           Q   And you are concerned that all of the Ginsberg poems in     6           the exhibit may be covered, correct?     7           A   Yeah, I think -- I have degrees of concern about each     8           one.  I mean, there are certainly some that I think it would     9           be safe to say I am more concerned by, given specific pieces    10           of content but, again, given the unclear nature of the    11           language in the CDA it's safe to say I'm concerned about    12           everything.    13           Q   Are you also concerned about all of the Clemente pictures    14           that are referenced here too, correct?    15           A   Correct.    16           Q   Now, Hotwired has never to your knowledge posted or    17           otherwise included in its on-line offerings sexually explicit    18           pictures, has it?    19           A   How would you define sexually explicit?    20           Q   Let's take as an example a centerfold from Penthouse    21           magazine.    22           A   Not to my knowledge -- not to my knowledge would we ever    23           do certainly a centerfold from Penthouse magazine, it would    24           be a copyright violation, but if you're asking is that the    25           type of content that generally appears on Hotwired, no.                                                                           107     1           Q   To your knowledge it's never appeared, correct?     2           A   To my knowledge, no.     3           Q   And to your knowledge Hotwired has never posted or     4           included in its on-line offerings pictures of couples engaged     5           in sexual activity, has it?     6           A   Again, I think in this exhibit there is an example that     7           might be construed as that.     8           Q   Which page of the exhibit are you pointing to?     9                    (Pause.)    10           Q   Is it the second page from the end?    11                    JUDGE SLOVITER:  "Labyrinth," is it "Labyrinth"?    12                    THE WITNESS:  Yes, the "Labyrinth" page.  It's hard    13           obviously with this photocopy that I have, but I think it's    14           safe to say that that is -- that pictures two people engaged    15           in a sexual act.    16           BY MR. BLACKWELL:      17           Q   Now, in addition to the "Labyrinth" painting by Clemente    18           you are not aware, are you, of any other posting in    19           Hotwired's on-line offerings of couples engaged in sexual    20           activity, are you?    21           A   I am not personally aware.    22           Q   And also, Mr. Anker, Hotwired has never to your knowledge    23           posted or otherwise included in its offerings pictures of    24           excretory activities, has it?    25           A   Not to my knowledge.                                                                           108     1           Q   You took a one-year computer programming course in high     2           school, Mr. Anker?     3           A   That's correct.     4           Q   And that's the extent of your formal training in computer     5           programming?     6           A   Yes.     7           Q   Other than that you're self-taught?     8           A   Yes.     9           Q   You're familiar with hypertext markup language, aren't    10           you?    11           A   Yes.    12           Q   HTML?    13           A   Right.    14           Q   And you have used it to create your own personal Web    15           page, correct?    16           A   That's correct.    17           Q   And it took you approximately an hour or two to create    18           your own Web page and get it up and running?    19           A   Right.  As I think as I said in my deposition, that was    20           the initial amount of time; a good Website is constantly    21           being worked on, but in terms of the initial amount of time    22           to get it put up, yes, that's about right.    23           Q   Thank you, Mr. Anker.    24                    MR. BLACKWELL:  Your Honors, no further questions at    25           this point.                                                                           109     1                    JUDGE SLOVITER:  Thank you.       2                    JUDGE DALZELL:  Ms. Kappler?     3                    JUDGE SLOVITER:  Any redirect?     4                    MS. KAPPLER:  Your Honor, we have no redirect     5           questions, unless the Court has questions which might prompt     6           them.     7                    JUDGE SLOVITER:  Yes, Judge Buckwalter has     8           questions.     9                    JUDGE BUCKWALTER:  No, I don't.    10                    JUDGE SLOVITER:  Oh, no, you don't?    11                    JUDGE BUCKWALTER:  No, I don't.    12                    JUDGE SLOVITER:  Okay.  Judge Dalzell?    13                    JUDGE DALZELL:  In Paragraph 17 of your declaration    14           you talk about the Hotwired's current registration system,    15           and you said that -- I think it's in Paragraph 17, that as    16           far as the password issue is concerned that some people have    17           resigned, is that true?    18                    THE WITNESS:  There are definitely people who will    19           not come to our site because of the password issue.    20                    JUDGE DALZELL:  And how do you know that?    21                    THE WITNESS:  We actually -- as of I believe it's    22           last August I have made it optional.  So, you can either come    23           in and get certain additional features if you choose to    24           subscribe using a password or you can visit our content    25           without, and the numbers that we see are approximately five                                                                           110     1           times as many people come in without entering their password.     2                    JUDGE DALZELL:  What's that?     3                    THE WITNESS:  About five times as many people on a     4           daily basis that visit our site don't enter the password,     5           even though we do give them a number of features to help them     6           actually go through our site better, they would still rather     7           not enter their password.     8                    JUDGE DALZELL:  All right, that's the only one I     9           have.    10                    JUDGE SLOVITER:  I might have one, let me just    11           double check.    12                    (Pause.)    13                    JUDGE SLOVITER:  I think you answered the    14           Government's questions by saying you couldn't think of -- I    15           guess the purport of your answers was you couldn't think of    16           anything, was it that you couldn't think of anything that    17           Wired communicates that might fall within this statute, was    18           that your answer?    19                    THE WITNESS:  I don't believe so.    20                    JUDGE SLOVITER:  Because you talked in Paragraph 8    21           of something called -- a news group called Alt. Sex Bondage.     22           I'm not sure I now what alt. means, what is alt. for that    23           purpose?    24                    THE WITNESS:  That's a -- in the UseNet news it's    25           set up actually in a set of hierarchies, alt. is one of the                                                                           111     1           hierarchies being a list.  And there's broad categories,     2           there's comp., which is anything about computers --     3                    JUDGE SLOVITER:  Well, what is alt.?     4                    THE WITNESS:  Alt. is alternative.  And, so, there's     5           a set of discussion groups on just generally alternative     6           topics.  There's a UseNet news group called Alt.Wired, which     7           is where people talk about Wired magazine.     8                    JUDGE SLOVITER:  Well, people who are on or access     9           this news group, if that's the right word --    10                    THE WITNESS:  Correct.    11                    JUDGE SLOVITER:  -- can talk about alternative    12           sexual bondage, is that right?    13                    THE WITNESS:  I personally have never been on that,    14           so I don't know offhand, but presumably, given the name, that    15           sounds right.    16                    JUDGE SLOVITER:  And to your knowledge is Hotwired    17           on the list of groups or entities or services such as    18           Surfwatch that would remain access to Hotwired from children    19           should the parents select Surfwatch, do you know that?    20                    THE WITNESS:  I am not familiar with how Surfwatch    21           works specifically, but I --    22                    JUDGE SLOVITER:  No, I'm not asking you that, I'm    23           asking you whether as far as you know Hotwired has been    24           identified by parental control groups as a source that could    25           be blocked or should be blocked from children under their                                                                           112     1           control?     2                    THE WITNESS:  I know at one point we did a story on     3           -- basically in response to the Time Magazine story about     4           cyberporn that we called "Journaporn," and I actually believe     5           it was filed as an exhibit.  I know at one point early on     6           that was actually blocked because it contained the word porn     7           in it, even though it didn't really have anything to do with     8           pornography in that sense.  At that time we were blocked.     9                    JUDGE SLOVITER:  But you have other material that--    10           is it correct that you have other material that -- besides    11           the word porn which might subject it to blocking by those who    12           want to shield minors from that material?    13                    THE WITNESS:  I think --    14                    JUDGE SLOVITER:  I mean, I've never heard of it    15           before this case, so --    16                    THE WITNESS:  Yeah, I think there are certain pieces    17           of Hotwired -- I mean, I'm a parent myself and there are    18           certain pieces of Hotwired that I would not want my children    19           to see, including the story on alt. sex bondage --    20                    JUDGE SLOVITER:  But that's a news -- go ahead --    21                    JUDGE BUCKWALTER:  No, I'm sorry.    22                    JUDGE SLOVITER:  But that's a news group, right?    23                    THE WITNESS:  I think what's discussed here in    24           Paragraph 8 is Wired Magazine wrote a story about the alt.    25           sex bondage news group that then appeared in Wired Magazine                                                                           113     1           and was then, as part of Wired Magazine's place on Hotwired,     2           appeared on Hotwired.  So, it is not actually the news group     3           itself, it was an editorial about this news group.     4                    JUDGE SLOVITER:  I see.  And there is some of that     5           material you would not want your own minors to see, is that     6           correct?     7                    THE WITNESS:  That's correct.     8                    JUDGE BUCKWALTER:  I was just going to say that, as     9           I gather from your declaration, you as a content provider are    10           doing nothing to identify the nature of your material or to    11           make it inaccessible to people under 18, is that right?    12                    THE WITNESS:  That is correct.    13                    JUDGE BUCKWALTER:  Whereas some content providers do    14           that, am I correct about that, or make some effort to    15           identify their material?    16                    THE WITNESS:  I don't know of any offhand.  I mean,    17           I think it's safe to say --    18                    JUDGE BUCKWALTER:  Well, maybe that's more of a    19           technical area -- I'll let you answer, go ahead, what were    20           you going to say?    21                    THE WITNESS:  I mean, I think it's safe to say that    22           we're certainly going to telegraph to -- you know, through    23           our introduction pages what the content is about and people    24           who might feel uncomfortable with the subject matter could at    25           that time choose to go elsewhere.  So, we're never going to                                                                           114     1           as just part of our own editorial mission surprise people     2           with something that they wouldn't necessarily want to see in     3           that way, but I don't know of any system we're doing     4           specifically nor of any other content providers that one by     5           one says here is what our judgment is on each specific piece     6           of content for any specific audience in that way.     7                    JUDGE BUCKWALTER:  Okay, that answers the question I     8           asked you.  Okay, thank you.     9                    JUDGE DALZELL:  Following up on Judge Buckwalter's    10           question and also Chief Judge Sloviter's, in Paragraph 26 you    11           talk about what I would call something of a Catch 22, that    12           is, if you were to label a site adults-only that that would    13           scare off advertisers, isn't that what you say there, that    14           they would "wrongly categorize it as adult's erotic or    15           pornographic site and, therefore, would be perceived as an    16           undesirable advertiser vehicle," close-quote?    17                    THE WITNESS:  I think advertisers tend to be    18           conservative and something that on the face of it is listed    19           as adults-only, regardless of what ends up being inside of    20           it, it does get unfairly tarred.    21                    JUDGE DALZELL:  But what I want to follow up on,    22           since you're a content provider, are you familiar with this    23           PICS proposal that is being noised about?    24                    THE WITNESS:  I am familiar with it in general, I'm    25           not familiar with any of the specifics of how it works.                                                                           115     1                    JUDGE DALZELL:  Well, as I understand it from the     2           declarations and the stipulation, it would involve self-     3           rating.  How would you self-rate yourself?     4                    THE WITNESS:  I really have to understand the system     5           better, I think --     6                    JUDGE DALZELL:  Well, let's use motion picture     7           ratings, if we could.     8                    THE WITNESS:  I, to be honest, tend to have problems     9           with --    10                    JUDGE SLOVITER:  We assume you're being honest.    11                    (Laughter.)    12                    THE WITNESS:  No, I tend to have problems with    13           things like the motion picture rating only in that, you know,    14           what is R-rated is what's been decided by Hollywood.  I have    15           seen plenty of R-rated films that I think have extremely    16           violent content that I as a parent would never want my    17           children to see, whereas I have seen -- I have seen content    18           of a sexual nature that doesn't concern me anywhere near as    19           much get much tougher ratings.  I think it's really -- the    20           types of content ratings, if you will, that I would want to    21           do would not be akin to an MPA, Motion Pictures Association.    22                    JUDGE DALZELL:  But does that then say that whatever    23           content ratings system is agreed to by the PICS group that    24           you would not be interested in participating in it?  Because    25           I take it you won't agree with every one of their                                                                           116     1           definitions.     2                    THE WITNESS:  It depends -- if the nature of the     3           PICS system is to identify the types of content, sexual     4           nature, violence, language, that kind of thing, I think     5           that's the kind of thing that I can agree with, and the     6           understanding that then parents can decide what, given the     7           age of their children and given their own sensibilities, they     8           would like their children to see or not to see.     9                    JUDGE DALZELL:  Well, given the Ginsberg-Clemente    10           materials that you have for us here, how would you rate it    11           using the motion picture rating system?    12                    THE WITNESS:  I would have to really go back and    13           look at it again, but, again, I'm not sure -- there is    14           nothing that I saw in terms of the pictures necessarily that    15           would concern me for my six-year-old to see.    16                    JUDGE DALZELL:  Okay.  So, you would rate that G or    17           PG?  Well, because you're going to be doing the self-rating.     18           As I understand the PICS system, you don't have to worry, you    19           don't have to disagree with anybody, you can rate it    20           yourself.  So, how would you rate it, G or PG or R?    21                    THE WITNESS:  Again, for my own personal    22           sensibilities -- and one of the tough things that you have    23           here is obviously what you're talking about as a parent    24           personally versus -- I would say as a category it includes    25           sexual material.  So, me as a parent -- I would say light                                                                           117     1           sexual material, you know, painting, not specific imagery of     2           a photographic type or something of that sort, that's the     3           kind of imagery that I would not have a problem with my     4           children seeing.     5                    JUDGE DALZELL:  The article on alt. sex bondage,     6           however, would you rate that NC-17?     7                    THE WITNESS:  Again, I would say that that has     8           explicit language, explicit language describing sexual     9           content, which would be something that I probably would not    10           want my children to see.    11                    JUDGE DALZELL:  All right.  And so since the alt.    12           sex bondage is within Hotwired's service would you not as a    13           general matter have to rate your whole system NC-17 because    14           part of it is NC-17?    15                    THE WITNESS:  One of the problems with the Web --    16           and going to the home pages is -- it's very difficult,    17           because it's not a front door in the same sense where you    18           always have to hit the main site, ww.hotwired.com, there is    19           no reason why someone can't come in directly into that    20           Clemente piece, for instance.    21                    JUDGE DALZELL:  Hyperlink into it?    22                    THE WITNESS:  Hyperlink right into it.  There's    23           discussion about Allen Ginsberg someplace else and someone    24           says, here's a very interesting store, link right to it, and    25           the person doesn't know that they're on Hotwired necessarily,                                                                           118     1           they have no idea about the Netizen or Signals, some of our     2           other sections, they're in a very specific subject.  So, you     3           know, the idea that one specific piece of content would then     4           void the entire system, it's really a number of different     5           systems and you can hit at any different -- any one of a     6           different number of ways.     7                    JUDGE DALZELL:  So, what you're highlighting is     8           something we got into, I guess you weren't here the first two     9           days, which is you would not only have to rate your service    10           as a general matter, you would have to rate each item of    11           information in it that could be hyperlinked into, correct?    12                    THE WITNESS:  Again, I think you would -- there    13           would even be no reason to necessarily do the entire system.     14           Every single piece of content, I've got about 10,000 pages on    15           my site, we would need to go through every one of those    16           10,000 pages and make a determination as to who we felt    17           should or shouldn't see it.    18                    JUDGE DALZELL:  Isn't that exactly the PICS proposal    19           though?    20                    THE WITNESS:  Again, I am not overly familiar with    21           the PICS proposal --    22                    JUDGE DALZELL:  Okay, fine.    23                    THE WITNESS:  -- and, so, I don't know.    24                    JUDGE SLOVITER:  What percent -- can you say what    25           percentage of your material, about what percentage of your                                                                           119     1           material is sexual content?     2                    THE WITNESS:  I don't know, it would be a very small     3           number, a very small percent.     4                    JUDGE SLOVITER:  Really?  I see.  Okay, thank you.     5                    Does counsel have any more?     6                    MR. BLACKWELL:  None from the Government, your     7           Honor.     8                    MS. KAPPLER:  No questions, your Honor.     9                    JUDGE SLOVITER:  No questions you said?    10                    MR. BLACKWELL:  Nothing for the Government.    11                    JUDGE SLOVITER:  Thank you very much.    12                    THE WITNESS:  Thank you.    13                    (WitnesWT02-B05-97IA095-001027-B016-30http://www.cdt.org:80/ciec/transcripts/April_1_Rheingold.html 205.177.10.31 19970215013249 text/html 66592HTTP/1.0 200 OKDate: Sat, 15 Feb 1997 01:31:29 GMTServer: Apache/1.1.1Content-type: text/html    Testimony of Howard Rheingold Testimony of Howard Rheingold, author April 1, 1996 (Transcript refers to Harold Rheingold)     14                    (Discussion held off the record.)    15                    JUDGE SLOVITER:  Okay, next witness.    16                    MR. HANSEN:  Does your Honor want to break for lunch    17           at this point?  The next witness is likely to be somewhat --    18           I think somewhat longer than the two we have just heard.    19                    JUDGE SLOVITER:  Okay.  Who is the next witness?    20                    MR. HANSEN:  Harold Rheingold.    21                    JUDGE DALZELL:  Okay.    22                    JUDGE SLOVITER:  Okay.    23                    MR. HANSEN:  We're happy to start if that's the    24           Court's preference.    25                    JUDGE SLOVITER:  Well, maybe we can do the technical                                                                           120     1           -- we're really concerned about the time, because we don't     2           know how long -- I mean, you only have this day for this.      3           So, why -- if it's all right, why don't we get the technical     4           aspect out and then you can start again -- or will that save     5           any time?     6                    MR. HANSEN:  Your Honors, my name is Christopher     7           Hansen, I'm one of the lawyers for the ACLU plaintiffs in     8           this case, and the plaintiffs call Harold Rheingold.     9                    Your Honor, Mr. Rheingold's declaration was signed    10           on March 26th, 1996, plaintiffs move into evidence his    11           declaration as his direct testimony.    12                    JUDGE SLOVITER:  Does the Government object or is --    13                    MS. RUSSOTTO:  Yes, your Honor, we do.    14                    JUDGE SLOVITER:  Oh, you do?    15                    MS. RUSSOTTO:  Your Honor, if I may be permitted    16           just a brief voir dire of the witness?    17                    JUDGE SLOVITER:  Sure.  And you are?    18                    MS. RUSSOTTO:  My name is Patricia Russotto, I    19           represent the Department of Justice in this action.    20                    JUDGE SLOVITER:  Yes, we saw you before, Ms.    21           Russotto, but the tape doesn't remember.    22                    HAROLD RHEINGOLD, Plaintiffs' Witness, Sworn.    23                    THE COURT CLERK:  Thank you, please be seated.     24           Please state and spell your name.    25                    THE WITNESS:  Harold Rheingold,                                                                            121     1           R-h-e-i-n-g-o-l-d.     2                               VOIR DIRE EXAMINATION     3           BY MS. RUSSOTTO:       4           Q   Good afternoon, Mr. Rheingold.  Mr. Rheingold, you are     5           here today to inform the Court about the formation of virtual     6           communities on the Internet, are you not?     7           A   That's correct.     8           Q   Mr. Rheingold, you have not reviewed any of the on-line     9           materials maintained by the plaintiffs, have you?    10           A   No, I have not.    11           Q   And you don't know whether the content of any of the    12           plaintiff's on-line -- you don't know anything about the    13           content of any of the plaintiff's on-line materials, do you?    14           A   I'm not sure.  I may have seen material previous to this    15           case that would be included in this.    16           Q   But you have not reviewed any of that material in    17           preparation for your opinion testimony today, have you?    18           A   No, I have not.    19           Q   And you don't know whether the plaintiffs host or    20           participate in any sort of virtual communities in cyberspace,    21           do you?    22           A   No, I do not.    23                    MS. RUSSOTTO:  Your Honors, Mr. Rheingold is being    24           offered here as an expert witness, he is not a plaintiff in    25           this action, but it's not entirely clear to the Government                                                                           122     1           how his opinion is at all useful or helpful to the Court in     2           understanding the evidence or determining any factual issues     3           here.  Mr. Rheingold has -- as he just stated, has not     4           reviewed any of the plaintiffs' Websites, he cannot say what     5           they have on line, he does not know whether they participate     6           in or host virtual communities.  And since he cannot relate     7           his expertise, assuming there is some expertise, to any of     8           the material that the plaintiffs have on line we would submit     9           that his expert opinion, whatever it may be, is simply not    10           relevant to these proceedings and --    11                    JUDGE SLOVITER:  I think the Court will accept it    12           subject to striking and subject to whatever --    13                    JUDGE DALZELL:  Well, I think Mr. Hansen wanted to    14           say something.    15                    MR. HANSEN:  Your Honors, Mr. Rheingold is being    16           offered as an expert in the part of cyberspace that involves    17           the formation of communities, news groups, chat rooms, other    18           conversation.  It is the plaintiffs' position that cyberspace    19           is not just about Worldwide Website, it is not just an    20           electronic library, it is also a place in which people meet    21           and converse and carry on conversations and form close    22           friendships, Mr. Rheingold is being offered for the purpose    23           of describing that sector of cyberspace and his declaration    24           suggests that that section of cyberspace, the community-    25           forming, the friendship-forming part will in fact be affected                                                                           123     1           by the Act.     2                    JUDGE BUCKWALTER:  Well, he's essentially a fact     3           witness rather than an opinion witness, isn't he?     4                    MR. HANSEN:  Well, I think he's both, your Honor.      5           He is the author of the leading book on this subject, it's     6           called Virtual Communities, and as a result -- as part of     7           that research for the book has traveled throughout the world,     8           interviewing people who created communities in cyberspace.     9                    JUDGE SLOVITER:  The Court will hear Mr. Rheingold    10           and if at the conclusion -- it will be accepted for what it's    11           worth.    12                    MR. HANSEN:  Thank you, your Honor.    13                    JUDGE DALZELL:  Thank you, Mr. Hansen, for your    14           explanation.    15                    JUDGE SLOVITER:  Now we will break for lunch --    16                    (Laughter.)    17                    JUDGE SLOVITER:  -- having had the dispute of the    18           day.    19                    JUDGE DALZELL:  1:30?    20                    JUDGE SLOVITER:  1:30, return at 1:30.    21                    (Court in recess; 12:16 to 1:24 o'clock p.m.)    22                    THE COURT CLERK:  Court is now in session.  Please    23           be seated.    24                    JUDGE DALZELL:  Proceed, Ms. Russotto.    25                                 CROSS-EXAMINATION                                                                           124     1           BY MS. RUSSOTTO:       2           Q   Good afternoon again, Mr. Rheingold.     3                    MS. RUSSOTTO:  Your Honor, there is one further     4           matter with regard to Mr. Rheingold's declaration that we     5           would like to point out.  We do have a hearsay objection to     6           Paragraph 10, in which Mr. Rheingold testifies about some     7           matters that other people told him about, we have obviously     8           no opportunity to cross-examine anybody about that.     9                    JUDGE DALZELL:  Yeah, I would say that's hearsay.    10                    MS. RUSSOTTO:  Very well.    11                    MR. HANSEN:  If I might be heard on that, your    12           Honor?    13                    JUDGE DALZELL:  Yes.    14                    JUDGE SLOVITER:  Yes.    15                    MR. HANSEN:  We have proffered Mr. Rheingold as an    16           expert, I think he would testify that it is the kind of    17           information he relied upon in writing his book --    18                    JUDGE DALZELL:  But what she's referring to is, "I    19           have been told of at least one such space that as a result of    20           the Act" --    21                    MR. HANSEN:  That's right.    22                    JUDGE DALZELL:  -- it seems to me that's textbook    23           hearsay.    24                    MR. HANSEN:  He was told about that in the context    25           of an affidavit that was submitted to him and which has been                                                                           125     1           submitted to the Government.  The Government has seen the     2           evidentiary foundation for that particular paragraph and     3           they're free to cross-examine him on further detail if they     4           want, but I think as an expert he's entitled to rely upon     5           that as the kind of information he has gathered in writing     6           his book and the kind of information he uses in forming     7           expert opinions.     8                    (Pause.)     9                    JUDGE DALZELL:  All right, for what it's worth we'll    10           let it in -- I mean, your point is well-taken.    11                    MS. RUSSOTTO:  Thank you, your Honor.    12           BY MS. RUSSOTTO:      13           Q   Mr. Rheingold, would you please tell the Court what a    14           virtual community is?    15           A   A virtual community is a group of people who meet through    16           on-line discussions and through those on-line discussions    17           form individual relationships and often, but not always,    18           continue those relationships into the face-to-face world.  I    19           would make a distinction between communities of interest,    20           let's say attorneys or engineers who exchange information,    21           and communities that consist of many different kinds of    22           people who have general discussions from which relationships    23           which extend beyond the technical specifics of their    24           information exchanges.    25           Q   And virtual communities would be the latter, correct?                                                                           126     1           A   Yes, although they can form from the former.     2           Q   And what virtual communities have you participated in     3           yourself?     4           A   I have participated for over ten years in a virtual     5           community known as the WEL, before that in --     6                    JUDGE SLOVITER:  The WEL?     7                    THE WITNESS:  The WEL is an acronym for the whole     8           earth electronic link, one of the oldest of the communities     9           that allow low-cost access to individuals who are not    10           particularly specialists.  At the time that the WEL was    11           formed you really had to be a government researcher to have    12           access to the ArpaNet (ph.).  So, this was really a    13           pioneering experiment that continues to this day.    14           BY MS. RUSSOTTO:      15           Q   In addition to the WEL what other virtual communities    16           have you --    17           A   Before the WEL I explored a number of bulletin-board    18           systems, particularly one known as the Skateboard that I    19           participated in for some time before the WEL.  More recently    20           I have become involved in creating a new virtual community    21           known as the River, which is one that is a cooperative    22           corporation owned by the members of the community.  I have    23           participated in virtual communities in Japan, two of them in    24           particular -- three of them in particular, Twix (ph.) and    25           Aegis (ph.) and Koara (ph.), which I describe in my book; a                                                                           127     1           community in France known as Calvidose (ph.); a community in     2           England known as Kicks.     3           Q   All right.     4           A   In addition to those there are mailing lists, MUD's and     5           MUSE's and UseNet news groups.     6                    JUDGE DALZELL:  All right, I'll take the bait,     7           what's a MUD?     8                    (Laughter.)     9                    MS. RUSSOTTO:  I was going to get to that.    10                    THE WITNESS:  A MUD is an on-line forum like others    11           in which people can log in remotely, select an identity.  And    12           essentially it's a place where instead of a professional    13           creating entertainment you create your own entertainment.     14           You make yourself a dwarf or a wizard or a princess and    15           describe yourself textually, so that others who issue the    16           command to look at you when you enter a room see your    17           description of yourself as a wizard or a princess, and then    18           you have conversations and make up adventures.  There's a    19           large number of these, hundreds if not thousands of these    20           that exist.    21                    JUDGE DALZELL:  Does MUD stands for something?    22                    THE WITNESS:  It originally stood for multi-user    23           dungeons, because it came from the Dungeons and Dragons    24           fantasy role-playing games.    25                    JUDGE DALZELL:  Okay, I'll take the bait on MUSE.                                                                           128     1                    THE WITNESS:  These are... as many of these on-line     2           forums tend to evolve into forums that were not originally     3           intended the MUD's, which were originally kind of games that     4           teenage boys played with each other, were seen by some to be     5           educational environments in which instead of having a fantasy     6           world you could talk about mathematics or astronomy or social     7           studies.  So, multi-user simulation environments, i.e. MUSE,     8           evolved as a place where not primarily game playing, but     9           learning through role playing with simulations is the purpose    10           of the social gathering.    11                    JUDGE DALZELL:  There you have it.    12                    JUDGE SLOVITER:  I don't know about wizards, but I    13           have a feeling princesses aren't so happy nowadays, I'm not    14           sure why somebody would want to be a princess.    15                    (Laughter.)    16           BY MS. RUSSOTTO:      17           Q   Mr. Rheingold, in the virtual communities that you have    18           described for us that form around these -- initially form    19           around the interest group discussions that you're talking    20           about, the interest -- the topics, you have yourself    21           participated in virtual communities built around a wide    22           variety of issues, right?    23           A   Yes.    24           Q   And you're aware the virtual communities, some of the    25           topics would include AIDS, for example, right?                                                                           129     1           A   Yes.     2           Q   Sexual abuse of children would be another example?     3           A   Yes.     4           Q   Sex education of children?     5           A   Yes.     6           Q   Breast cancer support groups, correct?     7           A   Yes.     8           Q   Gender discrimination support groups --     9           A   Yes.    10           Q   -- and discussion groups?  A general discourse about    11           politics, right?    12           A   Yes.    13           Q   Now, sometimes the participants in these communities may    14           describe sexual activity in explicit terms in the course of    15           these discussions, correct?    16           A   That's correct.    17           Q   And sometimes they may use street or colloquial language    18           to make a point, right?    19           A   That's correct.    20           Q   And sometimes they may use an expletive in the heat of    21           argument or debate, right?    22           A   That's correct.    23           Q   And your concern is that under the CDA participants in    24           these virtual communities could be prosecuted for using    25           explicit sexual language in discussing AIDS, right?                                                                           130     1           A   That's correct.     2           Q   Or for discussing -- using that kind of language,     3           explicit sexual language in discussing the sexual abuse of     4           children?     5           A   That's correct.     6           Q   Or breast cancer?     7           A   That's correct.     8           Q   Or any of the other topics that we just went through?     9           A   That's correct.    10           Q   Or for using expletives in heated discourse?    11           A   Yes.    12           Q   Indeed, didn't you tell me that you were concerned that    13           discussions of Shakespeare's Hamlet might be subject to -- or    14           might subject a virtual community member to prosecution under    15           the CDA because of the sexual puns in Hamlet?    16           A   That's correct.    17           Q   Now, do you really think that Hamlet depicts or describes    18           in terms patently offensive, as measured by contemporary    19           community standards, sexual or excretory activities or    20           organs?    21           A   I fear, because of my knowledge of the successful    22           attempts to remove books such as Tom Sawyer and the Diary of    23           Anne Frank from school libraries that the definition of what    24           may be offensive may indeed extend to Shakespeare, if it can    25           extend to Anne Frank and Mark Twain, yes.                                                                           131     1           Q   You're also concerned that images of Michelangelo's     2           "David" that might appear in virtual community discussions     3           that might subject members to the -- members of the community     4           to prosecution under the CDA, right?     5           A   Yes, other classical works of art that depict full-     6           frontal nudity.     7           Q   And you think that Michelangelo's "David" and other     8           classical works of art that depict full-frontal nudity -- or     9           do you think that these types of works depict or describe in    10           terms patently offensive, as measured by contemporary    11           community standards, sexual or excretory activities or    12           organs?    13           A   Which contemporary community?  Standards in my household    14           regard works of art as not being offensive.  I am aware that    15           there are people who live in my neighborhood who do find that    16           offensive.    17           Q   Now, you have not participated in any virtual communities    18           that are built around the posting of sexually-explicitly    19           images, have you?    20                    JUDGE BUCKWALTER:  What -- I didn't hear that, I'm    21           sorry.    22                    MS. RUSSOTTO:  I'm sorry, I'll repeat that.    23           BY MS. RUSSOTTO:      24           Q   You have not participated in any virtual communities that    25           are built around the posting of sexually-explicit images,                                                                           132     1           have you?     2           A   Not to my knowledge.     3           Q   You're familiar with bulletin-board systems, right?     4           A   Yes.     5           Q   Would you just briefly explain what those are?     6           A   A bulletin-board system is as simple as an inexpensive     7           personal computer with a modem, some simple software on it     8           that you plug into your telephone, and publicize the     9           telephone number and encourage people to log in, read and    10           write, publish and converse.  I understand that there are    11           more than 70,000 bulletin board systems in North America now.    12           Q   And in your experience do virtual communities form around    13           some of these bulletin-board systems?    14           A   Yes, they do.  I have participated in such and    15           participate in discussions with people who participate in    16           them.    17           Q   Now, some of these bulletin-board systems are commercial,    18           are they not?    19           A   Yes, they are.    20           Q   And they require a credit card for access, right?    21           A   Yes, some of them do.    22           Q   And some of these bulletin-board systems require a user    23           to register and receive a password before viewing the    24           material that's posted to the bulletin board, correct?    25           A   That's correct.                                                                           133     1           Q   And some bulletin-board systems in fact require a higher     2           access status in order to gain access to certain discussions     3           on the bulletin board, isn't that right?     4           A   That's correct.     5           Q   Now, I'm going to refer you to Exhibit 90, Defendant's     6           Exhibit 90, these are excerpts from your -- the paperback     7           version of your book, The Virtual Community.  And at Page 142     8           of your book you state, "A bulletin-board system or BBS is     9           open to anyone who wants to call in.  You have to stick    10           around for a while, perhaps meet the SISOP (ph.) in person to    11           be granted access to more restricted discussions that take    12           place among the inner circle of the same BBS."    13           A   Yes.    14           Q   Is that correct?  So, not everyone can participate in    15           these higher-access discussions, correct?    16           A   That's correct.    17           Q   And there is an inner core of participants that are just    18           granted access to those restricted discussions, right?    19           A   That's correct.    20           Q   And in fact you would need a special password for the    21           system operator in order to gain access to the files -- to    22           some files that are not accessible to other participants,    23           right?    24           A   Not necessarily.  The system operator could have a list    25           of registered users who have access to certain material that                                                                           134     1           was not --     2           Q   So, then you would have to register to gain access to     3           this restricted list of materials on the bulletin board?     4           A   Yes.     5           Q   Now, you're aware, are you not, that sexually-explicit     6           material is posted to some bulletin-board systems, right?     7           A   Yes.     8           Q   And could virtual communities form around the posting of     9           images and text messages on sexually-explicit bulletin-board    10           systems?    11           A   Certainly I can think of instances where that could be    12           the case.    13           Q   And those bulletin-board systems could require a user to    14           enter a credit card number for access to those images and    15           discussions, correct?    16           A   It's technically possible, yes.    17           Q   And they could also -- those bulletin-board systems that    18           accept postings or have postings of sexually-explicit images    19           and text, they could require registration or receipt of a    20           password for access to the site, right?    21           A   That's correct.    22           Q   And those types of bulletin-board systems could require a    23           higher access, as we were just talking about, to restrict a    24           minor's ability to gain access to the sexually-explicit    25           materials, correct?                                                                           135     1           A   Yes.     2           Q   And restricting access to exclude minors from viewing the     3           sexually-explicit material on a bulletin-board system would     4           not substantially alter the adult virtual community formed     5           around that bulletin-board system, would it?     6           A   I'm not sure, it would depend on the circumstances.  If     7           that in effect removed minors from a large range of     8           discussions which may have sexual content rather than simply     9           downloading images, for example, then I think that that --    10           that could be substantially damaging to their participation.    11           Q   Yes, but we're talking about those bulletin-board systems    12           that post and discuss sexually-explicit material, depictions    13           of explicit sexual activities, you're saying that you think    14           there are certain circumstances in which it would damage the    15           community, that community to exclude minors from viewing    16           those kinds of images?    17           A   Certainly -- if you would permit, I can cite an example.     18           If you were, for example, a gay teenager in a small town who    19           felt that maybe you were the only person in the world who had    20           certain feelings, and those feelings do have to do with    21           explicit sexual acts or imagining certain sexual acts, and    22           there are a number of people like that who are at risk of    23           suicide and depression, that being unable to participate in    24           discussions with others who might be able to tell them that    25           they're not alone, that instance would I think be damaging.                                                                            136     1           And, again, the definition of whether it's obscene or whether     2           it could be offensive to some I think in my mind is kind of     3           fuzzy and would exclude what I think would be very healthy     4           discussions for some people.     5           Q   So, you're assuming an educational value then to the     6           material, sexually -- explicit images of sexual activity,     7           you're assuming an educational value to that material?     8           A   Well, as I understand it and I'm not an attorney,     9           obscenity has to do with the lack of socially-redeeming    10           value.  So, I would --    11           Q   I understand, that's --    12           A   -- say socially-redeeming value would be educational    13           value, for example.    14           Q   All right.  Now, children represent only a small    15           percentage of the number of participants in the virtual    16           communities that you're aware of, isn't that right?    17           A   In some.  In others, such as the MUD's and MUSE's, I    18           think that they are a substantial minority or even a    19           majority.    20           Q   Okay.  So, in the MUD's and MUSE's there are a    21           substantial number of minors?    22           A   Yes.    23           Q   But in others it's mostly adults that are participating    24           in those virtual communities?    25           A   Yes.                                                                           137     1           Q   Now, I think your affidavit talks about your daughter     2           using the Internet, correct?     3           A   That's correct.     4           Q   And you've said that she uses that to E-mail messages to     5           her friends, right?     6           A   And to use search engines to do research for her     7           homework.     8           Q   And your daughter is 11 years old, right?     9           A   That is correct.    10           Q   And you don't supervise your daughter all throughout the    11           time that she is using the computer, do you?    12           A   No, I do not.    13           Q   Do you use any of the parental blocking software to block    14           access to certain sites?    15           A   No, I do not.  I believe it's important to teach my    16           daughter to make moral choices and I have made her aware that    17           there are -- that there is material out there that would be    18           unhealthy for her if she choose to access it.    19           Q   And your advice to her is simply not to put it into her    20           mind, correct?    21           A   My advice to her is that, just as she knows that there    22           are nutritious things to put in her body, there are    23           nutritious things to put in her mind.  And if she comes    24           across or has sent to her material that she feels is harmful    25           she should drag it to the trash, which is the way you delete                                                                           138     1           material on a screen, or she should show it to me.     2           Q   Now, you're familiar with the UseNet news groups, right?     3           A   Yes, I am.     4           Q   And in your opinion do virtual communities form around     5           these UseNet news groups?     6           A   They can, they do.     7           Q   All right.  And some of these news groups are moderated,     8           right?     9           A   Yes.    10           Q   And would you tell us or explain what happens in a    11           moderated news group?    12           A   In an unmoderated news group anyone who wants to    13           participate by posting something will simply issue the    14           command to send it to that news group, and it will    15           automatically be published and read by others who subscribe.     16           In a moderated news group that posting goes to a moderator    17           and the moderator decides whether to publish it or not.    18           Q   And you yourself hosted a moderated news group, right?    19           A   Yes, I did, I started one.    20           Q   And you moderated it to essentially say that this is    21           polite conversation and if you make trouble your words won't    22           show up, right?    23           A   Yes.  And also, I think to extend that, I was interested    24           in creating a forum for serious scientific discussion and not    25           arguments about science fiction.                                                                           139     1           Q   But you retained some discretion over what was posted in     2           the news group that you moderated, right?     3           A   Yes.  I received all of the postings before they were     4           posted and gave the command to post them.  There was not in     5           fact a single instance in which I choose not to publish     6           something.     7           Q   But you could have?     8           A   I could have, that's correct.     9           Q   You are aware, are you not, that adult news groups    10           containing sexually-explicit materials exist on UseNet,    11           right?    12           A   Yes.    13           Q   Now, I'm going to refer you again to another excerpt from    14           your book on Page 131, this is Exhibit 90.      15                    (Pause.)    16           Q   And I'm looking at the continuing paragraph at the top of    17           Page 131, you say that "If a local group does not want to    18           carry a news group or wants to block access to UseNet by    19           certain users it's possible to do so."  That's correct,    20           right?    21           A   That's correct.    22           Q   And by local group you mean a server or an ISP?    23           A   Yes.    24           Q   Internet service provider?    25           A   Yes.                                                                           140     1           Q   And the administrator of the server or the Internet     2           service provider could just decide not to carry certain news     3           groups, right?     4           A   That is correct.     5           Q   So, they could decide not to carry some of the news     6           groups in the alt.sex hierarchy, right?     7           A   Yes, they could, although if you provide access to the     8           Internet it's not necessary to have access to the news groups     9           that that particular Internet service provider keeps on their    10           server, you could for example go to another server.    11           Q   But you would have to have an account on that other    12           server, right?    13           A   Not necessarily.  There might -- and in fact I'm quite    14           sure there are places where you can have access to news    15           groups without having a password, you could have guest --    16           they could be open to guest accounts, for example.    17           Q   Mm-hmm, but the server that -- the particular server that    18           you have an account on could decide not to carry the alt.sex    19           hierarchy or the alt.binaries hierarchy, right?    20           A   That's correct.    21           Q   And you talked about MUD's and MUSE's a little bit and    22           you've explained what those are, is it your opinion that    23           virtual communities can develop around those kinds of fantasy    24           worlds?    25           A   Yes, I have experienced them.                                                                           141     1           Q   Okay, how does that happen?     2           A   If people, and here we're talking about young people as     3           well as older people, find for example that they don't have     4           the intellectual stimulation or the kind of specific     5           mentoring in mathematics or literature, whatever they're     6           interested in, in their geographic vicinity and they go to a     7           MUSE, such as the one I described at MIT or one I have     8           written about in Phoenix, Arizona, and find an atmosphere in     9           which people are friendly and help them understand that    10           material and can teach them in a way that maybe they're not    11           going to be able to learn at home or in their local school,    12           then that would become an important resource for them.  In    13           general, these communities are social places where it isn't    14           just the learning or the game playing, but the communication    15           with others, casual communications with others that you    16           encounter there, that seems to be the attraction.    17           Q   And to participate in those kinds of fantasy worlds you    18           have to be issued a password, is that right?    19           A   Almost all MUD's and MUSE's have a guest account that    20           does not require a password.  If you want to become a citizen    21           of that community and create a character that has an ongoing    22           presence then you need to register.    23           Q   So, a guest would just allow you to peek in and see    24           what's going on, right?    25           A   A guest could peek in and a guest could have                                                                           142     1           conversations and participate, but that guest would only be     2           designated as Guest 1 or Guest 2 and would not establish an     3           identity that had an ongoing identity.     4           Q   Now, these fantasy worlds often prescribe certain rules     5           of behavior for their participants, don't they?     6           A   Sometimes they do, yes.     7           Q   And in your book you have talked about the virtual     8           community called Cyberion City, correct?     9           A   Yes.    10           Q   And at Page 160 of your book you say that the Cyberion    11           City charter warns you when you enter that there are children    12           there and educators and librarians and people having fun, and    13           anybody who abuses the rule of polite communication is likely    14           to have his or her character removed, correct?    15           A   That's correct.    16           Q   And the rules of polite communication in Cyberion City    17           preclude using sexually-explicit language, right?    18           A   Yes.    19           Q   And they also preclude explicit discussions of excretory    20           activity, correct?    21           A   Yes, as far as I know.    22           Q   Well, you have written about it, right?    23           A   Yes.    24           Q   And participants in Cyberion City can be removed from the    25           community for violating those rules of the road, right?                                                                           143     1           A   Yes.  I would add, however, that it's important to note     2           that the charter of Cyberion City was created by the     3           participants, that was the particular charter that they     4           agreed upon and there are indeed others that I didn't write     5           about that have different rules.     6                    JUDGE DALZELL:  Cyberion, for purposes of the     7           record, is C-y-b-e-r-i-o-n, not with an S, as some of us     8           might have thought.     9                    JUDGE SLOVITER:  Oh, by listening.    10                    JUDGE DALZELL:  Right.    11           BY MS. RUSSOTTO:      12           Q   But if the participants do violate these rules that are    13           agreed upon then they can be removed from the community,    14           right?    15           A   They can be removed.  In this case there is also a due    16           process built into the charter, and complaints can lead to    17           trials and juries of peers and appeals.    18           Q   And they can be removed?    19           A   And they can be removed.    20                    JUDGE DALZELL:  How are the judges appointed?    21                    (Laughter.)    22                    THE WITNESS:  To my knowledge, they are selected by    23           the members of the community.    24                    JUDGE DALZELL:  Do they have impeachment?    25                    THE WITNESS:  I would suspect so.  Anything that                                                                           144     1           comes up when you're trying to run a judicial apparatus comes     2           up in a community like this and there are attempts to create     3           mechanisms for dealing with them.  In this particular case     4           and others that I know of those are regarded as educational     5           opportunities whereby students can understand what due     6           process means.     7                    JUDGE SLOVITER:  Do you have to have a passport that     8           makes you below 18 to get into them?     9                    JUDGE DALZELL:  No.  You need to understand the    10           language and quite under -- quite often you need to    11           participate in discussions with minors to understand that.    12                    JUDGE SLOVITER:  And if some of us are finding this    13           world a little difficult, judges and otherwise, we can just    14           escape into that one?    15                    (Laughter.)    16                    THE WITNESS:  Well, I sometimes say as a joke, but    17           it's not really a joke, that if you really want to understand    18           the on-line world you need to get a 17 or 18-year-old to sit    19           with you.    20           BY MS. RUSSOTTO:      21           Q   And in other fantasy communities besides Cyberion City    22           that you're familiar with, someone with a route password    23           could remove a participant that doesn't comply with the rules    24           of those communities, right?    25           A   Yes, they have the power to do that.                                                                           145     1           Q   Right.  Are there discussions or descriptions of explicit     2           sexual activity that occur in some of these fantasy worlds?     3           A   Yes.     4           Q   Now, participants in these fantasy worlds can build parts     5           of the fantasy environment themselves, can't they?     6           A   That's correct.     7           Q   And they would basically program a room or a section of     8           the environment, is that right?     9           A   Yes, they can not only communicate, but they can create    10           behaviors that are contingent upon things that happen.    11           Q   And the creator of a particular environment could program    12           it to exclude certain people from that environment, right?    13           A   Yes.    14           Q   Or, conversely, only to allow certain people in, the same    15           thing, I guess?    16           A   Yes.    17           Q   So, these rooms could be programmed to exclude minors,    18           for example?    19           A   Yes.    20           Q   And rooms where there are discussions of explicit sexual    21           activity could be programmed to exclude minors?    22           A   Yes.    23           Q   And in your view it would not be detrimental to the    24           community of this fantasy environment for some minors to be    25           excluded from rooms where explicit sexual discussions are                                                                           146     1           going on, right?     2           A   Well, again, I would cite an instance of where some minor     3           was having a problem with sexuality, which might well be     4           helped by participating in those discussions.     5           Q   Okay.  I would ask you to take a look at Page 149 of your     6           deposition.  And I think it might be useful to talk about     7           some of the -- a discussion that we had during your     8           deposition of this point.     9                    (Pause.)    10           Q   Question:  "Do you think it would be beneficial to the    11           community to exclude minors from accessing rooms where that    12           type of description of explicit sexual activity is going on?"    13                    Answer:  "It's hard to tell.    14                    "Why?"    15                    Answer:  I can think of instances from this    16           affidavit in which it would damage the community by causing    17           people to lie about their age.  I would also wonder where the    18           distinction between explicit sexual conversation and adult    19           conversation was designated."    20                    Question:  "Well, would the beneficial or    21           detrimental effect on the community perhaps depend on the age    22           of the minor?"    23                    Answer:  "Yes, I think yes.  I think that for an    24           elementary school student it would be much more inappropriate    25           than for a high school or college student."                                                                           147     1                    Question:  "Why do you think it might be more     2           inappropriate for an elementary school student to be allowed     3           access to one of these rooms in a MUD where sexual activity     4           is going on?"     5                    Answer:  "For one thing, they haven't undergone     6           puberty; for another thing, probably for that reason they     7           haven't had any sexual education; and, for another thing,     8           their level of maturity would be presumably generally lower,     9           although of course you find very mature young people and very    10           immature older people."    11                    Question:  "So, it might not be a benefit to the    12           community to have an elementary school student be given    13           access to those types of rooms on the MUD?"    14                    Answer:  "That's correct."    15                    That was your testimony, correct?    16           A   That's correct.    17           Q   And the last question I have for you, in your book you    18           talk about a "digital convergence of media," what do you mean    19           by that?    20           A   Well, I mean that what we're talking about here, the    21           Internet and bulletin-board systems, are systems in which    22           material that resides on computers is sent through    23           communication wires, we're seeing that voice and images and    24           software, as well as words, can be converted to digital form    25           and sent through wires.                                                                           148     1           Q   Okay, thank you.     2                    MS. RUSSOTTO:  May I have just a moment, your Honor?     3                    JUDGE SLOVITER:  Sure.     4                    (Pause.)     5                    MS. RUSSOTTO:  I have nothing further.     6                    JUDGE SLOVITER:  Any redirect?     7                    MR. HANSEN:  Just one question, your Honor.     8                                REDIRECT EXAMINATION     9           BY MR. HANSEN:      10           Q   Mr. Rheingold, as MUSE's and MUD's are currently set up    11           do the participants know whether the other participants are    12           adults or minors?    13           A   No.    14                    MR. HANSEN:  That's all I have, your Honor.    15                    JUDGE SLOVITER:  Judge Dalzell?    16                    JUDGE DALZELL:  No questions from me.    17                    (Discussion held off the record.)    18                    JUDGE BUCKWALTER:  The one thing in your    19           declaration, sir, that is not really relevant, but I wonder    20           what you meant by "among the many things left out of the    21           distorted popular image of the Internet are people from whom    22           the Net is a lifeline," what did you mean by the distorted    23           pop -- what is the distorted popular image?    24                    THE WITNESS:  Well, I know personally disabled    25           people, people who are --                                                                           149     1                    JUDGE BUCKWALTER:  No, no, no, I meant what's the     2           distorted popular image you're referring to?  Is it your     3           feeling that --     4                    THE WITNESS:  Well, I travel a lot and I speak a lot     5           and almost everything that I hear -- I'm also called by the     6           media for quotes a lot, almost everything that I'm asked is     7           about porno on the Net.  And I think that the distortion is     8           that you turn your computer on and porno comes flooding     9           through the screen --    10                    JUDGE BUCKWALTER:  Okay, that's what you meant by    11           that.    12                    THE WITNESS:  Yes.    13                    JUDGE BUCKWALTER:  I wondered, because I would    14           consider myself to be part of the public --    15                    THE WITNESS:  Yes.    16                    JUDGE BUCKWALTER:  -- and I want to know what this    17           distortion is that I am --    18                    THE WITNESS:  Well, do you --    19                    JUDGE BUCKWALTER:  And you have explained to me what    20           you thought the distortion was, thank you.    21                    THE WITNESS:  Okay.    22                    JUDGE BUCKWALTER:  Thank you.    23                    JUDGE SLOVITER:  As I understand it, and I didn't    24           until yesterday and I'm not sure I do, but what we're talking    25           about in MUSE's and MUD's -- and stop me if I'm -- or correct                                                                           150     1           me, please, if I'm incorrect -- is that there is some kind of     2           interactive fantasy world out there in which participants     3           take on new personalities or different personalities, a bit     4           like a masquerade, and this permits them to discuss with each     5           other or among each other whatever they want to, is that     6           correct?     7                    THE WITNESS:  No, I think that is not an adequate     8           description, if it was only that it probably wouldn't be     9           popular.    10                    JUDGE SLOVITER:  Well, and in the -- I guess in the    11           -- I don't -- and in the process they may --    12                    THE WITNESS:  Could I add just a little bit to that?    13                    JUDGE SLOVITER:  Well, no.  I mean, in the process    14           they may get educated or get their feelings out, et cetera,    15           is that -- I just want to know --    16                    THE WITNESS:  No, you're leaving something out,    17           which is it's not just creating a fantasy character and    18           having conversations, but you can actually create the    19           environment itself, which exists independent of your presence    20           in it.    21                    JUDGE SLOVITER:  All right, let's leave that for the    22           existentialists and go back to what we have here.    23                    THE WITNESS:  Well, it's important for children who    24           for example might be interested in C. S. Lewis to be able to    25           create their own "Narnia."                                                                           151     1                    JUDGE SLOVITER:  But is this uniquely for children     2           or primarily for children?     3                    THE WITNESS:  No.     4                    JUDGE SLOVITER:  What percentage of this     5           communication is sexual in nature, do you have any idea?     6                    THE WITNESS:  I can't tell you precisely, but my     7           guess would be it's under ten percent.     8                    JUDGE SLOVITER:  And the material that's not sexual     9           in nature what do they -- what is the subject matter?    10                    THE WITNESS:  The subject matter --    11                    JUDGE SLOVITER:  I haven't read your books yet,    12           so...    13                    THE WITNESS:  -- could be adventure, science    14           fiction, classical literature.  There are places that I have    15           described in school districts that study ancient Egypt, for    16           example, or other historical places, not imaginary places.    17                    JUDGE SLOVITER:  Is this used, to your knowledge, by    18           schools and school districts?    19                    THE WITNESS:  Yes, it is.  There's -- the MUSE in     20           -- called MariMUSE in Maricopa County, that's an example,    21           that's in Phoenix, Arizona; one of the poorest school    22           districts in the nation, a place where a very small    23           percentage of the students have -- their students speak    24           English; this is a place where college students from Phoenix    25           College and teachers from the school and young children                                                                           152     1           participate in discussions of, for example, ancient Egypt or     2           create -- recreate ancient Egypt and in fact bring their     3           parents in to show them, and in some instances teach their     4           parents English.     5                    JUDGE SLOVITER:  So that on the screen at this time     6           is like an Egyptian city, is that what you're --     7                    THE WITNESS:  You would give the -- you would say,     8           show me what's here, and you would then see a description     9           written by students that would say, there are pyramids in the    10           distance.  And you could say, approach the pyramid, they    11           could then using words describe what it is you see, so in    12           that sense create an Egyptian city.    13                    JUDGE SLOVITER:  But it's all in language rather    14           than in pictures?    15                    THE WITNESS:  It's all in language.    16                    JUDGE SLOVITER:  Okay.  Now, at Paragraph 10 of your    17           declaration you state that some MUD's or MUSE's have designed    18           methods to ban minors from these communities, what sort of    19           methods do they use?      20                    THE WITNESS:  Well, in this instance I was informed    21           by the young man that the people who administered this MUSE     22           -- this MUD were afraid of the consequences of the CDA and    23           asked minors to identify themselves.    24                    JUDGE SLOVITER:  But they're totally dependent then,    25           are they not, on self-identification?                                                                           153     1                    THE WITNESS:  In this instance, yes.     2                    JUDGE SLOVITER:  Well, in any -- you said yes to a     3           number of questions about that and I --      4                    THE WITNESS:  Well, there's really no difference     5           between a MUD or a MUSE or any other site on the Internet to     6           which you need to log in.  If you need to log into this they     7           can require a password and they can require you to register     8           to get that password.     9                    JUDGE SLOVITER:  But how would it be enforced as    10           applicable to minors?    11                    THE WITNESS:  Well, you could require them to give    12           you a credit card number that you would verify.    13                    JUDGE SLOVITER:  Well, you mean --    14                    THE WITNESS:  It would require someone on the other    15           end to go through the process of verifying the credit card.    16                    JUDGE SLOVITER:  Okay.    17                    JUDGE DALZELL:  Well, now I'm really confused.    18                    JUDGE SLOVITER:  Sorry.    19                    JUDGE DALZELL:  The host of this MUD, certainly a    20           MUD, the host of this is more often than not a child or    21           somebody young.    22                    THE WITNESS:  Well, I wouldn't say more often than    23           not, but certainly there are hosts who are children.    24                    JUDGE DALZELL:  All right, but they're not going to    25           verify credit card numbers, how would they do that?                                                                           154     1                    THE WITNESS:  That's correct, they're not going to     2           be able to do that.     3                    JUDGE DALZELL:  I guess Chief Judge Sloviter and I     4           are perplexed because Ms. Russotto asked you a number of     5           questions about these MUD's and MUSE's being, her term,     6           programmable --     7                    THE WITNESS:  Yes.     8                    JUDGE DALZELL:  -- to exclude minors and you readily     9           answered yes to all of those questions.    10                    THE WITNESS:  You can do the programming, that's not    11           the same thing as doing the verification.  The tools exist to    12           exclude anyone you want, you can simply say Person A with    13           Password B can't get in.  Now, determining the age of that    14           person and verifying I think is a different matter from    15           technically is it possible to do.    16                    JUDGE DALZELL:  So, in other words, to get into the    17           MUD or the MUSE you would have to have -- well, you have to    18           have a password anyway, right, that someone gives you?    19                    THE WITNESS:  Many of them say on the screen when    20           you enter register as guest, with password guest.  So, you    21           don't necessarily have to have a secret password.    22                    JUDGE DALZELL:  But then if you're going to be a    23           permanent member what do you do, you write in using the U.S.    24           Postal Service?    25                    THE WITNESS:  If you want to be -- yes, if you want                                                                           155     1           to be a permanent member then you go through a registration     2           procedure.  And quite often what that consists of is giving     3           them a name, not necessarily your legal identity, and an E-     4           mail address, and they will then E-mail the password to that     5           E-mail address.  And what they're concerned about is not so     6           much who you are, but that the person who you claim to be     7           today is the same person you claim to be tomorrow.  Otherwise     8           you could have someone calling themselves Howard on day one     9           and another person on day two adopting that identity and    10           doing all kinds of things that Howard might not want to be    11           identified with.    12                    JUDGE DALZELL:  And who is the they who gives the    13           password?    14                    THE WITNESS:  Well, it's the system administrator.     15           A system administrator is the person, whether it's because    16           they're in a university and they've been given that power by    17           the administration or because they own a computer and they    18           have connected it to the network who has the route password,    19           does that -- is that term clear to you --    20                    JUDGE DALZELL:  The route --    21                    THE WITNESS:  -- the route password?      22                    JUDGE SLOVITER:  Well --    23                    THE WITNESS:  The person who has control of the    24           computer system has technical control over everything that    25           happens, can throw anyone off, can admit who they want, can                                                                           156     1           erase the data base if they choose.     2                    JUDGE SLOVITER:  What harm would happen if all     3           sexual content was removed?  It's less than ten percent and     4           they could still play their castles-in-the-air, what would     5           happen?     6                    THE WITNESS:  I would like to have a specific     7           definition of sexual content to --     8                    JUDGE SLOVITER:  Well, I asked you how much of it     9           involved sexual activity, et cetera, and you said less than    10           ten percent, whatever you meant in answering I meant in    11           asking.    12                    (Laughter.)    13                    THE WITNESS:  Okay, could you repeat that?  What    14           harm would there be?    15                    JUDGE SLOVITER:  Yes, what would happen if -- to the    16           extent that they knew that all the games that were -- that    17           could be played were limited to games that had non-sexual    18           activity?    19                    THE WITNESS:  Well, it's -- if you're talking about    20           games, I don't see a problem --    21                    JUDGE SLOVITER:  Well, I call it games, I mean, you    22           become --    23                    THE WITNESS:  -- discussion --    24                    JUDGE SLOVITER:  -- a different person -- yes?    25                    THE WITNESS:  As I said, I have named an instance in                                                                           157     1           which I think it could be harmful to ban discussions of     2           sexual behavior, those in which there is an educational     3           component.     4                    JUDGE DALZELL:  But that would be a MUSE?     5                    THE WITNESS:  It could be.  And I think it's     6           important to note that this entire communications medium is     7           one that evolves and changes.  MUD's used to be for college     8           students having -- having fun, pretending to be play Dungeons     9           and Dragons, now they're becoming educational environments.     10           It's hard to tell what they're going to become in the future.     11           So, I'm being careful with my answers because I would want to    12           be careful about exactly how I would constrain how these    13           things can grow, because what they are today is not    14           necessarily what they're going to be tomorrow.  And in fact    15           in my book I wrote about the fact that the Internet would not    16           be here if the people who created it stuck to the rules of    17           what you were supposed to do.  You weren't really supposed to    18           communicate, it was really just for government researchers --    19                    JUDGE SLOVITER:  Well, we have seen --    20                    JUDGE DALZELL:  Yes, we have been over that.    21                    JUDGE SLOVITER:  We have been over that.    22                    THE WITNESS:  right.    23                    JUDGE SLOVITER:  Did our questions elicit -- our    24           attempt at understanding this, did that elicit any questions                                                                           158     1           from either side?     2                    MS. RUSSOTTO:  No questions from the Government,     3           your Honor.     4                    MR. HANSEN:  No, your Honor.     5                    JUDGE SLOVITER:  Okay, thank you very much.     6                    (Witness excused.) Back to Hearing Transcripts index Back to Citizens Internet Empowerment Coalition Page