WT02-B12-1IA086-000618-B045-232http://res2.resnet.upenn.edu:80/cis590/reading.032.html 130.91.195.242 19970122054615 text/html 4284HTTP/1.0 200 OKDate: Wed, 22 Jan 1997 05:46:12 GMTServer: Apache/1.1.1Content-type: text/htmlContent-length: 4113Last-modified: Tue, 22 Nov 1994 06:31:13 GMTNotes from House Hearing on Cryptography Export Controls From: djw@eff.org (Daniel J. Weitzner)Subject: Notes from House Hearing on Cryptography Export Controls October 12, 1993House Foreign Affairs CommitteeSubcommittee on Economic Policy, Trade, and the EnviornmentHearing on mass market cryptography and export controlsRep. Sam Gejdenson (D-Conn.), Chair [A hopefully informative and probably biased account of the hearing by EFF] Committee Members present: Gejdenson, Cantwell (D-Wash.), Fingerhut (D-Ohio), Rohrbacher (R-Calif.)Manzullo (R-Ill.) Witnesses: PANEL 1 (Open) J. Hendren, Arkansas Systems (A data security firm that does a lot ofinternational banking work) Ray Ozzie, IRIS Associates for Business Software Alliance (Lotus Notesdeveloper) Stephen Walker, Trusted Information Systems for Software Publishers Association Philip Zimmermann, PGP developer Don Harbert, Digital Eqiupment Corp. PANEL 2 (Secret Session) NSA representative Opening Statement of Gejdenson: "This hearing is about the well intentioned attempts of the NationalSecurity Agency to try to control the uncontrollable.... The NSA itselfacknowledges that if you have a long distance telephone line and a modem,you can send this software anywhere in the world. If you have a computerand a modem you can take this software off of the Internet anywhere in theworld.... I do not question the value of the information sought by theNational Security Agency. But once it is determined that the dispersion ofthis software cannot be controlled, then however much we might want toprotect our ability to obtain information, it is beyond our means to do so. Just as in the case of telecommunications, the National Security Agency isattempting to put the genie back in the bottle. It won't happen; and avibrant and productive sector of American indsutry may be sacrificed in theprocess." The main points raised by witnesses were these: 1. DES and other strong encryption which is barred by ITAR is in the publicdomain and available on the global market from foreign softwaremanufacturers: -Ray Ozzie used his laptop and a modem to show how to get a DESimplementation from ftp.germany.eu.net. The committee loved it and most ofthem seemed to understand what was going on on the screen, even though theyhad never heard of ftp. -Stephen Walker described the results of an SPA study which uncovered over250 cryptography packages which offer DES-based or stronger algorithms. -Phil Zimmermann testified that he designed PGP from publicly availableinformation. 2. Foreign DES implementations are just as good as US versions.Surprisingly enough, this is a contentious issue. Some members of thecommittee seemed to have been told by someone or another that foreignversions of DES may not be as strong as those that are made in the USA. Ifthis were true, then export controls might still be justified despite thenumerous foreign versions of DES on the market. In my view, this is apretty desperate argument. -Steve Walker demonstrated that all DES works the same way by encrypting apassage from Mozart's Eine Kleine Nachtmusik with several different foreignDES packages, and then decrypting them. Surprise! They all sounded justthe same. 3. Lots of money is being lost by US software/hardware vendors: -Don Harbert from DEC told of loses of over $70 Million in just the lastfew months. -BSA estimates that export controls exclude access to a global market theis $6-9 Billion. 4. People want their privacy -Phil Zimmermann told the committee about his experience with PGP users andhow badly people need and want to protect their privacy in electronicenvironments Committee Responses: Overall, the committee was quite sympathetic to the witnesses. ChairmanGejdenson seemed very supportive of changing export controls. Rep. DanaRohrbacher, no flaming liberal, said, "the cold war is over. I sympathizewith everything that has been said here." WT02-B12-2IA086-000618-B045-290http://res2.resnet.upenn.edu:80/cis590/reading.033.html 130.91.195.242 19970122054642 text/html 4260HTTP/1.0 200 OKDate: Wed, 22 Jan 1997 05:46:43 GMTServer: Apache/1.1.1Content-type: text/htmlContent-length: 4089Last-modified: Tue, 22 Nov 1994 06:31:14 GMTfrom Telecom, partial text of CPSR press rreleease on NII Palo Alto, Calif., October 25, 1993 -- In the wake of sudden corporatemergers and rapid technological developments, Computer Professionalsfor Social Responsibility (CPSR) today voiced concern that the plannedinformation superhighway will not realize its full potential. Thepublic interest organization put forward specific guidelines for theNational Information Infrastructure (NII) in a paper titled, "Servingthe Community: A Public-Interest Vision of the National InformationInfrastructure." Urging the Clinton Administration to move quickly toadopt these principles, CPSR President Eric Roberts said, "Althoughthere is widespread agreement on general goals, there is no specificplan to ensure that these goals are met." "It is much easier to state a vision than to achieve it, " said Dr.Roberts, who is also Associate Chair of the Computer Sciencedepartment at Stanford University. "And there are many dangers on thehorizon that threaten to compromise the value of the NII as a resourcefor the public. "For example, if a small number of companies dominate the market,we're in danger of stifling competition and innovation on the network.If those same companies control the programming, then open and diversespeech is limited. If pricing structures do not cover universalservice, the average person and the poor will be struggling to use thebackroads of the information highway. If privacy isn't protected,your TV could keep more detailed records of your finances than theIRS. And, if the NII is not designed to allow everyone to communicatefreely and to publish their own contributions, it could become nothingmore than a medium for delivering 500-channel television, withinteractivity limited to home-shopping and trying to guess the nextplay during sporting events." CPSR's paper expands on these dangers and makes specific policy andtechnical recommendations for the newly formed InformationInfrastructure Task Force. The Task Force is expected to coordinatenetwork policy for the Clinton Administration. "In its 'Agenda for Action' document, the Administration has set fortha positive vision of what the NII can be," said Dr. Roberts. "Toachieve that vision, however, the government must play a major role inthe design, development, and regulation of the network." CPSR recommendsthat the Administration adopt the following policies: o Promote widespread economic benefits by evaluating the NII's economic success using measures that reflect its impact on the society as a whole, not merely the profits of NII investors and service providers. o Evaluate the social impact of the NII by conducting periodic reviews as the NII is implemented and used to guarantee that it continues to serve the public interest. o Guarantee equitable and universal access through an appropriate mix of legislation, regulation, taxation, and direct subsidies. o Promote the development of a vital civic sector by ensuring resources, training, and support for public spaces within the NII where citizens can pursue noncommercial activities. o Promote a diverse and competitive marketplace in terms of the content carried over the NII. o Provide access to government services and information over the NII. o Encourage democratic participation by ensuring full public disclosure, and actively promoting democratic decision-making and public participation in all stages of the development process. o Actively facilitate the seamless connection of America's NII with the information infrastructures of other nations by working to resolve such issues as security, censorship, tariffs, and privacy. o Guarantee the functional integrity of the NII by establishing critical technical requirements including ease of use, widespread availability, full functionality, high reliability, adequate privacy protection, and evolutionary expansion. ...... WT02-B12-3IA086-000618-B045-341http://res2.resnet.upenn.edu:80/cis590/reading.034.html 130.91.195.242 19970122054738 text/html 21862HTTP/1.0 200 OKDate: Wed, 22 Jan 1997 05:47:04 GMTServer: Apache/1.1.1Content-type: text/htmlContent-length: 21690Last-modified: Tue, 22 Nov 1994 06:31:15 GMT Protection and The Inte Protection and The Inte Protection and The InternetSteve CislerApple Library "The unprecedented environment has produced a temperament volatile andmercurial, marked by uncalculating ardor, enterprise, intrepidity, andinsatiable hunger for innovation, out of which has grown a society that hasbeen alternately the reproach and marvel of mankind." --John Ingallswriting about the Great Plains (1902) quoted in W.P. Webb The Great PlainsGrossett and Dunlap 1931. Summary: Now that the Internet is becoming popular, many people andorganizations want to protect the Internet, protect people from theInternet, protect individual systems from casual visitors, protectchildren from access to certain files and online interactions, and protectwhole cultures from outside influences. A few years ago, the head of a fee-based online service was asked when theInternet could be used to access his system. "Why should we hook ourdrinking water supply to a sewage system?" was the gist of his reply. Sometime after that a special librarian for a large corporate library statedthat she felt it was her duty to keep the engineers and other patrons inthe company from using a dangerous and dirty system like the Internet. Ofcourse, they were already using it; she just did not want to get involvedat that time. Both of these people wanted to protect their enterprise andtheir users from what they saw as an uncontrollable, chaotic system, fullof dirty data, unruly computer intruders, foul-fingered Usenet orators,corrupted programs, and unreliable connections. This view was indicative ofthe kind of stratification of the online world. There was not very muchknowledge about or interest in learning about the different segments.Professional online database searchers did not frequent the world ofUsenet. Internet users looked down at the bulletin board system operators,and commercial consumer service providers were in their own separate worldwith only a few links to these other worlds. CompuServe did not talk toFidonet which was unaware of Usenet, and the Internet was a loosely guardedsecret. Suddenly that has changed, and the focus is on the Internet. The people andorganizations seeking connections, the ability to search for and providenew information, and the countries where all of this is offered, haveincreased at an exciting, alarming, and perhaps even exaggerated rate.Vinton Cerf, one of the founding fathers of the Internet, argues that itcan now be considered mass media. It certainly has become mainstream. Notonly do we see jokes about the Internet in the New Yorker, we findselections from the New Yorker on the Internet. It is reaching Indiantribes in the U.S., the capitals in Azerbaijan, Mozambique, Croatia, Peru,Beaverhead County, Montana, and schools throughout Texas. While just asmall fraction of the world's computer users are connected, and even fewerunderstand all they are connected to, the Internet offers the dream ofconnectivity to many millions in rural and urban areas all over the world.Even the cable companies, who looked upon the Internet as "invisible" or asa sideshow in early 1993, are going to offer connections to their customersby the end of 1993. Up to 1991 the culture of the Internet has been synonymous with openness,lack of central control and governance, non-commercial in nature, a placefor experimentation and rapid implementation and change. Some are fond ofcomparing the Internet to a frontier. This is due in part to the growth ofthe Unix operating system and the intellectual climate in the academiccomputing centers and government research labs where Unix and the Internetspread in the 1980's. In the 1990's we are seeing a concentration on newtools for users and administrators which in turn is bringing ease of use,an enormous leap in the amount and kind of content available, and this isattracting the rush of individuals, companies, schools, libraries,governments, businesses, and non-profits to the network. With the arrivalof new users, many of them from the commercial sector, a series of culturaland policy-based brushfires have been started. Stated in crude binaryterms, they center on fee versus free, open and closed systems, anarchicversus governed, private and anonymous versus centralized secure systemswith accountability, indexed information versus raw data, unimpeded riversof data versus filtered, bottled, and marketed information, free speechversus censorship, access for some versus universal access, flat-ratepricing versus packets/mile charges, cultural preservation versus culturaldisintegration, and centralized sources of information versus every user aspublisher. PROTECT: to cover or shield from that which would injure, destroy, ordetrimentally affect; secure or preserve usually against attack,disintegration, encroachment, or harm. --Webster's Third New InternationalDictionary As the network traffic explodes in size, diversity, and number of users,many people including users, administrators, and people not on the Net aretrying to "protect" people, systems, data from use, abuse, or access. As alibrarian, I am interested in extending access to more people, helping themfind the information, as well as, the personal contacts they need, and inencouraging the use of the networks to publish that information. While Iunderstand the motivation for the practices, it is obvious that many of theprotection methods will decrease the amount of information and narrow theconditions by which a group of users can get the information. You willalways find some on the Net who believe that it is justified, and many morewho think it's wrong, impossible, or just foolish to try and restrainaccess. The most obvious forms of protections are restricting access to a computersystem, protecting intellectual property, or keeping certain people fromseeing, doing, or using certain resources. I am not going to discuss thecryptology wars now raging over the Clipper Chip, RSA algorithms, andPretty Good Privacy (PGP) software except to say that it's a very largeissue. In mid-September small American encryption firms are being called infor some serious discussions with federal officials. Contact the ElectronicFrontier Foundation (ssteele@eff.org) for updates on this controversy. Anonymity A long-running argument about the value or danger of anonymity can generateas much heat as light. Some argue that many people will be afraid to posttheir thoughts and comments if they cannot be anonymous. Frequently citedare people wanting an open forum on substance abuse, mental illness, rape,and other sensitive topics. Anonymous mailing services have been set up inAustralia and Finland. However, the anonymous mailers have been used byindividuals who carry online flame wars into another realm. They have usedthese services to attack their enemies, make false accusations, one ofwhich resulted in the loss of the victim's job. While the victims arefairly sure of the perpetrator, they cannot prove it because he is using ananonymous mailing service. There are some more subtle issues we all must face. These are related tothe use of the Internet by young people, by cultural groups where the usersare not aware of the range of information on the Internet, use of anonymousmailers for spreading slanderous information, the manipulation of softwaretools to change information access, and the editing of files to "cleanse"them of objectionable information. Even though librarians have had a lot ofexperience with book, video, and music censorship battles, these are muchless clear-cut from an intellectual freedom standpoint, and that is onlyone aspect of the discussion in most cases. Access for Elementary and Secondary Schools Mike Roberts of EDUCOM says that approximately 10% of the American K12schools have some sort of Internet connection. Materials used andactivities undertaken by elementary and secondary school students comesunder a good deal of scrutiny. This varies by grade level, by school, bydistrict, and by state. It will be no different when Internet activitiesare included in many classrooms. Educators who plan to offer Internetaccess immediately confront the challenge of Usenet and anonymous ftpfiles. There is a fairly strong consensus that the students must beprotected from some of these discussions and some of the files. Thereasoning comes in various flavors: Some say that they personally don'tfind the material objectionable but if the conservative elements in thestate found out, the project would be threatened or canceled. Thenightmare they have is of some legislator waving around a raunchy GIF image"paid for with tax dollars and found on the State Educational Network", orreading some choice posting from alt.sex.furry.critters oralt.sex.necrophelia. This fear may be unfounded, but it tends to make someadministrators restrain themselves and avoid all Usenet groups. A sensiblecompromise is taken by the Boulder Valley School District. KenKlingenstein, reported at INET'93 in San Francisco that school committeesare combing through the Usenet groups to save the best and most relevant.With thousands available, few sites can subscribe to all of them (thetraffic is about 70 megabytes of messages each day). Providing access toscientific and mathematical information is relatively uncontroversial formost districts (unless creationism is vying for a place in the curriculum),but many people are worried about the software, text files, and images thatanyone can access, providing the students learn how to use the arcane ftpcommands and tools for unpacking, converting and displaying the pictures.Students with time and curiosity may become far more adept at using thesetools than over- worked teachers in some schools connected to the network.And now the tools are improving where access is much easier. Gopher One of the more interesting Internet software projects are the gopherclients and servers (See "Cool Tools for the Macintosh" Apple Library UsersGroup Newsletter , Summer 1993). There are over 1500 public gopher spaces,and the information being served is about everything imaginable. It rangesfrom electronic texts of out-of-copyright books, to campus phonedirectories, software libraries, pictures, archives of discussions, andmany unstructured databases. A special program called Veronica has beenwritten to help users find information within gopher. Veronica runs atseveral different sites in the U.S. and Italy. Earlier this year, one sitewas informed that when you did a veronica search on the word 'camping' youreached information about homosexuals. The site modified the program not todeliver any hits on 'camping'. They decided to protect their users frommaterial that might offend. Veronica can be configured to avoid searchingon any list of words. A 'stop word' list is usually done to save computercycles from looking up 'a', 'the', 'of', and the like. It can also be usedto omit seemingly innocent words like 'camping' or some of George Carlin'sfavorite terms. Most users are not aware this is going on, that thedatabase is searched with a filter. Some companies are working with the education community to provide networkaccess and services. Here is Richard Perlman of Pacific Bell describingtheir effort: "Pacific Bell is setting up access to the Internet for elementary andsecondary schools in California. This, project part of Pacific Bell's"Knowledge Network", is currently in a technology test authorized by theCalifornia Public Utilities Commission. Pacific Bell is using the InternetGopher to present information in a variety of organizational schemes tomeet the needs of students in elementary, junior high school, high schooland community college as well as teachers and librarians. Pacific Bell isworking with the schools to devise curriculum and lesson plans thatencourage and support the use of information networks as part of theeducational process. They are also working with school staff andadministration to address issues of content acceptability and appropriateuse." One possibility is that a young child would have access to one set ofmenus, an older student to more information, and the teacher or librarianwould have full access to all the gophers on the Knowledge Network.However, Pacific Bell makes it clear that the most persistent user can findways around gopher filters, so no school should expect complete protection. Gophers reflect the open culture of the Internet, and this has caused somesystem administrators to wish for more tools to restrict access to thepower of gopher or even to the server itself. John Stanley manages agopher server at the Coastal Imaging Laboratory at Oregon State University.It is not openly advertised, but it is not totally closed either. In lateAugust, a heated discussion took place on comp.infosystems.gopher on Usenetabout Stanley's request that the Veronica sites not index his gopher. Somefelt that he was not abiding by unwritten etiquette (open, freeinformation, free access anytime), but what angered Stanley was that heasked the indexers not to include information from his gopher, yet theycontinued to do so. It seems as though it was more of a communications(personal) problem than anything else. Stanley believed that the indexingplaced an unwelcome load on his machine, and he wanted to conserve hiscomputing resources for his users, not an indexing program in Italy.Michael Morse of the National Science Foundation has proposed that thegopher server software be delivered with the default set to "no index" andallow each administrator to turn it on or leave it off. While some argue about indexes to the information, others object to theinformation itself. One gopher site received a great deal of criticismbecause the letter writers thought the gopher administrator was postingunflattering information about the Koran. The discussion insoc.culture.islam on Usenet prompted many people to write and complainabout the definition of 'Koran" that is found in Ambrose Bierce's Devil'sDictionary at wiretap.spies.com KORAN, n. A book which the Mohammedans foolishly believe to have beenwritten by divine inspiration, but which Christians know to be a wickedimposture, contradictory to the Holy Scriptures. The actual electronic file was not at the index site, only a pointer toanother gopher where the document resided. By doing a search for otherlocations of the same document, I found that the gopher atccat.sas.upenn.edu included a version of Bierce's dictionary and left outthe definition for Koran but included this one for Christian: CHRISTIAN, n. One who believes that the New Testament is a divinelyinspired book admirably suited to the spiritual needs of his neighbor. Onewho follows the teachings of Christ in so far as they are not inconsistentwith a life of sin. That edition was broken up into folders for each letter of the alphabetwith each definition being a separate entry. Oddly, in another menu therewas a pointer to the wiretap.spies.com 'unexpurgated' version. Keep in mindI was only looking for the 'koran' definition. Indeed, there may be severalversions of this dictionary floating around in ftp sites. While theDevil's Dictionary is not the Satanic Verses, this does raise the issue ofwho is responsible for culling, controlling, and disseminating information,even barbed witicisms written 80 years ago. The gopher involved in the Koran controversy now posts this to head offcriticisms: IF YOU FEEL THAT INFORMATION YOU HAVE OBTAINED VIA <the> GOPHER OR OTHERINFORMATION SERVERS IS INACCURATE OR OFFENSIVE, WE SUGGEST YOU CONTACT THEORIGINAL PRODUCER/DISTRIBUTOR OF THAT INFORMATION. Usenet And now let us turn from religion to sex, figuratively speaking. Newcommunications media have frequently been used to convey sexual content. InVictorian times there was much discussion about the way the telephone mightbe used by people normally polite and restrained. The VCR industry began bytapping the huge market of people wanting to view pornography (what youlike) and erotica (what I like) in their own homes. The French Minitelsystem message traffic in the late 1980's included a huge proportion ofcasual sexual banter, online cruising, and gender swapping.Some of the mostpopular CD-ROMs don't mention ERIC and MARC, but Valerie is exposed for allto see. Because the Internet includes more and more information about human needsand concerns, there is a load of discussions about sex, pictures, and evenanimated video clips. Many old network hands hate to see this mentionedbecause it's always over-emphasized by novice reporters who are looking forthe sensational. Joe Abernathy, who used to report for the Houston Chronicle, wrote anintroduction to the Internet and its use as a vehicle for sexual material.The firestorm of criticism has not totally died down after several years,partly because of the opening lines "Westbury High School student Jeff Noxon's homework was rudely interrupted recently when he stumbled across the world's most sophisticated pornography ring." -posted on com-priv@psi.com July 11, 1991 by Abernathy Abernathy weathered the criticism and went on to write about other Internetevents.Some people forgave him for his initial article; others did not.People feel strongly about the Internet...and about sex. The clashes occuron the network and in discussions about access to pictures, jokes,discussions, and stories. These are all found in Usenet, where some of themost popular news groups are the controversial alt (for alternate)hierarchy. Estimates place the readership of alt.binaries.pictures.eroticaat 150,000 in August 1993. 853 messages were posted, but because they werelarge image files, this group accounted for about 43 megabytes of trafficin a month whereas rec.arts.tv.soaps had 45,000 readers, 5125 messagesaccounting for about 10.5 megabytes per month. About 56% of the Usenetsites receive the erotica group. Why don't the others? There are manyreasons. Some administrators consider all of the alt.groups a waste of diskspace and cpu time; others omit the picture groups because of the file sizeand sometimes because of the content. For instance, Apple does not carrythe picture groups because of copyright problems with some of the scannedimages, and the administrator does not have time to figure out whichpresent intellectual property problems and which do not. Other firms areconcerned about sexual harassment charges from employees who find thematerial offensive, so the manager removes it. In some cases, women havecomplained when the groups were removed, even more than male readers. Usinggopher and a little perseverance any of the Usenet groups can be accessed,even those that have been dropped from the Usenet master list of your homemachine. Public Archives In addition there are public (ftp) archives that contain controversialmaterial. Some of these may show up in a gopher listing; other archivelists are passed among interested parties. Usually, they are not postedbecause the flood of ftp sessions would slow down the file server.In onecase several years ago, administrators ruled that public directories on theuniversity system should not devote space to nudes and X-rated images. Thesolution was for each individual to copy favorite files into the personaldirectory (some on the same machine). This took up much more room thanhaving a central, public file, but it permitted the university from totallyremoving the files. It is my opinion that the number of files that will offend are hidden bythe vast total number of files available, but the resource discovery toolsare being sharpened, polished, and are easier to use. This will bring morepeople online, and the curious will be able to cruise the backwaters of theNet with relative ease. Many will come back to share their adventures. Many cultures express concern about cultural disintegration by trying tokeep out alien influences: rock music, foreign languages, other politicalideas, alternative ways for men and women to relate to each other, poetry,This will be done by stressing the negative points of the outside influenceand the strengths of the home culture. Because more traditional andsometimes authoritarian groups (countries, companies, Indian nations, andreligions) have a growing presence on the Internet, they will be lookingfor ways of filtering what their users see and use as access is extended. We are working with some Indian tribes to put historical photographs andartwork online to share with others. One museum curator showed me somephotographs repatriated from the Smithsonian to the tribe. "Actually, thesewill only be available to initiated males over 14 years old." Thephotographs of the sacred dances (and the dances themselves) must beprotected. So there is a constant tension between the Indians wish to makeinformation available and to protect sacred information. I hope the few issues that I have raised will generate discussion in thelibrary community because we have strong ideals of openness that are notalways well understood in a new environment like the Internet. If our roleas guides, editors, and electronic librarians is valid, we will have torepeatedly confront these challenges. WT02-B12-4IA087-000625-B040-386http://res2.resnet.upenn.edu:80/cis590/reading.035.html 130.91.195.242 19970122054905 text/html 8245HTTP/1.0 200 OKDate: Wed, 22 Jan 1997 05:49:02 GMTServer: Apache/1.1.1Content-type: text/htmlContent-length: 8074Last-modified: Tue, 22 Nov 1994 06:31:16 GMTNews from the cipher front From: strnlght@netcom.com (David Sternlight)Subject: News from the cipher frontDate: 27 Oct 93 18:36:16 GMTOrganization: DSI/USCRPAC Ciphertext, the RSA newsletter (v1 n1, Fall 1993) showed up in my mailboxthis week. It contains much useful and interesting information, as well asan announcement of RSA's 1994 conference on January 12-14. What follows aresome digested excerpts, posted with permission. On the Clipper front there is a very useful and non-polemical summary of thetechnical aspects of Clipper by Paul Fahn, and an article by Martin Hellman.Hellman is a Distinguished Associate of RSA Laboratories, one of theinventors of Public Key technology, and a Professor of ElectricalEngineering at Stanford. He's not happy with Clipper as presently proposed,and says why. Since the article is based on his NIST testimony, the lattercan be obtained by anonymous ftp at isl.stanford.edu in/pubs/hellman/nist.clipper.text. The third annual RSA Data Security Conference is at Redwood Shores, CA. Itcosts $245 per person. There is no Onsite registration. Deadline is Friday12/17/93. For details contact RSA. Registration is limited to 400 andincludes the conference, tutorials, and hardcopy conference proceedings, aswell as a cocktail reception, and breakfast and lunch on all three days. Apple Ships RSA Digital Signature in Long-Awaited System 7 Pro. On October4th, Apple Computer introduced millions of new users to the RSA DigitalSignature. The producs are called PowerTalk and PowerShare and are part ofSystem 7 Pro, a new version of the Mac operating system. They include fivecomponents, integrated into the operating system--Messaging, Electronic MailDirectories, Privacy and Authentication, and Digital Signatures. They alsoinclude RSA's RC4 symmetric stream cipher for server-to-server linkencryption. Powertalk is compliant with the Public Key CryptographyStandards, and users will receive a voucher for a free unaffiliated"residential digital certificate, good for use with any secure PKCS orInternet PEM-compliant application. The Apple System 7 Pro implementation is PEM-certificate compatible, and themessages are as well. (For those who want privacy, RIPEM Mac operates withthe key pair generated by the Mac.) There is an API to the sign/verifyfunctions of the MacOS so that any app developer can use the featureswithout needing to license from RSA. Of course, the MacOS with RSA DigitalSignatures is fully exportable. RSA has a free signer utility forWindows that is compatible with the Mac sigs. Internet Privacy Enhanced Mail Arrives. Several commercial and freewareversions are available right now: TechMail, written at MIT, is a complete mail reading program for Macintoshand (soon) Windows. It includes full implementation of the Internet PEMRFCs, using RSA's TIPEM toolkit as its security engine. It is a client ofthe Internet Post Office Protocol. Techmail for the Mac is available fromnet.dist.mit.edu in pub/TechMail. It runs on SLIP or non-SLIP. (Poster'snote: The SLIP version incudes PEM and works fine. I haven't tested thenon-slip version and am not sure if it yet includes PEM.) TIS/PEM and T-Mail are non-commercial freeware and commercial supportedversions, respectively, of Trusted Information Systems implementations ofInternet PEM. The former was developed under contract with ARPA andagreement with RSADSI and is available in source code for academic researchor exploratory use by corportions or individuals on the Internet. For moreinformation send e-mail to tispem-support@tis.com. TIPEM 1.1 is the latest release of RSA's Toolkit for InteroperablePrivacy-Enhanced Messaging. It permits creating applications that complywith the Internet PEM standards as well as the commercial Public KeyCryptography Standards (PKCS) established by vendors including Lotus, Apple,Novell, and Microsoft. The toolkit was used for Apple's Powertalk. It isavailable directly from RSA Data Security Inc. RIPEM is another freeware public key encryption program designed forInternet PEM. It implements a subset of PEM as described in RFC's 1421-1424The internet host ripem.msu.edu acts as a RIPEM key server for users whochoose to register their keys. It is available via anonymous ftp fromrsa.com and non-anonymous ftp from ripem.msu.edu. RSA Certificate Services Center Opens for Business. This article describesthe center RSA has established to get ral certificates with your name,public key, and organizational affiliation safely embedded in acryptographically tamper-proof digital document. This provides the digitalID for Apple Powertalk, Internet Privacy-Enhanced Mail, or any X.509certificate-based secure application. The center allows you to issue your own affiliated certificates using RSA'sCertificate Issuing System; or the Certificate Services Center can issueaffiliated certificates for you, or you can purchase individual unaffiliatedcertificates directly from the CSC. Revocation services are also provided,as are certificate verification services. Users of Apple's System 7 PRO mayget their first certificate free. (Poster's note--as I understand it,subsequent individual certificates are $25.) For more information contactGeorge Parsons, CSC Manager at 415-595-8782. RSA Licensee Update: This piece is a partial list of products using RSA Technology available nowor coming soon. They include products from Novell, Apple, Microsoft, TrustedInformation Systems, Motorola, AT&T, Lotus, Word Perfect, Racal, IBM,Northern Telecom, Hughes, etc. in categories of Security in the OS, SecureE-mail, Secure Telephone and Fax, Secure Workgroup, Secure Electronic Forms,Link and Node Encryption, and Secure Remote Access. Hilgraeve Licenses RSA for Best-Selling Asynch Package. Hilgraeve, Inc. isabout to release the very first mass-market asynchronous communicationspackage with RSA encryptoin capabilities built in. The current release ofthat software, HyperACCESS/5 is already a market leader, for DOS, OS/2, andWindows. It has received PC Magazine's Editors' Choice Award three out ofthe past five years for its quality, performance, and ease of use. For moreinformation, contact Matt Gray at 313/243-0576. DataMedia's SECURExchange can "secure virtually any existing DOS, Windows,or Macintosh E-mail system. It uses RSA Digital Envelopes, RSA DigitalSignatures, and RSA Digital Certificates. It has been fully tested withcc:Mail, Microsoft Mail, DaVinci Mail, Beyond Mail, Internet, Compuserve,MCI Mail, AT&T EasyLink, and other systems. For more info call 603/886-1570. Dr. Ron Rivest has a piece on the Difficulty of Factoring--a reprint of a"classic paper." The RSA Factoring Challenge is a list of very long numbers posted onrsa.com. There are cash prizes for the most successful factorers. Prizesvary from the tens to the thousands of dollars, and unrewarded prize moneyrolls over into a kitty from month to month. SmartDisk is a smartcard that fits in a standard 3-1/2 inch diskette slotand interfaces with the disk read heads. It's a high-performace smart cardthat doesn't need a reader. It has its own embedded OS firmware. the firtapplication available is SafeBoot, a complete PC access control packagewhich is "virtually unhackable. The encryption algorithm and key are storedon the SmartDisk to protect them. For further info call Gene Wagner or JonKaplan at Fischer International, 813/643-1500. The above excerpts are only partial summaries of the material in thenewsletter. RSA Data Security Inc. is at 100 Marine Parkway, Suite 500, Redwood City, CA94065-1031. Disclaimer: The poster of this summary has no connection with any of thecompanies mentioned herein, except as an occasional beta tester for some,and an interested observer. David --David Sternlight When the mouse laughs at the cat, there is a hole nearby.--Nigerian Proverb WT02-B12-5IA087-000625-B041-8http://res2.resnet.upenn.edu:80/cis590/reading.036.html 130.91.195.242 19970122054929 text/html 15357HTTP/1.0 200 OKDate: Wed, 22 Jan 1997 05:49:30 GMTServer: Apache/1.1.1Content-type: text/htmlContent-length: 15185Last-modified: Tue, 22 Nov 1994 06:31:17 GMT700 Club Report on the Clipper Chip on Wednesday, October 20, 1993 Date: Tue, 2 Nov 93 04:08:13 -0800From: mlshew@netcom.com (Mark Shewmaker)To: cypherpunks@toad.com On October 20, 1993, the 700 Club gave a report on the Clipper chip.The report was fantastic. If you want to convince people why thechip is so very dangerous, and why cryptographic freedoms are soimportant, I recommend that you take a good look at this. Most people don't take to overly technical explanations of things,at least for the first round of explanations. This is an excellentmodel of starter explanation for such people. I've included a transcript of the show's Clipper segments. Notice one important thing: The report is not overtly religious intone. It does not need to be. Encryption and privacy issues cutacross many political and religious lines. There is no need toalienate the people you are trying to convince by insulting theirgroup affiliations. Notes on the transcript: It includes only the Clipper-chip segments.The transcript is in three sections. The first is from the intro tothe show where they show clips of future segments of that days show,the second is the pre-commercial "Next: The Clipper chip, here on the700 Club", and the last is the actual report. All typos and inaccuracies are mine. The editing I did to the reportis: (1) remove "uh"'s (2) try to add returns in order to put the speech'sformat into some semblance of paragraph form for easier reading, and(3) change one case of two people talking simultaneously (at the end)to one person saying a few words, followed by the other saying a few words. People in the report: Ben Kinchlow and Terry Meeuwsen are the hosts,who talk about the stories between themselves, and Julia Zaher is thereporter for the story. She speaks both in a voiceover to the report,and in the report, interviewing Jerry Berman, Lynn McNulty, Lance Hoffman,and of course Dorothy Denning. By the way, they showed the Clipper chip itself! Or, at least theyshowed something they claimed to be the Clipper chip. Unfortunately,there was no close-up, just the chip in someone's hand, with the chiptaking about a sixteenth of the screen. It looked like a 28 pin PLCCpackage, with the cheaper tin plated leads. Odd that there are so few pins. Here's the transcript: [The following was clipped from the intros to the that day's topics] Ben Kinchlow: We've also got a word of caution for you because very soon, if you're familiar with this song: _Every_Move_You_Make,_Every_ _Step_You_Take: The federal government could be watching you! Jerry Berrman: We are going to conduct our lives in electronic media: Order our movies, order our television shows, decide what schools we send our children to, what programs we want to, what products we want to buy, what magazines we want downloaded into our homes. Ben Kinchlow: And if you're a big fan of large government, this tiny computer chip could now give the government, Big Brother, instant access to every detail of your private life. And we'll have details of that still to come. Terry? Terry Meeuwsen: Right...Scary. ---[The following is the pre-commercial message.]--- Ben Kinchlow: Well coming up next... The clipper computer chip. It could be a key to invading your privacy. We'll have that for you as the 700 club continues. ---[The following is the actual report.]--- Terry Meeuwsen: The famous line from the book _1984_ was "Big Brother is watching you", and in the future, that could prove to be true. How would Big Brother watch you? What method would he use? Some privacy experts fear the means could be-- a computer chip. CBN News correspondent Julia Zaher brings us the story from Washington. Julia Zaher:(voiceover) The way we communicate is changing rapidly. It won't be long before our telephone, our computer, and perhaps even our television will all be one device. Jerry Berman of the Electronic Frontier Foundation says we'll use that device to conduct most of our daily business, our personal business; and for some of us, our professional business. Jerry Berrman: We are going to conduct our lives in electronic media: Order our movies, order our television shows, decide what schools we send our children to, what programs we want, what products we want to buy, what magazines we want downloaded into our homes. Julia Zaher:(voiceover) Berman and others in the communications and computer industries welcome the innovative technology, but they also worry that a new danger is threatening the privacy of every American. The danger is that a computerized record of nearly all of our activities will be constantly accumulating. That record could show virtually every move we make, from what we buy, to how much money we make, to what political causes we support. To protect our privacy, Berman and others believes, more people will start doing what the government and the military have done for decades: Add scrambling devices to telephones and computers, to keep outsiders from tapping into important information and conversations. That process of coding and decoding information is called encryption. Jerry Berrman: Today we don't think of encrypting our communications, but it will be done with a flick of a button. Julia Zaher:(voiceover) Already, AT&T makes a scrambling device for telephones. Many businesses, especially those with overseas offices, use these scrambling devices routinely. They also take advantage of the almost 300 computer software programs available to code and decode computer programs and electronic mail. The Clinton administration has taken a great interest in this information revolution, and the government has invented its own scrambling device. Lynn McNulty: This is one of the clipper chips. The chip itself costs about twenty-five dollars. Julia Zaher:(voiceover) The new invention is known as the Clipper chip. The chip is supposed to provide the strongest possible method of coding phone, FAX, and computer transmissions to prevent unwanted eavesdropping. The chip is supposed to be on the market soon. Lynn McNulty is with the National Institute of Standards and Technology, known as NIST for short. President Clinton has commissioned NIST to help make the Clipper chip the highest standard for scrambling information. The White House wants to see more businesses and individuals use the Clipper chip to protect their communications once it's on the market. The reportedly unbreakable scrambling code in the chip would be a big plus in the fight to keep information private. But there's a catch. Lynn McNulty: A good part of the technical details of the, that underlie the standard will not be made public, which is a departure from the way we've done business in the past. Julia Zaher:(voiceover) The details of how Clipper works and the keys that can break the code are all being kept secret by the government. That has nearly everyone in the computer and communications industries alarmed. Lance Hoffman is a computer science and encryption coding and decoding expert. Lance Hoffman: The administration wants to control the whole process, and wants the government to control all the keys, is what it boils down to--that's the real problem. Julia Zaher:(voiceover) The government says it alone must hold the keys that can break Clipper's private scrambling code. That would mean that only government agencies could eavesdrop on computer and telephone transmissions. Private agencies, or individuals like private detectives couldn't do it. The FBI and other law enforcement agencies say, instead of getting court orders for wiretaps, in the future they'll be routinely requesting codes that are scrambling computers and telephones. Dorothy Denning is one of the five outside computer experts who had the chance to examine the Clipper chip and try to break its code. Julia Zaher: And what happened? Dorothy Denning: I failed. I didn't break it. Julia Zaher: There was no way you could break it? Dorothy Denning: There was no way I could break it. Julia Zaher:(voiceover) Denning is one of the very few people in the computer science field who sees no danger in the government holding the only keys that can break Clipper's code. Dorothy Denning: ...And this initiative does not in any way to expand the government's authority to intercept communications. Julia Zaher:(voiceover) Denning also says Clipper's unbreakable code would make it more difficult for police or the FBI to do illegal wiretaps. But Hoffman and many others disagree. They say that all of the secrecy about how clipper works, combined with the government alone holding the keys to break the code, would put the privacy of everyone using clipper in jeopardy. Hoffman says that while the chip is just one of many scrambling devices now, the government could eventually argue that everyone coding their information must use clipper Lance Hoffman: There's no reason they couldn't change their mind at a later point and say "well we tried it voluntari..." "We tried it as a voluntary measure, it doesn't work, so now it's going to be mandatory." Julia Zaher:(voiceover) Privacy advocates like Jerry Berman point out the government has been known to spy on citizens when it believes they hold dangerous political opinions. Jerry Berrman: There are good governments, there are bad governments. We've gone through abusive periods where we've had intelligence agencies chasing different political dissidents from the right and left around. We worry about these things. Julia Zaher:(reporting) Computer coding and decoding standards may all seem irrelevant at this point, but they'll be important in the future to protect your privacy. The government's Clipper chip is the most powerful coding and decoding device developed so far. It hasn't been decided yet if Clipper will be the one national standard used to protect electronic privacy, but if it is, it could also pose the greatest threat, if those decoding keys, held by the government, fall into the wrong hands. Julia Zaire, CBN News, Washington. Ben Kinchlow: And some of us would say that the wrong hands for them to fall into is the government! You know. What your talking about here, essentially, is a giant superhighway. This is what the President, Vice-President Gore is recommending--that we have this super-highway, which on the surface is wonderful. It enables us all across the world to hook up and, you know, exchange information and communications with people, and that's a wonderful idea, and we need to take full advantage of what's going on in technology today: Marvelous things. Like one of our cameramen is hooked up to something called Internet, where you can pull out files from the university of Tokyo, if you will. I mean, it's a wonderful idea. The problem is, when the government comes in and starts saying, "The only" I mean, everybody has this scrambling device, but the only people who can unscramble this device is the government. But the government says that "we must have this" in order to track down criminals and terrorists. The problem is, "criminals and terrorists" eventually become who the government says "criminals and terrorists" are. And it will not be long before anybody who disagrees with the government, then, can become a criminal, and his whole activities can be tracked down. And indeed what Orwell said about 1984 becomes a reality. The Big Brother has the capacity to watch you, track you. And by the way, interestingly enough, they do have, and have developed, a small uh Terry Meeuwsen: Oh, I don't want to know this Ben Kinchlow: tracking device that goes under Terry Meeuwsen: Under the skin? Ben Kinchlow: under your skin. In fact, they used some of it, according to one report I read, over in the war that just took place in the middle east, so they could track our men by satellite. Terry Meeuwsen: Well, you know [sigh], the bottom line is that it's the same thing we've been hearing day after day after day: More government control, more government control. So, we need to hear that... Ben Kinchlow: The operative word here being 'control.' Terry Meeuwsen: Yeah. Ben Kinchlow: Watch it. WT02-B12-6IA087-000625-B041-55http://res2.resnet.upenn.edu:80/cis590/reading.037.html 130.91.195.242 19970122055003 text/html 8935HTTP/1.0 200 OKDate: Wed, 22 Jan 1997 05:50:04 GMTServer: Apache/1.1.1Content-type: text/htmlContent-length: 8764Last-modified: Tue, 22 Nov 1994 06:31:19 GMTNew EFF Infrastructure Policy Statement: The Open Platform Campaign The recent spate of telecommunications mergers -- Bell Atlantic/TCI, USWest/Time-Warner, AT&T/McCaw, plus numerous others in the works -- raisethe stakes for information policy makers and those of us who are concernedabout the development of an open, accessible information infrastructure. EFF has just released a major new statement on our Open Platform Campaign,which explains EFF's approach to infrastructure policy. Our big concern isencourage Congess and the Administration to do the right thing and set outa new, positive communications policy that is ready for the informationage. We believe that this policy must achieve the following goals: * Diversity of Information Sources: Promote a fully interactive infrastructure in which the First Amendment flourishes, allowing the greatest possible diversity of view points; * Universal Service: Ensure a minimum level of affordable information and communication service for all Americans; * Free Speech and Common Carriage: Guarantee infrastructure access regardless of the content of the message that the user is sending; * Privacy: Protect the security and privacy of all communications carried over the infrastructure, and safeguard the Fourth and Fifth Amendment rights of all who use the information infrastructure; * Development of Public Interest Applications and Services: Ensure that public interest applications and services which are not produced by the commercial market are widely available and affordable. Our policy proposal, available by anonymous ftp on ftp.eff.org in/pub/eff/papers/op2.0, contains a discussion of these principles andconcrete legislative recommendations on how to accomplish many of thesegoals. Here are a few selected paragraphs from the main paper to give aflavor of our positions, but we hope you'll read the whole thing. "Regulatory changes should be made, and mergers approved or barredbased on specific, enforceable commitments that the electronicsuperhighways will meet public goals and realize the potential of digitaltechnology. That potential arises from the extraordinary spaciousness ofthe broadband information highway, contrasted with the scarcity ofbroadcast spectrum and the limited number of cable channels that definedthe mass media era. Properly constructed and administered, the informationhighway has enough capacity to permit passage not only for a band ofchannels controlled by the network operator, but also for a common carriageconnection that is open to all who wish to speak, publish, and communicateon the digital information highway. For the first time, electronic mediacan have the diversity of information we associate only with the printmedia." But we can't rely on the promises of industry or the wonders of thecompetitive marketplace alone to create this infrastructure. We needlegislative benchmarks to ensure that all citizens have access to advancedinformation infrastructure. We will achieve this goal not by havinggovernment build the whole thing, but by finding a new communicationspolicy framework that works for the market and brings benefits toconsumers. We've expanded the concept of "Open Platform Services" from just narrowbandISDN, to include any switched, digital service, offered on a commoncarriage basis, by any provider. "To achieve the full potential of new digital media, we need tomake available what we call Open Platform services, which reach allAmerican homes, businesses, schools, libraries, and governmentinstitutions. Open Platform service will enable children at home to tieinto their school library (or libraries all around the world) to do theirhomework. It will make it possible for a parent who makes a video of thelocal elementary school soccer game to share it with parents and studentsthroughout the community. Open Platform will make it as easy to be aninformation provider as it is to be an information consumer." "Open Platform services provide basic information accessconnections, just as today's telephone line allows your to connect to aninformation service or the coaxial cable running into your home connectsyou to cable television programming. This is not a replacement forcurrent online services such as America Online or Compuserve, but rather isthe basic transport capacity that one needs to access the multimediaversion of these information services. "Specifically, Open Platform service must meet the following criteria: * widely available, switched digital connections;* affordable prices;* open access to all without discrimination as the content of the message;* sufficient "up-stream" capacity to enable users to originate, as well as receive, good quality video, multimedia services. "Open Platform service itself will be provided by a variety of providersover interconnected networks, using a variety of wires, fiber optics, coaxcable, and wireless transmission services. But however it is provided, ifit is affordable and widely available, it will be the on-ramp for thenation's growing information superhighway." Rather than a narrow focus on stopping or delaying the proposed mergers,policy makers should use the leverage of the moment to create a newCommunications Act that serves the public interest. "The Administration and Congress can create an prompt thedeployment of open platforms by using the political leverage at itsdisposal. Bell Atlantic, TCI, Time Warner, US West and others involved inrecent mergers are all promising to build open platforms.Telecommunications giants are asking policymakers for permission to enternew markets or to form new, merged entities. Rather than per se oppositionto current mergers, or mere reliance on competition to build the datahighways, make the mergers and other accommodations conditional onproviding affordable open platform services. The terms of this new socialcontract should be written into a new Communications Act, revised for theinformation age. With a real "social contract" in hand, we just mightrealize the Jeffersonian potential of the data superhighways. " "Together with a coalition of public interest groups and privateindustry, the Electronic Frontier Foundation is working to establish OpenPlatform objectives in concrete legislation. Open Platform provisions,which would cause near term deployment of Open Platform services, arepresent in both the recent Senate infrastructure bill and the latest draftof House telecommunications legislation, soon to be introduced. We arealso working with the Administration to have Open Platform policiesincluded in the recommendations of the Information Infrastructure TaskForce. In addition to federal policy, critical decisions about the shapeof the information infrastructure will be made at state and local levels.Since 1991, EFF has been working with a number state legislatures andpublic utility commissions to have affordable, digital services offered ata local level. As cable and telephone infrastructures converge, we willalso work with local cable television franchising authorities. We inviteall who are concerned about these issues to join with us in these publicpolicy efforts." We hope that everyone will have a look at our new proposal, and join in tohelp us. ===================================================================FOR MORE INFORMATION ABOUT THE OPEN PLATFORM CAMPAIGN CONTACT: Daniel J. Weitzner, Senior Staff Counsel, <djw@eff.org> MEMBERSHIP: Sarah Simpson, Membership Coordinator, <ssimpson@eff.org> ONLINE RESOURCES AND INFORMATION: Stanton McCandlish, Online Activist, <mech@eff.org> EFF DOCUMENTS ON THE SUBJECT (in ftp.eff.org): Open Platform Campaign: Public Policy for the Information Age/pub/eff/papers/op2.0 Senate Telecommunications Infrastructure Act of 1993 (S. 1086)/pub/eff/legislation/infra-act-s1086/pub/eff/legislation/infra-act-s1086-summary EFF Testimony on Senate Infrastructure Bill/pub/eff/legislation/kapor-on-s1086 ......................................................................Daniel J. Weitzner, Senior Staff Counsel <djw@eff.org>Electronic Frontier Foundation 202-347-5400 (v)1001 G St, NW Suite 950 East 202-393-5509 (f)Washington, DC 20001 *** Join EFF!!! Send mail to membership@eff.org for information *** WT02-B12-7IA087-000625-B041-104http://res2.resnet.upenn.edu:80/cis590/reading.038.html 130.91.195.242 19970122055054 text/html 10068HTTP/1.0 200 OKDate: Wed, 22 Jan 1997 05:50:47 GMTServer: Apache/1.1.1Content-type: text/htmlContent-length: 9897Last-modified: Tue, 22 Nov 1994 06:31:20 GMT U.S. CODE AGENCY IS JOSTLING FOR CIVILIAN TURF *** Hastily Scanned. No authority for redistribution granted *** New York Times, Monday, January 24, 1994By John Markoff The National Security agency is trying to establish a standard torelectronically scrambling computer communications, a move that would go farbeyond the agency's usual military and intelligence domain to includecivilian activities like electronic tax returns and computerized medicalpayments.The plan by the N.S.A., which may be announced as early as today, worriesbusiness executives, who fear a Government encroachment on privacy. Andsome officials in the Clinton Administration believe that the N.S.A. isoverstepping its bounds. The N.S.A. is the Federal agency responsible for electronic surveillanceof global communications, though usually not civilian communlcations,within the United States. But in an era when everyday business is increasingly conducted overcomputer networks, and when much of that electronic commerce is transmittedin scrambled form to prevent eavesdropping or theft of information, theagency is intent on having Government and civilian computer users employ astandard approach to scrambling. That way, after-obtaining a court's permission, law-enforcement officialswould have a way of cracking codes. Bidding Process The agency will seek bids from companies to produce circuit cards basedon its technology, which would be used to scramble electronic messages forGovernment agencies and, eventually, private companies. Agency employeesconfirmed the plan late Friday, though no agency officials could be reachedover the weekend for further details. The Internal Revenue Service, the Government agency that has the mostelectronic communication with the public, has already started testing thesystem. "We need to know what the administrative issues are with thistechnology," said Henry Philcox, the tax agency's chief informationofficer.Many computer industry executives oppose the National Security Agency'seffort, saying there is no way for industry experts and outsiders todetermine the reliability and security of the underlying scramblingtechnology, which the agency intends to keep secret. Privacy-rights advocates, meanwhile, are wary of the system because ofthe electronic "back door" it contains, permitting Governmenteavesdropping. And some other Administration officials say the agency isgoing too far by pushing the standard into civilian computing "What these guys are trying to do is run ahead of the blocking," anAdministration official who spoke on the condition of anonymity said."Trying to sell this as the wave of the future is premature asAdministration policy.The circuit card, which is designed to fit into a personal computer andwhich the agency calls Tessera, is based on technology similar to a deviceknown as the Clipper Chip, a telephone voice-scrambling chip that providesa back-door means for letting law-enforcement officials eavesdrop. The Clipper plan, developed by the National Security Agency incooperation with the National Insatute for Standards and Technology, aCommerce Department agency, was announced in April by the ClintonAdministration. It has been almost universally opposed by computer andtelecommunications executives and by public policy groups. In a letter to be sent to President Clinton today, which was released onFriday to The New York Times, a group of 38 of the nation's leadingcomputer scientists, computer-security specialists and privacy experts haveurged that the Clipper program be stopped. "The current proposal was developed in secret by Federal agenciesprimarily concerned about electronic surveillance, not privacy protection,"the letter states. "Critical aspects of the plan remain classified and thusbeyond public review." The letter was signed by most of the civilian pioneers of moderncryptography, including Whitfield Diffie of Sun Microsystems, Ralph CMerkle of the Xerox Corporation, Martin Hellman of Stanford University andRonald Rivest of the Massachusetts Institute of Technology. While there has been no other indication so far that the Government wantsto torce private industry to use Clipper or Tessera technolo8ies, theiradoption as Government and military standards could go a long way towardmaking them de facto standards. The Federal and military markets are someof the largest for the computer and communications industrles, and theGovernment has the power to determine what sorts of advanced technology canbe exported. Moreover, the Government could insure widespread use of the Clipper andTessera technologies by insisting that they be used by businesses andindividuals when communicating electronically with Federal agencies. Official Reasoning Law-enforcement officials say the technologies are intended to resolve alongstanding problem of the information age: how to preserve the right ofbusinesses and citizens to use codes to protect all sorts of digltalcommunications without letting criminals and terrorists conspire beyond thelaw's reach. Businesses and individuals who often communicate over computernetworks already make use of a variety of scrambling systems-either oftheir own devising or those commercially available. Many of these scrambling systems are unbreakable by anyone who does nothold the electronic keys to the code, something generally known only by thesender and the recipient of scrambled messages. That is a problem for the National Security Agency, which routinelylistens to many of the world~s telephone and computer conversations -although it has no jurisdiction for moni toring non-Governmentconversations within the United States. The N.S.A.'s Tessera and Clippersystems would have an independent agency hold master keys to the codes,which could be obtained with a court's permission for surveillance bylaw-enforcement officials. The agency plans initially to purchase 10,000 to 70,000 of the Tesseracards for its use and that of the Pentagon. In an industry briefin8 heldearlier this month, however, N.S.A. officials proposed the eventual use ofthe secure communications card in a vast range of civilian and Governmentapplications including some by the Internal Revenue Service, theDepartments of Health and Hurnan Services, Justice and State and in theSenate and the House. The agency also suggested that the card could be used for civilianfunctions like electronic mail and in the scrambling systems employed incable television.The National Security Agency's new standard-setting effort is beingintroduced a couple of weeks before the Clinton Administration completes aclassified review of the Clipper proposal, and several industry executivessaid the announcement had been timed to apply pressure to theAdministration's decision making. The proposal angers industry executives who believe that the agency isrushing to establish a de facto standard that will undercut efforts toadopt a competing commercial standard without a built-in back door. Thatstandard, being developed by RSA Data Security, a Redwood City, Calif.,software company, has been endorsed by the nation's leading computermakers, software developers and telecommunications companies. Secret Formula These companies are particularly troubled by the National SecurityAgency~s refusal to disclose the mathematical formula, or algorithm, onwhich-its scrambling technology is based. "The issue here is: Should a secret algorithm developed by theintelligence community be used for unclassified civilian uses?" saidStephen Walker, a computer security industry executive and a member of theGovernment's Computer System Security and Privacy Advisory Board. l thinkthe answer is it should not. The agency has increasingly come into conflict with industry and public !policy groups who argue that independent and public coding technology isessential if the nation is to develop a viable electronic commerce system. "These Government surveillance plans focus on limiting public privacy ata time when everyone is calling for more privacy," said Marc Rotenberg, .Washington director of Computer Professionals for Social Responsibility, apublic interest group that organized the letter that will be sent toPresident Clinton today. "Privacy is a key part of the national informationinfrastructure, and the decisions the Administration is making are leaningl in the wrong direction." The new security standard is being proposed at a time the NationalSecurity Agency is trying to redefine its role after the cold war, and itraises questions in critics' minds about whether the agency is oversteppingits authority. The 1988 Computer Security Act limited the N.S.A.'s computersecurity role to military and intelligence agencies. "These guys are fighting for job secyrity," said William Ferguson, vicepresident of Semaphore Inc., a , Santa Clara, Calif., computer networksecurity firm. "Now that the K.G.B. has gone commercial, the N.S.A. istrying to start its own initiatives that say, 'all we're trying to do i iskeep up with the K.G.B.' " White House officials said the agency's actions would not necessarilyforce the Administration to authorize, an unpopular coding technology.One official said the Administration policy review was likely to establisha permanent working group that, would limit the National Security, Agency'srole in policy making. The N.S.A. originally planned to announce its request for proposals onFriday. But the notice was delayed because the Government shut downThursday in response to the frigid weather that disrupted the supply ofelectricity in Washington and other parts of the East. The agencytentatively plans to award contracts for the Tessera card by March 25. ****WT02-B12-8IA087-000625-B041-152http://res2.resnet.upenn.edu:80/cis590/reading.039.html 130.91.195.242 19970122055211 text/html 5619HTTP/1.0 200 OKDate: Wed, 22 Jan 1997 05:52:12 GMTServer: Apache/1.1.1Content-type: text/htmlContent-length: 5448Last-modified: Tue, 22 Nov 1994 06:31:21 GMT CPSR, ETC URGE CLINTON TO DROP CLIPPER [FYI -- "today" seems to mean Jan 24th 94. -meng] More than three dozen of the nation's leading cryptographers,computer security specialists and privacy experts today urgedPresident Clinton to abandon the controversial Clipper encryptionproposal. The letter was coordinated by Computer Professionalsfor Social Responsibility (CPSR), which has long sought to openthe issue of cryptography policy to public debate The group cited the secrecy surrounding the proposal,widespread public opposition to the plan and privacy concerns asreasons why the initiative should not go forward. The letter comes at a crucial point in the debate oncryptography policy. An internal Administration review of theissue is nearing completion and the National Security Agency (NSA)is moving forward with efforts to deploy Clipper technology incivilian agencies, including the Internal Revenue Service. CPSR has sponsored several public conferences oncryptography and privacy and has litigated Freedom of Informa-tion Act cases seeking the disclosure of relevant governmentdocuments. In one pending FOIA case, CPSR is challenging thesecrecy of the Skipjack algorithm which underlies the Clipperproposal. For additional information, contact Dave Banisar, CPSRWashington, DC, (202) 544-9240, <banisar@washofc.cpsr.org>. ============================================================= January 24, 1994 The PresidentThe White HouseWashington, DC 20500 Dear Mr. President, We are writing to you regarding the "Clipper" escrowedencryption proposal now under consideration by the White House.We wish to express our concern about this plan and similartechnical standards that may be proposed for the nation'scommunications infrastructure. The current proposal was developed in secret by federalagencies primarily concerned about electronic surveillance, notprivacy protection. Critical aspects of the plan remainclassified and thus beyond public review. The private sector and the public have expressed nearlyunanimous opposition to Clipper. In the formal request forcomments conducted by the Department of Commerce last year, lessthan a handful of respondents supported the plan. Several hundredopposed it. If the plan goes forward, commercial firms that hope todevelop new products will face extensive government obstacles.Cryptographers who wish to develop new privacy enhancingtechnologies will be discouraged. Citizens who anticipate thatthe progress of technology will enhance personal privacy willfind their expectations unfulfilled. Some have proposed that Clipper be adopted on a voluntarybasis and suggest that other technical approaches will remainviable. The government, however, exerts enormous influence in themarketplace, and the likelihood that competing standards wouldsurvive is small. Few in the user community believe that theproposal would be truly voluntary. The Clipper proposal should not be adopted. We believe thatif this proposal and the associated standards go forward, even ona voluntary basis, privacy protection will be diminished,innovation will be slowed, government accountability will belessened, and the openness necessary to ensure the successfuldevelopment of the nation's communications infrastructure will bethreatened. We respectfully ask the White House to withdraw the Clipperproposal. Sincerely, Public Interest and Civil Liberties Organizations Marc Rotenberg, CPSR Conrad Martin, Fund for Constitutional Government William Caming, privacy consultant Simon Davies, Privacy International Evan Hendricks, US Privacy Council Simona Nass, Society for Electronic Access Robert Ellis Smith, Privacy Journal Jerry Berman, Electronic Frontier Foundation Cryptographers and Security Experts Bob Bales, National Computer Security Association Jim Bidzos, RSA Data Security Inc. G. Robert Blakley, Texas A&M University Stephen Bryen, Secured Communications Technologies, Inc. David Chaum, Digicash George Davida, University of Wisconsin Whitfield Diffie, Sun Microsystems Martin Hellman, Stanford University Ingemar Ingemarsson, Universitetet i Linkvping Ralph C. Merkle, Xerox PARC William Hugh Murray, security consultant Peter G. Neumann, SRI International Bart Preneel, Katolieke Universiteit Ronald Rivest, MIT Bruce Schneier, Applied Cryptography (1993) Richard Schroeppel, University of Arizona Stephen Walker, Trusted Information Systems Philip Zimmermann, Boulder Software Engineering Industry and Academia Andrew Scott Beals, Telebit International Mikki Barry, InterCon Systems Corporation David Bellin, North Carolina A&T University Margaret Chon, Syracuse University College of Law Laura Fillmore, Online BookStore Scott Fritchie, Twin-Cities Free Net Gary Marx, University of Colorado Ronald B. Natalie, Jr, Sensor Systems Inc. Harold Joseph Highland, Computers & Security Doug Humphrey, Digital Express Group, Inc Carl Pomerance, University of Georgia Eric Roberts, Stanford University Jonathan Rosenoer, CyberLaw & CyberLex Alexis Rosen, Public Access Networks Corp. Steven Zorn, Pace University Law School (affiliations are for identification purposes only)WT02-B12-9IA087-000625-B041-197http://res2.resnet.upenn.edu:80/cis590/reading.040.html 130.91.195.242 19970122055234 text/html 27539HTTP/1.0 200 OKDate: Wed, 22 Jan 1997 05:52:35 GMTServer: Apache/1.1.1Content-type: text/htmlContent-length: 27367Last-modified: Tue, 22 Nov 1994 06:31:22 GMTRebuttle (of sorts) to Gore's Speech from Telecom Digest From: rrb@deja-vu.aiss.uiuc.edu (Bill Pfeiffer)Subject: Rebuttle (of sorts) to Gore's SpeechDate: Tue, 18 Jan 1994 18:12:41 -0600 (CST) Dear TELECOM: Here is a file of a speech by Neil Postman who has a slightlydifferent perspective on the Information Superhighway. Bill Pfeiffer Editor AIRWAVES RADIO JOURNAL (info@airwaves.chi.il.us) Source: Neil Postman, German Informatics Society, 11 Oct 90, Stuttgart Following speech was given at a meeting of the German InformaticsSociety (Gesellschaft fuer Informatik) on October 11, 1990 inStuttgart, sponsored by IBM-Germany. INFORMING OURSELVES TO DEATH ____________________________ by Neil Postman The great English playwright and social philosopher George BernardShaw once remarked that all professions are conspiracies against thecommon folk. He meant that those who belong to elite trades -physicians, lawyers, teachers, and scientists - protect their specialstatus by creating vocabularies that are incomprehensible to thegeneral public. This process prevents outsiders from understandingwhat the profession is doing and why - and protects the insiders fromclose examination and criticism. Professions, in other words, buildforbidding walls of technical gobbledegook over which the prying andalien eye cannot see. Unlike George Bernard Shaw, I raise no complaint against this, for Iconsider myself a professional teacher and appreciate technicalgobbledegook as much as anyone. But I do not object if occasionallysomeone who does not know the secrets of my trade is allowed entry tothe inner halls to express an untutored point of view. Such a personmay sometimes give a refreshing opinion or, even better, see somethingin a way that the professionals have overlooked. I believe I have been invited to speak at this conference for justsuch a purpose. I do not know very much more about computertechnology than the average person - which isn't very much. I havelittle understanding of what excites a computer programmer orscientist, and in examining the descriptions of the presentations atthis conference, I found each one more mysterious than the next. So,I clearly qualify as an outsider. But I think that what you want here is not merely an outsider but anoutsider who has a point of view that might be useful to the insiders.And that is why I accepted the invitation to speak. I believe I knowsomething about what technologies do to culture, and I know even moreabout what technologies undo in a culture. In fact, I might say, atthe start, that what a technology undoes is a subject that computerexperts apparently know very little about. I have heard many expertsin computer technology speak about the advantages that computers willbring. With one exception - namely, Joseph Weizenbaum - I have neverheard anyone speak seriously and comprehensively about thedisadvantages of computer technology, which strikes me as odd, andmakes me wonder if the profession is hiding something important. Thatis to say, what seems to be lacking among computer experts is a senseof technological modesty. After all, anyone who has studied the history of technology knows thattechnological change is always a Faustian bargain: Technology givethand technology taketh away, and not always in equal measure. A newtechnology sometimes creates more than it destroys. Sometimes, itdestroys more than it creates. But it is never one-sided. The invention of the printing press is an excellent example. Printingfostered the modern idea of individuality but it destroyed themedieval sense of community and social integration. Printing createdprose but made poetry into an exotic and elitist form of expression.Printing made modern science possible but transformed religioussensibility into an exercise in superstition. Printing assisted inthe growth of the nation-state but, in so doing, made patriotism intoa sordid if not a murderous emotion. Another way of saying this is that a new technology tends to favorsome groups of people and harms other groups. School teachers, forexample, will, in the long run, probably be made obsolete bytelevision, as blacksmiths were made obsolete by the automobile, asballadeers were made obsolete by the printing press. Technologicalchange, in other words, always results in winners and losers. In the case of computer technology, there can be no disputing that thecomputer has increased the power of large-scale organizations likemilitary establishments or airline companies or banks or taxcollecting agencies. And it is equally clear that the computer is nowindispensable to high-level researchers in physics and other naturalsciences. But to what extent has computer technology been an advantageto the masses of people? To steel workers, vegetable store owners,teachers, automobile mechanics, musicians, bakers, brick layers,dentists and most of the rest into whose lives the computer nowintrudes? These people have had their private matters made moreaccessible to powerful institutions. They are more easily tracked andcontrolled; they are subjected to more examinations, and areincreasingly mystified by the decisions made about them. They are moreoften reduced to mere numerical objects. They are being buried by junkmail. They are easy targets for advertising agencies and politicalorganizations. The schools teach their children to operatecomputerized systems instead of teaching things that are more valuableto children. In a word, almost nothing happens to the losers that theyneed, which is why they are losers. It is to be expected that the winners - for example, most of thespeakers at this conference - will encourage the losers to beenthusiastic about computer technology. That is the way of winners,and so they sometimes tell the losers that with personal computers theaverage person can balance a checkbook more neatly, keep better trackof recipes, and make more logical shopping lists. They also tell themthat they can vote at home, shop at home, get all the information theywish at home, and thus make community life unnecessary. They tellthem that their lives will be conducted more efficiently, discreetlyneglecting to say from whose point of view or what might be the costsof such efficiency. Should the losers grow skeptical, the winners dazzle them with thewondrous feats of computers, many of which have only marginalrelevance to the quality of the losers' lives but which arenonetheless impressive. Eventually, the losers succumb, in partbecause they believe that the specialized knowledge of the masters ofa computer technology is a form of wisdom. The masters, of course,come to believe this as well. The result is that certain questions donot arise, such as, to whom will the computer give greater power andfreedom, and whose power and freedom will be reduced? Now, I have perhaps made all of this sound like a wellplannedconspiracy, as if the winners know all too well what is being won andwhat lost. But this is not quite how it happens, for the winners donot always know what they are doing, and where it will all lead. TheBenedictine monks who invented the mechanical clock in the 12th and13th centuries believed that such a clock would provide a preciseregularity to the seven periods of devotion they were required toobserve during the course of the day. As a matter of fact, it did.But what the monks did not realize is that the clock is not merely ameans of keeping track of the hours but also of synchronizing andcontrolling the actions of men. And so, by the middle of the 14thcentury, the clock had moved outside the walls of the monastery, andbrought a new and precise regularity to the life of the workman andthe merchant. The mechanical clock made possible the idea of regularproduction, regular working hours, and a standardized product.Without the clock, capitalism would have been quite impossible. Andso, here is a great paradox: the clock was invented by men who wantedto devote themselves more rigorously to God; and it ended as thetechnology of greatest use to men who wished to devote themselves tothe accumulat- ion of money. Technology always has unforeseenconsequences, and it is not always clear, at the beginning, who orwhat will win, and who or what will lose. I might add, by way of another historical example, that JohannGutenberg was by all accounts a devoted Christian who would have beenhorrified to hear Martin Luther, the accursed heretic, declare thatprinting is "God's highest act of grace, whereby the business of theGospel is driven forward." Gutenberg thought his invention wouldadvance the cause of the Holy Roman See, whereas in fact, it turnedout to bring a revolution which destroyed the monopoly of the Church. We may well ask ourselves, then, is there something that the mastersof computer technology think they are doing for us which they and wemay have reason to regret? I believe there is, and it is suggested bythe title of my talk, "Informing Ourselves to Death". In the timeremaining, I will try to explain what is dangerous about the computer,and why. And I trust you will be open enough to consider what I haveto say. Now, I think I can begin to get at this by telling you of asmall experiment I have been conducting, on and off, for the pastseveral years. There are some people who describe the experiment as anexercise in deceit and exploitation but I will rely on your sense ofhumor to pull me through. Here's how it works: It is best done in the morning when I see acolleague who appears not to be in possession of a copy of {The NewYork Times}. "Did you read The Times this morning?," I ask. If thecolleague says yes, there is no experiment that day. But if the answeris no, the experiment can proceed. "You ought to look at Page 23," Isay. "There's a fascinating article about a study done at HarvardUniversity." "Really? What's it about?" is the usual reply. Mychoices at this point are limited only by my imagination. But I mightsay something like this: "Well, they did this study to find out whatfoods are best to eat for losing weight, and it turns out that anormal diet supplemented by chocolate eclairs, eaten six times a day,is the best approach. It seems that there's some special nutrient inthe eclairs - encomial dioxin - that actually uses up calories at anincredible rate." Another possibility, which I like to use with colleagues who are knownto be health conscious is this one: "I think you'll want to know aboutthis," I say. "The neuro-physiologists at the University of Stuttgarthave uncovered a connection between jogging and reduced intelligence.They tested more than 1200 people over a period of five years, andfound that as the number of hours people jogged increased, there was acorresponding decrease in their intelligence. They don't know exactlywhy but there it is." I'm sure, by now, you understand what my role is in the experiment: toreport something that is quite ridiculous - one might say, beyondbelief. Let me tell you, then, some of my results: Unless this is thesecond or third time I've tried this on the same person, most peoplewill believe or at least not disbelieve what I have told them. Some-times they say: "Really? Is that possible?" Sometimes they do adouble-take, and reply, "Where'd you say that study was done?" Andsometimes they say, "You know, I've heard something like that." Now, there are several conclusions that might be drawn from theseresults, one of which was expressed by H. L. Mencken fifty years agowhen he said, there is no idea so stupid that you can't find aprofessor who will believe it. This is more of an accusation than anexplanation but in any case I have tried this experiment on non-professors and get roughly the same results. Another possible con-clusion is one expressed by George Orwell - also about 50 years ago -when he remarked that the average person today is about as naive aswas the average person in the Middle Ages. In the Middle Ages peoplebelieved in the authority of their religion, no matter what. Today, webelieve in the authority of our science, no matter what. But I think there is still another and more important conclusion to bedrawn, related to Orwell's point but rather off at a right angle toit. I am referring to the fact that the world in which we live is verynearly incomprehensible to most of us. There is almost no fact -whether actual or imagined - that will surprise us for very long,since we have no comprehensive and consistent picture of the worldwhich would make the fact appear as an unacceptable contradiction. Webelieve because there is no reason not to believe. No social,political, historical, metaphysical, logical or spiritual reason. Welive in a world that, for the most part, makes no sense to us. Noteven technical sense. I don't mean to try my experiment on thisaudience, especially after having told you about it, but if I informedyou that the seats you are presently occupying were actually made by aspecial process which uses the skin of a Bismark herring, on whatgrounds would you dispute me? For all you know - indeed, for all IPosted-Date: Wed, 26 Jan 1994 14:11:53 -0500Date: Wed, 26 Jan 94 12:27:57 CSTFrom: telecom@delta.eecs.nwu.edu (TELECOM Moderator)To: telecom@delta.eecs.nwu.eduSubject: Informing Ourselves to Death know - the skin of a Bismark herring could have made the seats onwhich you sit. And if I could get an industrial chemist to confirmthis fact by describing some incomprehensible process by which it wasdone, you would probably tell someone tomorrow that you spent theevening sitting on a Bismark herring. Perhaps I can get a bit closer to the point I wish to make with ananalogy: If you opened a brand-new deck of cards, and started turningthe cards over, one by one, you would have a pretty good idea of whattheir order is. After you had gone from the ace of spades through thenine of spades, you would expect a ten of spades to come up next. Andif a three of diamonds showed up instead, you would be surprised andwonder what kind of deck of cards this is. But if I gave you a deckthat had been shuffled twenty times, and then asked you to turn thecards over, you would not expect any card in particular - a three ofdiamonds would be just as likely as a ten of spades. Having no basisfor assuming a given order, you would have no reason to react withdisbelief or even surprise to whatever card turns up. The point is that, in a world without spiritual or intellectual order,nothing is unbelievable; nothing is predictable, and therefore,nothing comes as a particular surprise. In fact, George Orwell was more than a little unfair to the averageperson in the Middle Ages. The belief system of the Middle Ages wasrather like my brand-new deck of cards. There existed an ordered,comprehensible world-view, beginning with the idea that all knowledgeand goodness come from God. What the priests had to say about theworld was derived from the logic of their theology. There was nothingarbitrary about the things people were asked to believe, including thefact that the world itself was created at 9 AM on October 23 in theyear 4004 B. C. That could be explained, and was, quite lucidly, tothe satisfaction of anyone. So could the fact that 10,000 angels coulddance on the head of a pin. It made quite good sense, if you believedthat the Bible is the revealed word of God and that the universe ispopulated with angels. The medieval world was, to be sure, mysteriousand filled with wonder, but it was not without a sense of order.Ordinary men and women might not clearly grasp how the harsh realitiesof their lives fit into the grand and benevolent design, but they hadno doubt that there was such a design, and their priests were wellable, by deduction from a handful of principles, to make it, if notrational, at least coherent. The situation we are presently in is much different. And I should say,sadder and more confusing and certainly more mysterious. It is ratherlike the shuffled deck of cards I referred to. There is no consistent,integrated conception of the world which serves as the foundation onwhich our edifice of belief rests. And therefore, in a sense, we aremore naive than those of the Middle Ages, and more frightened, for wecan be made to believe almost anything. The skin of a Bismark herringmakes about as much sense as a vinyl alloy or encomial dioxin. Now, in a way, none of this is our fault. If I may turn the wisdom ofCassius on its head: the fault is not in ourselves but almostliterally in the stars. When Galileo turned his telescope toward theheavens, and allowed Kepler to look as well, they found no enchantmentor authoriza- tion in the stars, only geometric patterns andequations. God, it seemed, was less of a moral philosopher than amaster mathematician. This discovery helped to give impetus to thedevelopment of physics but did nothing but harm to theology. BeforeGalileo and Kepler, it was possible to believe that the Earth was thestable center of the uni- verse, and that God took a special interestin our affairs. Afterward, the Earth became a lonely wanderer in anobscure galaxy in a hidden corner of the universe, and we were left towonder if God had any interest in us at all. The ordered,comprehensible world of the Middle Ages began to unravel becausepeople no longer saw in the stars the face of a friend. And something else, which once was our friend, turned against us, aswell. I refer to information. There was a time when information was aresource that helped human beings to solve specific and urgentproblems of their environment. It is true enough that in the MiddleAges, there was a scarcity of information but its very scarcity madeit both important and usable. This began to change, as everyone knows,in the late 15th century when a goldsmith named Gutenberg, from Mainz,converted an old wine press into a printing machine, and in sodoing, created what we now call an information explosion. Forty yearsafter the invention of the press, there were printing machines in 110cities in six different countries; 50 years after, more than eightmillion books had been printed, almost all of them filled withinformation that had previously not been available to the averageperson. Nothing could be more misleading than the idea that computertechnology introduced the age of information. The printing pressbegan that age, and we have not been free of it since. But what started out as a liberating stream has turned into a delugeof chaos. If I may take my own country as an example, here is what weare faced with: In America, there are 260,000 billboards; 11,520newspapers; 11,556 periodicals; 27,000 video outlets for rentingtapes; 362 million tv sets; and over 400 million radios. There are40,000 new book titles published every year (300,000 world-wide) andevery day in America 41 million photographs are taken, and just forthe record, over 60 billion pieces of advertising junk mail come intoour mail boxes every year. Everything from telegraphy and photographyin the 19th century to the silicon chip in the twentieth has amplifiedthe din of information, until matters have reached such proportionstoday that for the average person, information no longer has anyrelation to the solution of problems. The tie between information and action has been severed. Informationis now a commodity that can be bought and sold, or used as a form ofentertainment, or worn like a garment to enhance one's status. Itcomes indiscriminately, directed at no one in particular, disconnectedfrom usefulness; we are glutted with information, drowning ininformation, have no control over it, don't know what to do with it. And there are two reasons we do not know what to do with it. First, asI have said, we no longer have a coherent conception of ourselves, andour universe, and our relation to one another and our world. We nolonger know, as the Middle Ages did, where we come from, and where weare going, or why. That is, we don't know what information isrelevant, and what information is irrelevant to our lives. Second, wehave directed all of our energies and intelligence to inventingmachinery that does nothing but increase the supply of information. Asa consequence, our defenses against information glut have broken down;our information immune system is inoperable. We don't know how tofilter it out; we don't know how to reduce it; we don't know to useit. We suffer from a kind of cultural AIDS. Now, into this situation comes the computer. The computer, as we know,has a quality of universality, not only because its uses are almostinfinitely various but also because computers are commonly integratedinto the structure of other machines. Therefore it would be fatuous ofme to warn against every conceivable use of a computer. But there isno denying that the most prominent uses of computers have to do withinformation. When people talk about "information sciences," they aretalking about computers - how to store information, how to retrieveinformation, how to organize information. The computer is an answerto the questions, how can I get more information, faster, and in a moreusable form? These would appear to be reasonable questions. But now Ishould like to put some other questions to you that seem to me morereasonable. Did Iraq invade Kuwait because of a lack of information?If a hideous war should ensue between Iraq and the U. S., will ithappen because of a lack of information? If children die of starvationin Ethiopia, does it occur because of a lack of information? Does racismin South Africa exist because of a lack of information? If criminalsroam the streets of New York City, do they do so because of a lack ofinformation? Or, let us come down to a more personal level: If you and your spouseare unhappy together, and end your marriage in divorce, will it happenbecause of a lack of information? If your children misbehave and bringshame to your family, does it happen because of a lack of information?If someone in your family has a mental breakdown, will it happenbecause of a lack of information? I believe you will have to concede that what ails us, what causes us themost misery and pain - at both cultural and personal levels - has nothingto do with the sort of information made accessible by computers. Thecomputer and its information cannot answer any of the fundamental quest-ions we need to address to make our lives more meaningful and humane.The computer cannot provide an organizing moral framework. It cannottell us what questions are worth asking. It cannot provide a means ofunderstanding why we are here or why we fight each other or why decencyeludes us so often, especially when we need it the most. The computeris, in a sense, a magnificent toy that distracts us from facing what wemost needed to confront - spiritual emptiness, knowledge of ourselves,usable conceptions of the past and future. Does one blame the computerfor this? Of course not. It is, after all, only a machine. But it ispresented to us, with trumpets blaring, as at this conference, as atechnological messiah. Through the computer, the heralds say, we will make education better,religion better, politics better, our minds better - best of all,ourselves better. This is, of course, nonsense, and only the young orthe ignorant or the foolish could believe it. I said a moment agothat computers are not to blame for this. And that is true, at leastin the sense that we do not blame an elephant for its huge appetite ora stone for being hard or a cloud for hiding the sun. That is theirnature, and we expect nothing different from them. But the computerhas a nature, as well. True, it is only a machine but a machinedesigned to manipulate and generate information. That is whatcomputers do, and therefore they have an agenda and an unmistakablemessage. The message is that through more and more information, more convenientlypackaged, more swiftly delivered, we will find solutions to ourproblems. And so all the brilliant young men and women, believingthis, create ingenious things for the computer to do, hoping that inthis way, we will become wiser and more decent and more noble. Andwho can blame them? By becoming masters of this wondrous technology,they will acquire prestige and power and some will even become famous.In a world populated by people who believe that through more and moreinformation, paradise is attainable, the computer scientist is king.But I maintain that all of this is a monumental and dangerous waste ofhuman talent and energy. Imagine what might be accomplished if thistalent and energy were turned to philosophy, to theology, to the arts,to imaginative literature or to education? Who knows what we couldlearn from such people - perhaps why there are wars, and hunger, andhomelessness and mental illness and anger. As things stand now, the geniuses of computer technology will give usStar Wars, and tell us that is the answer to nuclear war. They willgive us artificial intelligence, and tell us that this is the way toself-knowledge. They will give us instantaneous global communicat-ion, and tell us this is the way to mutual understanding. They willgive us Virtual Reality and tell us this is the answer to spiritualpoverty. But that is only the way of the technician, the fact-mongerer,the information junkie, and the technological idiot. Here is what Henry David Thoreau told us: "All our inventions are butimproved means to an unimproved end." Here is what Goethe told us:"One should, each day, try to hear a little song, read a good poem,see a fine picture, and, if it is possible, speak a few reasonablewords." And here is what Socrates told us: "The unexamined life is notworth living." And here is what the prophet Micah told us: "What doesthe Lord require of thee but to do justly, and to love mercy and towalk humbly with thy God?" And I can tell you - if I had the time(although you all know it well enough) - what Confucius, Isaiah,Jesus, Mohammed, the Buddha, Spinoza and Shakespeare told us. It isall the same: There is no escaping from ourselves. The human dilemmais as it has always been, and we solve nothing fundamental by cloakingourselves in technological glory. Even the humblest cartoon character knows this, and I shall close byquoting the wise old possum named Pogo, created by the cartoonist,Walt Kelley. I commend his words to all the technological utopiansand messiahs present. "We have met the enemy," Pogo said, "and he isus." ------------------- [TELECOM Digest Editor's Note: My sincere thanks to Bill for passingalong this article to us. It certainly does give us something tomeditate upon as we travel down the 'information superhighway' sohighly touted by the present occupant of the White House and hisstaff. PAT] WT02-B12-10IA087-000625-B041-249http://res2.resnet.upenn.edu:80/cis590/reading.041.html 130.91.195.242 19970122055310 text/html 4269HTTP/1.0 200 OKDate: Wed, 22 Jan 1997 05:53:13 GMTServer: Apache/1.1.1Content-type: text/htmlContent-length: 4098Last-modified: Tue, 22 Nov 1994 06:31:23 GMTDIGITAL PRIVACY AND SECURITY WORKING GROUP -- letter to the President DIGITAL PRIVACY AND SECURITY WORKING GROUP 1001 G Street, NWSuite 950 EastWashington, DC 20001 Jerry Berman 202/347-5400Leah Gurowitz 202/393-1010 December 6, 1993 The PresidentThe White HouseWashington, DC 20500 Dear Mr. President: On April 16, 1993, you initiated a broad industry/government reviewof privacy and cryptography policies at the same time that theAdministration unveiled its Clipper Chip proposal. The Digital Privacy andSecurity Working Group -- a coalition of over 50 communications andcomputer companies and associations, and consumer and privacy advocates --has been working with members of your Administration to develop policieswhich will reflect the realities of the digital information age, the needto provide individuals at work and home with information security andprivacy, and the importance of preserving American competitiveness. The Digital Privacy and Security Working Group is committed to theproposition that computer users worldwide should be able to choose theirencryption programs and products, and that American programs and productsshould be allowed to compete in the world marketplace. In our discussionswith Administration officials, we have expressed the Coalition's tentativeacceptance of the Clipper Chip's encryption scheme (as announced on April16, 1993), but only if it is available as a voluntary alternative towidely-available, commercially-accepted, encryption programs and products. Thus, we applaud repeated statements by Administration officialsthat there is no intent to make the Clipper Chip mandatory. One keyindication of whether the choice of encryption regimes will be trulyvoluntary, however, is the ability of American companies to export computerprograms and products employing other strong encryption algorithms (e.g.DES and RC2/RC4 at comparable strengths) demanded by customers worldwide.In this regard, we commend to your attention legislation introduced by Rep.Maria Cantwell (H.R. 3627) that would liberalize existing export controlson software with encryption capabilities. Of course, such legislationwould not be necessary if the Administration acts to accomplish such exportcontrol liberalization on its own. As part of your on-going encryptionreview and decision-making, we strongly urge you to do so. As your Administration concludes its review of this issue,representatives of the Digital Privacy and Security Working Group remainavailable to meet with Administration officials at any time. Sincerely, American Civil Liberties Union IBM Apple Computer, Inc. Information Industry Association Business Software Alliance Information Technology Association of AmericaCommittee on Communications andInformation Policy, IEEE-USA Iris Associates, Inc. Computer and Business Equipment Lotus Development CorporationManufacturers Association Microsoft CorporationCrest Industries, Inc. Oracle CorporationDigital Equipment Corporation Prodigy Services CompanyEDUCOM Software Publishers AssociationElectronic Frontier Foundation Sun Microsystems, Inc.Electronic Messaging Association Telecommunications Industry AssociationGKI Cryptek Division Trusted Information SystemsHewlett-Packard Company cc: John Podesta, Office of the President George Tenet, National Security Council Mike Nelson, Office of Science and Technology Policy Ray Kammer, National Institute of Standards and Technology Steve Aoki, National Security Council Geoff Greiveldinger, Department of Justice WT02-B12-11IA087-000625-B041-296http://res2.resnet.upenn.edu:80/cis590/reading.042.html 130.91.195.242 19970122055338 text/html 5880HTTP/1.0 200 OKDate: Wed, 22 Jan 1997 05:53:38 GMTServer: Apache/1.1.1Content-type: text/htmlContent-length: 5709Last-modified: Tue, 22 Nov 1994 06:31:24 GMTA study of National Cryptography Policy Date: Wed, 01 Dec 93 15:34:50 ESTFrom: "Herb Lin" <hlin@nas.edu>Subject: A study of National Cryptography Policy Please forward this message to any individual or mailing listthat you believe should receive it. Many thanks..*********************As part of the Defense Authorization Bill for FY 1994, the U.S. Congresshas asked the Computer Science and Telecommunications Board(CSTB) of the National Research Council (NRC) to undertake a study ofnational policy with respect to the use and regulation of cryptography.The report of the study committee is due two years after all necessarysecurity clearances have been processed, probably sometime summer1996, and is subject to NRC review procedures. The legislationstates that 120 days after the day on which the report is submitted tothe Secretary of Defense, the Secretary shall submit the report to theCommittees on Armed Services, Intelligence, Commerce, and theJudiciary of the Senate and House of Representatives in unclassifiedform, with classified annexes as necessary. This study is expected to address the appropriate balance in cryptography policyamong various national interests (e.g., U.S. economic competitiveness(especially with respect to export controls), national security, lawenforcement, and the protection of the privacy rights of individuals),and the strength of various cryptographic technologies known todayand anticipated in the future that are relevant for commercialpurposes. The federal process through which national cryptographypolicy has been formulated is also expected to be a topic ofconsideration, and, if appropriate, the project will addressrecommendations for improving the formulation of nationalcryptographic policy in the future. This project, like other NRC projects, will depend heavily on inputfrom industry, academia, and other communities in the concernedpublic. Apart from the study committee (described below), briefingsand consultations from interested parties will be arranged and otherswill be involved as anonymous peer reviewers. It is expected that the study committee will be a high-level group thatwill command credibility and respect across the range of government,academic, commercial, and private interests. The committee willinclude members with expertise in areas such as: - relevant computer and communications technology; - cryptographic technologies and cryptanalysis; - foreign, national security, and intelligence affairs; - law enforcement; - commercial interests; and - privacy and consumer interests. All committee members (and associated staff) will have to be clearedat the "SI/TK" level; provisions have been made to expedite theprocessing of security clearances for those who do not currently havethem. Committee members will be chosen for their stature, expertise,and seniority in their fields; their willingness to listen and considerfairly other points of view; and their ability to contribute to theformulation of consensus positions. The committee as a whole willbe chosen to reflect the range of judgment and opinion on the subjectunder consideration. The detailed composition of the committee has not yet been decided;suggestions for committee members are sought from the community atlarge. Note that NRC rules regarding conflict of interest forbid theselection as committee members of individuals that have substantialpersonal financial interests that might be significantly affected by theoutcome of the study. Please forward suggestions for people toparticipate in this project to CSTB@NAS.EDU by DECEMBER 17,1993; please include their institutional affiliations, their field(s) ofexpertise, a note describing how the criteria described above apply tothem, and a way to contact them. For our administrativeconvenience, please put in the "SUBJECT:" field of your message thewords "crypto person". Finally, some people have expressed concern about the fact that theproject will involve consideration of classified material. Argumentscan and have been made on both sides of this point, but in any eventthis particular ground rule was established by the U.S. Congress, notby the CSTB. Whether one agrees or disagrees with the assertedneed for classification, the task at hand is to do the best possible jobgiven this constraint. On the National Research Council The National Research Council (NRC) is the operating arm of theAcademy complex, which includes the National Academy of Sciences,the National Academy of Engineering, and the Institute of Medicine.The NRC is a source of impartial and independent advice to thefederal government and other policy makers that is able to bring tobear the best scientific and technical talent in the nation to answerquestions of national significance. In addition, it often acts as aneutral party in convening meetings among multiple stakeholders onany given issue, thereby facilitating the generation of consensus oncontroversial issues. The Computer Science and Telecommunications Board (CSTB) of theNRC considers technical and policy issues pertaining to computerscience, telecommunications, and associated technologies. CSTBmonitors the health of the computer science, computing technology,and telecommunications fields, including attention as appropriate tothe issues of human resources and information infrastructure andinitiates studies involving computer science, computing technology,and telecommunications as critical resources and sources of nationaleconomic strength. A list of CSTB publications is available onrequest. WT02-B12-12IA087-000625-B041-337http://res2.resnet.upenn.edu:80/cis590/reading.043.html 130.91.195.242 19970122055430 text/html 6030HTTP/1.0 200 OKDate: Wed, 22 Jan 1997 05:54:26 GMTServer: Apache/1.1.1Content-type: text/htmlContent-length: 5859Last-modified: Tue, 22 Nov 1994 06:31:25 GMTA Superhighway Through the Wasteland? NYT Op-Ed >From the New York Times Op-Ed Page, Wednesday, November 24, 1993 A Superhighway Through the Wasteland? By Mitchell Kapor and Jerry Berman Mitchell Kapor is chairman of the Electronic Frontier Foundation, anonprofit group that promotes civil liberties in digital media. He was afounder of the Lotus Development Corporation, from which he resigned in1986. Jerry Berman is executive director of the foundation. (Washington) Telecommunications and cable TV executives, seeking toallay concerns over their proposed megamergers, insist that the comingelectronic superhighway will be an educational and informational tool aswell as a cornucopia of interactive entertainment. Allow the marriagebetween entertainment and communications giants, we are told, and they willconnect students with learning resources, provide a forum for politicaldiscourse, increase economic competitiveness and speed us into themultimedia information age. Both broadcast and cable TV were introduced with similar fanfare. Theresults have been disappointing. Because of regulatory failure and thelimits of the technology, they failed to be saviors of education orpolitical life. We love the tube but recognize that it is largely acultural wasteland. For the Government to break this cycle of promise and disappointment,communications mergers should be approved or barred based on detailed,enforceable commitments that the electronic superhighway will meet publicgoals. The amount of electronic material the superhighway can carry isdizzying compared to the relatively narrow range of broadcast TV and thelimited number of cable channels. Properly constructed and regulated, itcould be open to all who wish to speak, publish and communicate. None of the interactive services will be possible, however, if we havean eight-lane data superhighway rushing into every home and only a narrowfootpath coming back out. Instead of settling for a multimedia version ofthe same entertainment that is increasingly dissatisfying on today's TV, weneed a superhighway that encourages the production and distribution of abroader, more diverse range of programming. The superhighway should be required to provide so-called open platformservices. In today's channel-based cable TV system, program producers mustnegotiate for channel space with cable companies around the country. In anopen platform network, we would avoid that bottleneck. Every person wouldhave access to the entire superhighway, so programmers could distributeinformation directly to consumers. Consumers would become producers: individuals and small organizationscould create and distribute programs to anyone on the highway who wantsthem. Open platform services will spur diversity in the electronic media,just as low production and distribution costs make possible a wide varietyof newspapers and magazines. To prevent abuses by media giants that because of recent Federal courtdecisions will control the pipeline into the home and much of the contentdelivered over it, we need new laws. Like today's phone companies, thecompanies controlling the superhighway must be required to carry otherprogrammers' content, just as phone companies must provide service toanyone who is willing to pay for it. We must guarantee that anyone who,say, wants to start an alternative news network or a forum for politicaldiscussion is given an outlet to do so. Americans will come to depend on the superhighway even more than theyneed the telephone. The guarantee of universal telephone service must beexpanded to include universal access to the superhighway. Although marketforces will help keep the new technology affordable, we need laws toprotect consumers when competition fails. And because several companies will operate the highway, each must berequired to interconnect with the others. Likewise, the new computers thatwill give us access to the superhighway should be built according tocommonly accepted standards. Also, even an open, competitive market will leave out organizations withlimited resources such as schools and libraries. To compensate for marketoversights, we must insure that money -- whether through Federal support ora tax on the companies that will control the superhighway -- is madeavailable to these institutions. Finally, people won't use the newtechnology unless they feel that their privacy is protected. Technicalmeans, such as recently developed encryption techniques, must be madeavailable to all users. And clear legal guidelines for individual controlover access to and reuse of personal information must be established.Companies that sell entertainment services will have a record of what theircustomers' interests are; these records must remain confidential. Bell Atlantic, T.C.I., Time-Warner, U.S. West and other companiesinvolved in proposed mergers have promised to allow the public full accessto the superhighway. But they are asking policy makers to trust that,profits aside, they will use their new positions for the public good. Rather than opposing mergers or blindly trusting competition to shapethe data highways, Congress should make the mergers hinge on detailedcommitments to provide affordable services to all Americans. Somelegislators, led by Representative Ed Markey, Democrat of Massachusetts,are working to enact similar requirements; these efforts deserve support. The best approach would be to amend these requirements to theCommunications Act of 1934. Still the central law on open access, anupdated Communications Act would codify the terms of a new social contractbetween the the telecommunications industry and the American people. Copyright 1993 The New York Times Company WT02-B12-13IA087-000625-B042-22http://res2.resnet.upenn.edu:80/cis590/reading.044.html 130.91.195.242 19970122055532 text/html 7783HTTP/1.0 200 OKDate: Wed, 22 Jan 1997 05:55:35 GMTServer: Apache/1.1.1Content-type: text/htmlContent-length: 7612Last-modified: Tue, 22 Nov 1994 06:31:26 GMTEFF ANNOUNCES ITS OFFICIAL POLICY ON CRYPTOGRAPHY AND PRIVACY EFF ANNOUNCES ITS OFFICIAL POLICY ON CRYPTOGRAPHY AND PRIVACY Strongly opposes original Clipper/Skipjack plan, reiterates the need to lift restrictions on encryption December 8, 1993 The Electronic Frontier Foundation is pleased to announce itsformal policy on encryption. This is particularly timely, because yesterday the New York Timesannounced that the Digital Privacy and Security Working Group hadproposed to trade support for the administration's proposed ClipperChip for a lifting of the long-standing export embargo on robustdomestic encryption. This was a misunderstanding of what the DPSWG offered theadministration in this proposal, leading to the belief that both theDPSWG (a coalition of over 50 computer, communications, and privacyorganizations and associations) and it's principal coordinatingorganization, the Electronic Frontier Foundation, have offered to easetheir opposition to Clipper. We see it as a pragmatic effort to get the government to wiggle onthese issues: one step in the right direction, with many more tofollow. This step is that we insist that use of Clipper and keyescrow must be completely voluntary. It's not voluntary if users ofthe Skipjack algorithm are forced to use key escrow. It's notvoluntary if users who do choose escrow are forced to use thegovernment's choice of escrow agents. It's not voluntary ifmanufacturers such as AT&T are pressured into withdrawing competingproducts. It's not voluntary when competing products can't be sold ina worldwide market. It's not voluntary if the public can't see thealgorithm they are "volunteering" to use. It's not voluntary if thegovernment will require anyone to use Skipjack or escrow, even whencommunicating with the government. The Working Group chose to state this in a diplomatic fashion byapplauding "repeated statements by Administration officials that thereis no intent to make the clipper chip mandatory". They were diplomaticfor two reasons. First, they believe the Administration has gotten thismessage. Clipper was announced in April and was supposed to beavailable in the Summer. It is December, the escrow system is stilluncertain, and the Administration is still drafting a report which wasdue in July. If they still don't get it, the coalition has a 100 pagewhite paper documenting the case against clipper and the case forlifting export controls, which they will release in response to anyAdministration position favoring Clipper. The second reason is that the coalition was trying to use theintroduction of the Rep. Cantwell's bill eliminating many exportcontrols on crypto to try, one more time, to urge the Administrationto make voluntariness meaningful by unilaterally lifting exportcontrols. Even if the Working Group and the Administration can'tagree on Clipper, EFF and the Working Group needed to continuepressing the export issue. But NSA is digging in, and a legislative fight looks more likely.If diplomacy fails, EFF must fight for our rights. Thus, we aregoing to need all the allies we can find, from IBM, Apple, Lotus,and Sun, to cryptographers, cypherpunks, and folks on the net. EFF wants the public and the Administration to know (as we havefrequently stated to them face to face) that the Electronic FrontierFoundation would fight to the end any attempt by the Administration todo any more than let companies use it if they want and to let peoplebuy it if they want -- and only in a market which has other strongencryption schemes available because export controls have been lifted. Under truly voluntary conditions, the EFF would be proud to say, "Wehave expressed ... tentative acceptance of the Clipper Chip'sencryption scheme ... only if it is available as a voluntaryalternative to widely-available, commercially-accepted encryptionprograms and products." We would applaud the Government for employingNSA's substantial expertise to devise improved encryption schemes --like DES and Skipjack -- and deploying them to improve our society'sprivacy and security. We hope that the Clinton Administration can agree to take this singlestep. Here is the whole journey we'd like to begin. If you share ourpath, we need your help and support -- please join EFF. Send email toeff@eff.org for details. Electronic Frontier Foundation Policy on Cryptography & Privacy (Approved November 11, 1993) Digital technology is rapidly rendering our commercial activities andcommunications -- indeed, much of our personal lives -- open to scrutiny bystrangers. Our medical records, political opinions, personal financialtransactions, and intimate affairs now pass over digital networks wheregovernments, employers, insurance companies, business competitors, andothers who might turn our private lives against us can examine them withincreasing ease and detail. The Electronic Frontier Foundation believes that Americans must be allowedaccess to the cryptographic tools necessary to protect their own privacy.We will work toward making the following principles the official policiesof the U. S. Government: 1. Private access to cryptography must be unhindered: * There must be no laws restricting domestic use of cryptography. * There must be no restrictions on the export of products, services,or information because they contain cryptographic algorithms. 2. Cryptography policy and technical standards must be set in open,public forums: * All participants in the policy debate on these issues, particularlylaw enforcement and national security agencies, must submit their argumentsto public scrutiny. * Any civilian encryption standard must be published and exposed torigorous public challenge. 3. Encryption must become a part of the information infrastructure toprovide security, to protect privacy, and to provide each individualcontrol over his or her own identity. * Each user must be free to choose whether or not to use key escrow,and who should have copies of their keys, if anyone. * Government at all levels should explore cryptography's potential toreplace identity-based or dossier-based systems, such as driver's licenses,credit cards, checks, and passports with less invasive technology. 4. New technologies must not erode constitutional protections,particularly the right to speak, publish, and assemble, and to be free fromunreasonable searches and seizures . * There must be no broadening of governmental access to privatecommunications and records, through wiretap law or otherwise, unless thereis a public consensus that the risks to safety outweigh the risks toliberty and that our safety will actually be increased by the broadenedaccess. *** The Electronic Frontier Foundation recognizes that the combination ofdigital communications and encryption technology does indeed threatensome of law enforcement's current investigative techniques. We also recognize that encryption will prevent many of the onlinecrimes that will likely occur without it. We further believe thatthese technologies will create new investigative tools for lawenforcement, even as they obsolete old ones. Entering this newenvironment, private industry, law enforcement, and private citizensmust work together to balance the requirements of both liberty andsecurity. But technology halts for no one, not even the law. WT02-B12-14IA087-000625-B042-66http://res2.resnet.upenn.edu:80/cis590/reading.045.html 130.91.195.242 19970122055555 text/html 8110HTTP/1.0 200 OKDate: Wed, 22 Jan 1997 05:55:54 GMTServer: Apache/1.1.1Content-type: text/htmlContent-length: 7939Last-modified: Tue, 22 Nov 1994 06:31:27 GMTA note on the politics of privacy and infrastructure Date: Sat, 20 Nov 1993 11:46:50 -0500From: mkapor@kei.com (Mitchell Kapor) Rich Karlgaard <0005096930@mcimail.com> wisely observes: > ...the range of>political opinion in the U.S. is not always spread>along a single axis of left to right. I believe>there is another axis ascendant. It is>authoritarian/libertarian.> Try this exercise. Draw a left-to-right>line across a page. Then draw a vertical line from>top to bottom, labeling it Authoritarian on top,>Libertarian on bottom. You have just created a>grid with four quadrants. I have tried to illustrate his point. My deficiencies as a graphic artistare equaled only by the impoverished of ASCII as a graphical medium. Karlgaard's two axes: -----------authoritarian------------ | ^ | | | | |<----left------|------ right----> | | | | | v | -----------libertarian-------------- I want to substitute "anti-authoritarian" for "libertarian", as follows: ----------- authoritarian---------- | ^ | | | | |<----left------|------ right----> | | | | | v | -----------anti-authoritarian------- Doing this permits distinguishing two varieties of anti-authoritarian, thedecentralist and the libertarian. -------------------------------------- | | | | | | |-------------------------------------| | decentralist | libertarian | | | | --------------------------------------- In my terminology Libertarian is used to refer more specifically to theright quadrant of the anti-authoritarian position. The left side of theanti-authoritarian space I have chosen to call decentralist. As Rich indicates, on some issues, like NAFTA and, I might add, the ClipperChip, the opposing sides are divided, not on liberal-conservative politicallines, but on the horizontal axis. I would claim that the lower half of the political space simply be calledanti-authoritarian and that it is divided into two quadrants: on the left,the decentralist, and on the right, the libertarian. You can see how this works on Clipper chip and other privacy issues relatedto encryption. EFF chairs a coalition of 60 organizations, from theAmerican Petroleum Institute to the ACLU, which opposes government controlof encryption. You have cypherpunks and corporate interests aligned onthis issue, because they all want decentralization of control overencryption technology. On issues where the goal is to remove government-imposed barriers, likeprivacy, there is easy agreement between left-leaning decentralists andright-leaning libertarians. The coherence of EFF's Board resides in thelibertarian-decentralist commonality of interest which is more importantthan conventional divisions of left-right politics. On the other hand, the sometimes fractious nature of the public interestcommunity, of which EFF is part, can be seen to in splits along the samehorizontal axis. EFF supports private sector ownership and operation of theNational Information Infrastructure,, Many other public interestorganizations share the same general goals of openness for the NII as EFFbut prefer approaches lying above the horizontal midline, e.g., throughdirect government ownership or operation of the NII. Infrastructure is a trickier issue than privacy. All anti-authoritarianswould agree that a government-built NII is the wrong approach. However,there seems to be more willingness among many on the net who think ofthemselves as libertarians to leave it entirely to private industry tobuild the NII, where government abandons any role, even as referee. If wewound up with an NII controlled by an oligopoly of enormous corporateinterests which resulted in centralized control over content, it would be abad thing. If independent content providers can't easily get on thenetwork, it would be a huge catastrophe. It seems to me that, in principle, corporate authoritarianism is asdangerous as government authoritarianism, and this is an issue which mayseparate left-quadrant and right-quadrant anti-authoritarians. A libertarian would argue that if government got out of the way, e.g.,deregulated telecommunications and let everybody compete, it would besufficient to achieve the right kind of NII. Personally, I think that'snaive. A more considered libertarian view would be that either the marketwill produce the desired result by itself OR IT WON'T, but there is nothinganybody can do to alter the outcome. Thus government should stay out ofit, and the public interest community should go home. To me, this is bothfatalistic and simplistic. A decentralist would say that deregulation alone is not necessarily goingto be sufficient to produce a decentralized NII. It might be and it mightnot. But if it is not, we do not need to be fatalists about it. We havethe opportunity to try to influence the outcome both by working at thelevel of raising consciousness and through the possibility legislationwhich ratifies some sort of hard-fought compromise that achieves certaingoals (e.g. for new common carriage or new universal service). Thisembodies the EFF approach. We may all get lucky in the sense that the architecture of consumerbroadband networks winds up following a model which is more, rather thanless, like the Internet in its openness and decentralization. This appearsto be the general direction Bell Atlantic is taking. However, while theirsystem is open (in terms of common carriage or system architecture), it isheavily asymmetrical with a big downstream pipe and a small upstream pipe,at least for the foreseeable future. If the TCI merger goes through, and if they are able to rationalize twodifferent networks, business models, and corporate cultures, what obtainsfor BA will hold for TCI too. There are some mighty big ifs here, and inany event Bell Atlantic/TCI only serves 25% of the country. Othercarriers, who have a different business model which does not emphasizerevenue from transport a la Bell Atlantic, but revenue from content, maychoose to go with closed, channelized systems. We have to see what other cable companies and telcos actually offer.Increasingly I am going to focus my efforts on understanding the likelyarchitectural deployments of the carriers and how close they come to EFF'smodel of an open platform. The pragmatic question which faces us as wefill in the picture with details will be what, if anything, can be done, tonudge the system into providing alternatives which are closer to openplatforms. All in all, I'd prefer to try to catalyze any necessary changes in mindsetof carriers in order to secure voluntary moves. But as a pragmatist Ibelieve that government action, or certainly the threat of it, may beuseful or, in the worst case, necessary, to achieve the desired end.Further, since the whole process is already highly politicized, I thinkinvolvement to prevent bad governmental solutions from being imposed andscrewing things up is clearly necessary. Thus politics is inevitablyinvolved to carry out a an anti-authoritarian mission. At least in myview. ................................................................... Mitchell Kapor, Chairman <mkapor@kei.com>Electronic Frontier Foundation *** Join EFF!!! Send mail to membership@eff.org for information *** WT02-B12-15IA087-000625-B042-110http://res2.resnet.upenn.edu:80/cis590/reading.046.html 130.91.195.242 19970122055619 text/html 8545HTTP/1.0 200 OKDate: Wed, 22 Jan 1997 05:56:16 GMTServer: Apache/1.1.1Content-type: text/htmlContent-length: 8374Last-modified: Tue, 22 Nov 1994 06:31:28 GMTFBI'S DIGITAL TELEPHONY BILL WAS RESULT OF FAILED 2-YEAR BEHIND-SCENES CAMPAIGN--submited with permission of author COMMUNICATIONS DAILYMonday November 22, 1993Copyright 1993 THIS ARTICLE IS INTENDED FOR PERSONAL USE ONLY AND MAY NOT BEDISTRIBUTED IN ANY FORM, ELECTRONIC OR OTHERWISE, TO ANY OTHERFORUMS. FBI'S DIGITAL TELEPHONY BILL WAS RESULT OF FAILED 2-YEAR BEHIND-SCENESCAMPAIGNby Brock N. Meeks FBI's controversial Digital Wiretap Bill was result of failed2-year campaign, code-named "Operation Root Canal," to win quiettelephone industry agreement to give law enforcement agencieseasy wiretap access to digital conversations, CommunicationsDaily has learned. Previously classified documents show how bill was introducedin light of industry's insistence that no voluntary agreementcould ensure compliance by all of industry. Telephone companiesultimately opposed bill, confounding FBI, which thought it hadfull industry endorsement. Industry figures have denied publiclythat they encouraged FBI to introduce bill. Documents also raiseserious doubts about legitimacy of FBI's frequent claim thatdigital technologies are proved stumbling blocks to criminalinvestigations. Month-long examination by Communications Daily that includedinterviews with telephone company and law enforcement officials andinspection of more than 180 pages of documents obtained from FBIand Justice Dept. under Freedom of Information Act (FOIA), suppliedto us by Computer Professionals for Social Responsibility (CPSR),also revealed that Bureau: (1) Tried to get industry voluntarilyto write digital wiretap "trapdoors" into future specifications forcentral office switches. (2) Attempted to convince industry tocooperate voluntarily by indicating that FBI wouldn't be able toprotect network security. (3) Developed study of financial impactof digital wiretap access on industry, later claiming no such studyexisted. In absence of law compelling industry to comply with FBIdesire for digital wiretap access, Bureau tried to induce telephonecompanies to develop "immediate and interim solutions" to problem,according to internal FBI memo dated Feb. 8, 1991. Memo also saidFBI agents, in conversations with industry executives, "stressedthe necessity to incorporate these monitoring requirements infuture specifications for central office switches." When FBI began to realize industry wouldn't go alongvoluntarily with its request for digital access, it painted direpicture of how Bureau would be limited in ability to fight crimeif wiretap access weren't given, pointedly claiming that securityof networks themselves would be at risk. Industry reluctance to comply voluntarily with FBI plan meantagency had to turn to legislation. "It was the Bureau's court oflast resort," FBI source said. Internal FBI memo dated Aug. 21,1991, quoted unidentified PacBell official as saying: "The onlyviable solution for this problem would be through legislativeaction as technical solutions alone would be cost prohibitive andineffective." PacBell official also is quoted saying legislation"would ensure the equal commitment of all providers." Telephone company officials have denied publicly that theysupported legislative solution. When existence of bill was madepublic, RHCs and equipment makers opposed it, confusing FBI. InSept. 22, 1992, letter to Charles Bowsher, then Comptroller Gen.,then-FBI Dir. William Sessions said that when Bureau efforts togain industry's voluntary compliance failed "to achieve promptaction," industry reached consensus that "legislative mandate wasboth needed and desired -- a stance later repudiated by industryspokespersons." In fact, industry lobbying against bill became sointense that then-Attorney Gen. William Barr, in June 1992 letterto Sessions, told how he had sought to enlist efforts ofthen-Commerce Secy. Barbara Franklin because her "support isurgently needed to help diminish the telecommunications industry'sintense lobbying efforts in opposition." Whether companies flip-flopped on legislative issue isunclear. FBI refused to comment on apparent conflict betweenconsensus Sessions thought he had from industry and industry'svehement opposition to bill when it was introduced: "You'll haveto get those answers from the industry," said agent Barry Smith ofFBI Legislative Affairs Office. Although FBI documents clearly show industry agreedlegislation was only way FBI could hope to gain industrywidecompliance, it isn't clear that industry gave any indication itwould support such a bill if introduced. Interviews with industryofficials produced contradictory accounts. One senior RHC officialwho took part in FBI-industry meetings said flip-flop was"calculated game of political brinksmanship." He said industrynever had any intention of backing legislation: "This was all anelaborate kind of shell game to discourage the FBI from making usspend millions of dollars to make their job easier." But another RHC official differed: "I don't recall theindustry ever telling the FBI it would support legislation.Certainly our company never indicated that position." AT&Tspokesman said company has "always been opposed to legislativesolution." Yet, when idea of legislation was presented torepresentatives of AT&T, Bell Labs and Nynex at Aug. 21, 1991,meeting with FBI, as recorded in Sept. 30, 1991, internal FBI memo,none of those present was noted as opposing legislative idea.Indeed, almost year later, perceived industry flip-flop stillbothered Bureau. Internal FBI memo dated Sept. 30, 1992 (afterindustry had come out against bill), written by Kier Boyd, FBIDeputy Asst. Dir. Operations-Technical Services Div., said "theRBOCs are playing both sides of the street, so as not to offend theJustice Dept., which enjoys considerable power over theiractivities" under MFJ. However, if that was intention, result wasan FBI obviously irked by what it saw as duplicity. FBI Worries Groundless? Despite FBI insistence that digital technologies havepotential to thwart investigations, Bureau has no evidence tosupport claim, documents revealed. Bureau has said publicly thatinvestigations already have been hampered by current digitaltechnologies, but has declined to respond to requests forspecifics. However, FBI field report documents show Bureaureceived no support from field officers to back up claims ofproblems caused by digital technologies; field offices repeatedlyreported no difficulty in carrying out electronic surveillance.Dec. 3, 1992, report from Newark office is typical, as it reported:(1) Drug Enforcement Administration "advised that as of this date,the DEA has not had any technical problems with advanced telephonetechnology." (2) N.J. Attorney Gen.'s office said it hasn't hadany problems "since the last contact." (3) IRS reported noproblems with "advanced telephone matters." (4) N.J. State Policesaid that "as of this date" agency has had no problems withtechnology's hindering investigations. Examination of all documents released turned up no reportsof technology's hampering investigations. In Nov. 16 appearanceon Wis. Public Radio, Special Agent James Kallstrom of FBITechnical Services Div. also contradicted previous FBI claims,admitting during debate with CPSR legal counsel David Sobel thatdigital technologies hadn't yet hampered FBI investigations. Major concern of Congress, consumer advocates and industry iseventual cost of implementing FBI plan. Agency consistently hassaid it's in no position to evaluate such costs. When GAOinvestigators asked FBI for any cost analysis agency had done, FBIdenied it had any. But in May 26, 1992, memo from Attorney Gen.Barr to FBI Dir. Sessions titled "Digital Telephony InformationMemorandum," which outlines changes Justice Dept. made in FBI'soriginal bill, Barr said "significant" change in measure "is thatit is silent on how the cost burden for accommodating lawenforcement's needs will be assumed." Same memo then said effortsto "compress the timetable" for presenting legislation included "acost-benefits study formulated by the FBI [that] was forwardedthrough your staff to the OMB." FBI declined to release study. --30-- WT02-B12-16IA087-000625-B042-165http://res2.resnet.upenn.edu:80/cis590/reading.047.html 130.91.195.242 19970122055816 text/html 13310HTTP/1.0 200 OKDate: Wed, 22 Jan 1997 05:58:08 GMTServer: Apache/1.1.1Content-type: text/htmlContent-length: 13138Last-modified: Tue, 22 Nov 1994 06:31:30 GMTBackground on Information Superhighway 1993-12-20 PART 1 of 2 THE WHITE HOUSE Office of the Press Secretary______________________________________________________________ BACKGROUND BRIEFING BY SENIOR ADMINISTRATION OFFICIALS December 20, 1993 The Briefing Room 3:17 P.M. EST SENIOR ADMINISTRATION OFFICIAL: Good afternoon. VicePresident Gore will deliver the luncheon address tomorrow afternoonat the National Press Club to do one of two major speeches that hewill present on telecommunications policy and reform that theadministration will be pursuing in 1994 with both legislative andadministrative actions. In between the Vice President's speeches, Secretary RonBrown will deliver a speech also in early January regarding theimplications of telecommunications reform for the economy. Thesecond speech the Vice President will deliver will be in California,in Los Angeles, on January 11th at an all-day summit hosted by theTelevision Academy of Arts and Sciences on the superhighway --information superhighway. I believe they put out a press releaseabout 10 days ago on that and are finalizing the agenda and theparticipants. But that will have representatives from all of theinformation industry -- cable, television, telephone, movies, energyindustry, education community -- at which point the Vice Presidentwill lay out the blueprint for the administration's proposed reformof both those aspects of the Telecommunications Act of 1934 and themodified final judgment from the AT&T divestiture judicialrestrictions on communications industry in the January speech,followed by legislation at the beginning of the next session. Tomorrow afternoon, the Vice President will lay outseveral principles that he thinks should guide the administration andthe Congress's reform of the telecommunications laws and the creationof the marketplace of the future in information. As part of that hewill also discuss some of the processes that we have been goingthrough in the administration both interagency and between the WhiteHouse and the Congress to communicate with and respond to the manybills that have been introduced on the Hill regardingtelecommunications reform. With the confirmation of Reed Hundt now as the Chairmanof the FCC and the team in place at the Department of Commerce andthe Department of Justice, there are all the people in place to takeresponsibilities for different aspects of the decisions that wouldhave to be made for a transition from the Telecommunications Act of'34 and the system that both legislative and administrative changeswould set up. Let me introduce my colleague in just a moment to talkabout some of the process we've through as well as the implications. SENIOR ADMINISTRATION OFFICIAL: What I thought I'd dois just give you a sense of what's the desired end point, what is thenature of the phase we're in now, and what's the nature of -- whatare in broad terms the kinds of issues that we have to deal with. And I'll stay with the sort of -- the most fundamental informationindustry kinds of questions. What the changes in technology to which the VicePresident's speeches and Secretary Brown's speeches will basically beresponsive to really mean is that for the first time since we've hada telecommunications -- since telecommunications has been a centralpart of the economy is that -- is the possibility for absolutelypervasive competition in every single line of business oftelecommunications. And therefore the desired end point is to moveto -- is to move to a point ultimately where any company can offerany services through any network to any set of consumers. That's thedesired end you'd like to reach to, and where all of the facets ofthe industry are competitive. Obviously, the period that we're in at the moment is aperiod -- and it'll probably be a long period -- of transitionbetween a telecommunications and an information environment that wascharacterized really quite differently, when technologies were verydifferent and when there were lines of business, when particulartechnologies offered particular lines of business and there wasreally no merging between the two. And the best way, I think, tothink of the issues that are going to be on the Hill next year and towhich the Vice President and Secretary Brown will be referring andresponding in the course of their speeches is the following: Thereare a whole set of problems which derive from what are the kinds ofservices that a company can offer. Can it offer local competitiveservices -- i.e., in the local loop where telecommunications go tothe home? Can a company offer long distance services? Can a companyengage in manufacturing? Can a company engage in what are called"information services," which is the offer to the home or to abusiness of particular information. So one area in which legislation is being considered andupon which the Vice President will comment will be the loosening ofrestrictions which affect what services a company can offer. Another whole area derives from the fact that because ofthe history of telecommunications and the different history ofcompanies, companies with different kinds of history now offerdifferent kinds of services and are restricted in that way. So acable company offers one kind of services, broadcast televisionoffers another kind, now convergent mostly with cable television,telephone companies offer another kind. And, again, another set oflegislation is increasingly -- moves in the direction of saying thatthe past history matters less and less, and as long as there iscompetition, companies can -- irrespective of their past history --can offer competing services. Both are responding to the basic factthat the technology has changed fundamentally and that all of thesethings are now convergent. The end result of all of that I stated in one way, whichis -- is the capability to offer any set of services to any consumerthrough any network at any time. Another way, though, of thinkingabout that is the enormous changes and advantages as we begin -- asthat begins to be put in place nationally for our economy. Not onlyis it in itself -- do those changes involve an enormous amount ofinvestment, and therefore jobs, but they also increase radically theflexibility of our economy, its capability to deal with change, thecapability to offer new and different services, the capability ofcompanies to work with each other so that you can see a merging outof the information infrastructure an economy that functions in quitesignificantly different ways. And that's the end result, is a muchfreer, much more competitive telecommunications and informationmarketplace that, because it is that way, changes in quitefundamental ways the nature of the economy. My colleague and I are available for questions if thereare any. Q How does this affect the average person? Is this-- it sounds wonderful, but I'm not sure how it affects them and whenit will affect them. SENIOR ADMINISTRATION OFFICIAL: I think that the firstway it affects them is going to be lower prices fortelecommunications and information services. I think that the secondway that it will affect them will be the increased investment, theincreased number of jobs that the information industry change means.The third way it's going to affect them is it's going to change thevery nature of their work. I mean, just as an example, videoconferencing is on an almost vertical rise up within companies as theprice has come down. You're going to see much more of that. You'regoing to see a very large number of people working in companies whocan now spend more of their time at home as telecommuting replacesvehicle commuting. Now, timelines for those -- the first couple of changesthat I announced -- that I mentioned -- price changes, investmentchanges, probably over the next very few years. The longer changesof lifestyle -- end of the century, seven years, eight years. Q Would this be happening without what you're doing?Because I've heard about this for quite a while. What is the WhiteHouse doing with this legislation that wouldn't happen otherwise? SENIOR ADMINISTRATION OFFICIAL: Regulation -- let memake one point about laws and regulations and my colleague can makeanother. The technology that changes that are occurring are going tochange and the changes are going to occur irrespective of whatanybody does. And to suggest that they wouldn't is a little bit likepretending you're King Knute. Technology has historically shown atendency to move much more rapidly than regulation. And what thisdoes is catch regulation up with where technology is and give it --and provide a capacity so it can change much more flexibly. Q Except that how do you define competition? This isa tough thing to get your arms around because nobody knows yet wherethe market's going or what the mergers are going to end up being. SENIOR ADMINISTRATION OFFICIAL: That's right. Q So you must have, in whatever proposals you havethat you're sending to the Hill some kind of definitions for what youwould consider competition. Is it two companies, side by side? Mustit be three? And then, before you get to that competition, you mustalso be thinking of some kind of regulations that protect the peoplefrom a monopoly developing. SENIOR ADMINISTRATION OFFICIAL: Let me make one pointon this, and then my colleague should speak. My colleague made thepoint that no one can predict the shape and appearance of marketsthat are changing this rapidly and their shape and appearance in thefuture. But what we can do is try to build certain values into thesystem. And one of those values has got to be a competitiveenvironment and a competitive marketplace. And, therefore, what the regulatory system has to do asit ushers us through a transition like this, is provide for checksalong the way so that one can ask the question, is there, in fact,competition. SENIOR ADMINISTRATION OFFICIAL: And we're not sayingthat these models will be developed overnight or even be clear andaccepted by everybody when the proposals are introduced by the administration in January and early February. But already, on theHill, you see people who are providing models that, as in theDingell-Brooks bill, that for certain changes in the law, there haveto be reviews by the Justice Department and the FCC in their areas ofjurisdiction and in antitrust considerations regarding what iscompetition. Now, the challenge is that the Telecommunications Act of'34 dealt with a much different world. We have now had the challengeof coming up with models that define competition in the modern worldwhere you don't have competition that's based just on how many wiresgo into your house, but what your access is to wireless technology.The fact that we're going to be talking to our televisions andwatching our telephones means that we have to redefine whatcompetition means because we're going to be getting information fromevery source imaginable. And as one person put it, everything we donow through wires in the ground we're going to do in the air; andeverything we do now in the air we're going to do through wires inthe ground. So we have to rethink the models at the same time thatwe're rethinking the technology. If I could go back quickly to the question about whatdoes this mean for the average American and how soon will it mean it,we're already seeing a situation in which education is reversed inthe home. Parents are learning computers from their children.Parents are learning how to program their VCRs and their cell phonesfrom their children. The technology revolution is occurring morequickly than the education system can handle it or the regulatorysystem. And as a result, all of these changes that we read abouteveryday in the paper are occurring -- they're running into the wallof regulations and judicial restrictions, and they're all findinglittle fish ladders around the dam so to speak. We're got to startdealing with how to open up the dam in a controlled way to let thesetechnologies flow in a way that still protects universal service,competition, open access and privacy. Q You talked about removing barriers between variousindustries. And right now the FCC licenses services for veryspecific -- gives licenses for the airwaves for very specificpurposes like broadcast tv or cellular phones. Could you everforesee, say, a television station being allowed to use maybe aportion of its spectrum for another kind of service or cellular phonesystem -- using it for some other thing? SENIOR ADMINISTRATION OFFICIAL: I could foresee it. Idon't think that's something that we're going to have to deal with inthis initial proposal that deals with the legislative angle. But let WT02-B12-17IA087-000625-B042-211http://res2.resnet.upenn.edu:80/cis590/reading.048.html 130.91.195.242 19970122060026 text/html 13114HTTP/1.0 200 OKDate: Wed, 22 Jan 1997 06:00:23 GMTServer: Apache/1.1.1Content-type: text/htmlContent-length: 12942Last-modified: Tue, 22 Nov 1994 06:31:31 GMTBackground on Information Superhighway 1993-12-20 Part 2 of 2 me say, if you look at the companies who are now making a living bygathering taxi cab radio frequencies and bundling them together forcell networks. There's a great opportunity here to convert one formof use of the frequency into another form that has a much bettereconomic potential. Q One of the reasons the local phone companies havebeen kept out of long distance, and it's obvious they're a monopoly,how much of their monopoly do they have to lose in order for them tobe allowed into this new area? I mean, is it 90, 80, 70, 60? SENIOR ADMINISTRATION OFFICIAL: That's the samequestion we got just a second ago. The Justice Department will haveto be setting up those kinds of models. The important thing is, arewe going to start the process of addressing that question and dealingwith proposals like Ameritech's and others who have said, we'll letyou into our area if you'll let us into yours. And we have todecide, what do we mean by effective competition before we let theregional companies into other areas and prevent monopolies. SENIOR ADMINISTRATION OFFICIAL: Let me give you anotherperspective on your point. I said that we're in a period oftransition that'll last a decade or more. After all, theCommunications Act of '34 is now 50 years old -- 60 years old. Andwe're not in the legislation that will be considered this next year,going to get to the point that you've stated. But very, veryrespectable people in the business and in the academic fields thatlook at it, say that we're getting to the point where you reallyought to think of these different kinds of companies as bit companies-- they're as bits companies. And some of them sell them by over-the-air broadcast, and some of them sell them by other kinds ofwireless technologies, and some of them sell them through wires underthe ground. And that, ultimately, the point is that they're allgoing to be selling bits, and they ought to all be regulated in a waythat recognizes it in certain fundamental ways that are in the samebusiness. Q Is that going to affect newspapers havingrestrictions on TV stations they can own and vice-versa, in the samemarket -- SENIOR ADMINISTRATION OFFICIAL: Not the currentlegislation. The current legislation does not, and largely, I think,because the system can only accommodate so much at any given time.We really are in a period of transition. But if you follow the logicof what I just said, yes, ultimately. Remember, the fundamental switch that is occurring hereis from scarcity to plenty; that the reason why most of theregulation has been in effect for so long is the basic underlyingassumption that the ways to the consumer were limited; and thereforecontrol over them was antithetical, both to the nature to our economyand also to a democracy. If you've reached a point where spectrum space, becauseof the many different ways of using over the air and alsofiberoptics, coaxial cable is essentially unlimited, then you beginto reach a point where you care less about the nature of regulationas it is now and you begin to look for a change. Q Are there some companies -- I'm not an expert inthis -- but are there some companies like an AT&T or whatever thatare not going to care for this kind of change that you're talkingabout? SENIOR ADMINISTRATION OFFICIAL: The devil's in thedetails -- if you went around to the industry and you said do yousubscribe to the -- any company through any network, any informationservice to any set of consumers, everyone would agree. It's in theanswering of the specific questions, like how do you judgecompetition, what particular rules do you have in effect where peopleare going to -- out. Q Well, on that note, what specific provisions inbills on the Hill do you like? And could you talk about what you'relooking at as far as some of the subsidiary guidelines, pricingthings -- what do you see up there that you like, and what might theVice President be endorsing? SENIOR ADMINISTRATION OFFICIAL: Well, first of all, allof the bills that are currently introduced on the Hill are a step inthe right direction. They tend to compliment each other -- there'ssome overlap. There's very little contradiction. You'd have to getinto the details to see some areas where there would be some realdisagreements. In his speech tomorrow, the Vice President -- well,first off, the Vice President has spoken with the spoken with the sponsors of all of the bills that are on the Hill in the last monthor two and has met with many of them personally, and has had aninteragency group that has been reviewing all of that. Tomorrow inhis talk he will address where he would like to go with some of thosebills, although the administration proposal and which of the bills wewill incorporate and which provisions will be announced in theJanuary speech in Los Angeles. Q That hasn't been decided yet then? SENIOR ADMINISTRATION OFFICIAL: Some of the basicprinciples -- let me put it this way -- the basic principle that weare going to change our regulatory system to allow for -- to decreasethe restrictions on the cable companies, the telephone companies, theinformation services provided by telephones and to provide for easingof the MFJ, modified final judgment restrictions. That decision isclearly made. The details of the architecture of how you do that andthe timetable under which you do that and the tests, both entry andpost-entry that you use to guard that, is still under discussion. Q To what extent are you worried that deregulationmight have the same effect on the telecommunications industry that itdid on the airline industry or the breakup of the phone companies? SENIOR ADMINISTRATION OFFICIAL: Well, first off, we'renot talking about instant deregulation; we're talking about atransition period from a system that is well-known but not well-working and a system that is not yet in place which we think willprovide much better market measures -- or market incentives forcompetition and for in investment. The difficult time is thetransition. And in that transition, you will still need to havegovernment regulation; you will always need to have anti-trust reviewof the market as it exists to prevent monopoly advantage. So, we arenot talking about a black or white situation. We are talking aboutwalking a line between the current antiquated system and a system inwhich market principles would apply except in those areas whereeither geography or economic benefits create a monopoly that we findunacceptable based on the values that the Vice President is going totalk about tomorrow. Q When you talk about easing the MFJ, are you talkingabout letting the regional phone companies get into long distance --because you know the fights that exist between the long distancecompanies and the regional phone companies about crossing into eachother's territory? So, are you just going to -- are you going toopen that up and say let's get rid of the MFJ, or are you talkingabout contingent on something else you can get rid of this part ofthe MFJ? SENIOR ADMINISTRATION OFFICIAL: Well, remember we'renot operating in a vacuum. The Dingell-Brooks bill lays out, forinstance, a timetable for the regional companies to get in on thelong distance going through certain entry barriers and Department ofJustice and FCC reviews. We are -- we think that that provides avery good model. We are looking at how that could be incorporated.We have some issues that we still need to understand about the bill. But we're not talking about just taking two opposinggroups and throwing them in the same room together. We're talkingabout coming up with rules of the road when we get to thisintersection. And even today, AT&T said that although they had beenskeptical, historically, of this kind of relaxation, they now seesome good things about it. So we think there's a way to work thisout. Q To borrow a phrase from health care, is this sortof like "managed deregulation"? Is that what you're talking about? SENIOR ADMINISTRATION OFFICIAL: Well, any kind ofderegulation is going to be managed. And somehow I don't think thatI -- it's a nice term, but I don't think it's a appropriate analogy.We face next year -- have the opportunity of seeing next year thelargest single change in telecommunications regulation and law that'soccurred since 1934. And the changes are really absolutelysubstantial. There is, I think, with respect to the kinds of valuesthat my colleague underlined, which is to say, privacy, competition,access, there is a responsibility to make certain that certain kindsof values get built into the system. But if by "managed," you mean,do we think that we have some sense that we can make this a careful,stately kind of transition irrespective of the way the technology isflowing, no. Technology is occurring extremely rapidly, andgovernment doesn't affect that rate of change much. Q Would the administration's bill include someprovision on these mergers -- like, for instance, TCI-Bell Atlantic-- AT&T? Did you all address those issues -- SENIOR ADMINISTRATION OFFICIAL: No. Theadministration's bill -- when those mergers were announced, the WhiteHouse statement on those was that we favor competition, we favorimproved opportunities for information provision to all sectors ofsociety, and that there are formal reviews going on on all of thosemergers, and we let those processes run. We are not going to try andpick and choose among all the mergers in the legislation. We are trying to, in the proposals we will put forward-- and the Vice President speaks tomorrow -- talk about the marketthat's out there, how the market is changing, and how the technologyimproves communication. This isn't so much about technology,although that's what we read about every day, as it is abouttechnology's effects on the way we communicate and the way we'regoing to communicate, and who will have information and who will not.And the provision of information to the public, to schools,hospitals, libraries, as well as to the economically well-off sectorsof society is a crucial point that we want to make sure is includedin any reforms that happen. Q Well, you mean, he won't outline what his plan is;he'll just do an overview of -- SENIOR ADMINISTRATION OFFICIAL: He will do an overviewof some of the questions we're going to address as well as theprinciples he thinks need to be incorporated in the blueprint, aswell as principles that we anticipate, or that we would like to seein the marketplace that the private sector creates as well, becausethere are many responsibilities we think the private sector shouldtake on that relate to the values of universal service and openaccess, some of which are governed by anti-trust principles, othersare governed by the value we put on information's importance to anydemocracy. Q I missed who the Vice President is going to talk totomorrow. SENIOR ADMINISTRATION OFFICIAL: The National PressClub. Q What the difference between the January 4th and theJanuary 11th speech? SENIOR ADMINISTRATION OFFICIAL: Ron Brown will do theJanuary 4th speech, primarily on the economic aspects of the -- Q And what -- the January 11th speech is going to beabout? SENIOR ADMINISTRATION OFFICIAL: Is the Vice President'sblueprint in Los Angeles. Q public institution, so is there going to be auniversal access for poor people so they can get phones, and are theyconsidering television and cable television now, something that thatshould also be available no matter how -- SENIOR ADMINISTRATION OFFICIAL: The extent of how wedefine universal service is actively under discussion. And thequestion of subsidies or rate subsidies is also a very difficult one.As you know, the definition of universal service has gone to having aparty line phone to having an individual line. Is call-waiting partof universal service? Is a modem hook-up part of universal service?Those are some of the questions that we have to answer. We don'texpect to have all of the answers, because the market will surpriseus down the road in terms of what's available. One of the issues we want to propose to deal with thatquestion is how to make the regulatory system more responsive morequickly to technology changes. We can't wait 60 years at a pop tocatch up with technology. So that's one of the problems we're goingto reach is, how can we make the regulatory system more responsive tothe technological opportunities. THE PRESS: Thank you. END3:43 P.M. EST WT02-B12-18IA087-000625-B042-329http://res2.resnet.upenn.edu:80/cis590/reading.049.html 130.91.195.242 19970122060207 text/html 22468HTTP/1.0 200 OKDate: Wed, 22 Jan 1997 06:02:05 GMTServer: Apache/1.1.1Content-type: text/htmlContent-length: 22296Last-modified: Tue, 22 Nov 1994 06:31:33 GMT38 Hours in Hamburg: A visit to the 10th Chaos Communications Congress Date: Tue, 4 Jan 94 18:52:54 +0100To: efarber@iiic.ethz.chSubject: 38 Hours in HamburgFrom: efarber@iiic.ethz.ch (Manny E. Farber) 38 Hours in Hamburg:A visit to the 10th Chaos Communications Congress by Manny E. Farber Armed only with an invitation in English addressed to the "globalcommunity" and a small pile of German Marks, I arrived at theEidelstedter Buergerhaus about an hour or so before the beginning ofthe 10th Chaos Communication Congress (subtitled "Ten years afterOrwell"), sponsored by the (in)famous Chaos Computer Club. TheBuergerhaus (literally, "citizen's house") turned out to be a modestcommunity hall; needless to say, not all invited showed up. TheCongress took place between the 27th and the 29th of December. As thetitle implies, social as well as technical issues were on the docket. After forking over 30 DM (about $20) for a pass for the first twodays of the Congress, I sort of felt like asking for a schedule, butrefrained, thinking that asking for scheduled chaos might seem a bitodd. I went to the cafeteria for breakfast. An organizer started outannouncing, "Anyone who wants to eat breakfast pays 5 Marks, and gets astamp, which--no, rather, anyone who wants breakfast pays 5 Marks andeats breakfast." The atmosphere was quite collegial and informal, with little moreorder than was absolutely necessary. The approximately 150 attendeeswere predominantly German (a few from Switzerland and Holland, at least-- and probably only -- one from the United States, namely myself),male, and technically oriented. (During an explanation of themathematical algorithm underlying electronic cash, a non-techieobjected, "But I don't want to have to think up a 200-digit randomnumber every time I buy something!" It was explained to him that thiswas done by software in the chip-card ...). Although not mentioned in the invitation, not a word of English was tobe heard; all the events were conducted in German. Some were conductedin a "talk show" format, with a host asking questions, simplifyinganswers, making jokes. A television network carried the video from theauditorium to other rooms throughout the building (albeit withoutsound) along with up-to-the-minute event schedules. The tone of the discussions of how electronic cash could beembezzled, or chip cards abused, digital signatures forged, etc., wasconstructive rather than destructive. And it was balanced, i.e. notonly "how could a malicious individual embezzle money?" was discussed,but also "how could the government use chip cards to reduce people'sprivacy?" Here, the "hackers" were hackers in the positive sense ofunderstanding a technology, not in the negative sense of wreakinghavoc. It was, however, noted that trying out a potential weakness ofthe "EuroScheck" cash cards was quite easy: it would require buying acard reader for 1,500 DM and maybe a week of time. The question of technical solutions to "big brother" did come up inthe presentations about chip cards. The danger is that a pile of cardsis eliminated in favor of a card containing someone's driver's license,driving record (maybe), employee information, credit information, etc.etc. A chip card could theoretically be programmed to give out *only*the information absolutely necessary, e.g. telling a policeman onlythat someone is allowed to drive, without disclosing his identity. The "Hackzentrum" (Hacking Center) turned out to be a room filledwith networked computers and people hacking on them. It seemed mostlyharmless. (I nevertheless did not try a remote login -- I had noreason to doubt good intentions, but on the other hand, who knows whowrote or replaced the keyboard driver and what sort of supplementalfunctionality it might have?) The packet radio room had a "Digi"repeating station and, true to the ham radio tradition, where theconversation centers on who is talking to whom and how well they heareach other and on what other frequency they might hear each otherbetter, the computers attached were mostly displaying maps of thepacket radio network itself. I didn't delve very deeply into the"Chaos Archive," but noticed a collection of maintenance sheets fortelephone equipment among CCC newsletters and other paraphenalia. Some "signs of the Congress": - Bumper sticker: "I (heart) your computer" - Telephone stickers: "Achtung, Abhoergefahr" ("Attention, Eavesdropping danger"; and the German PTT logo transformed into a pirate insignia, with the words "Telefun - Mobilpunk" (derived from "Telefon - Mobilfunk") - T-shirt: "Watching them (eye-ball) watching us" - Post-It Note pad (for sale for DM 1.50): a pad of about 50, pre-printed with a hand-written note: "Vorsicht, Stoerung. Automat macht Karte ungueltig" ("Careful--Defect. Machine makes card invalid") - Word coinage: "Gopher-space" - Stamp: "ORIGINALE KOPIE" ("ORIGINAL COPY") The press were told not to take pictures of anyone without theirexplicit permission. Schedules were distributed throughout the Congress. By the eveningof the 27th, a schedule for the 28th, "Fahrplan 28.12 Version 2.0," wasalready available ("Fahrplan" means a bus/train schedule; this ispresumably an "in" joke). By 17:30 on the 28th, "Fahrplan 28.12Version 2.7" was being distributed. (I missed most of the interveningversions; presumably they were neatly filed away in the Chaos Archiveby then ...) The scheduled events (in translation) were as follows; a "*" meansthat I have included some comments later in this report: December 27, 1993 - Welcoming/opening- How does a computer work?- ISDN: Everything over one network- Internet and multimedia applications: MIME/Mosaik/Gopher- Data transport for beginners- Chip-cards: Technology* Media and information structures: How much truth remains? Direct democracy: information needs of the citizen- Encryption for beginners, the practical application of PGP* Alternative networks: ZAMIRNET, APS+Hacktic, Green-Net, Knoopunt, Z-Netz and CL December 28, 1993 - Encryption: Principles, Systems, and Visions- Modacom "wireless modem"- Electronic Cash- Bulletin board protocols: Functional comparison and social form, with the example of citizen participation- Discussion with journalist Eva Weber- Net groups for students, Jan Ulbrich, DFN* What's left after the eavesdropping attack? Forbidding encryption? Panel: Mitglied des Bundestags (Member of Parliament) Peter Paterna, Datenschutz Beauftragter Hamburg (Data privacy official) Peter Schar, a journalist from Die Zeit, a representative from the German PTT, a student writing a book about related issues, and a few members of the Chaos Computer Club- Cyber Bla: Info-cram* How does an intelligence service work? Training videos from the "Stasi" Ministrium fuer STAatsSIcherheit (Ministry for National Security)- System theory and Info-policies with Thomas Barth- Science Fiction video session: Krieg der Eispiraten ("War of the ice pirates") December 29, 1993 - Thoughts about orgination ("Urheben")- Computer recycling- Dumbness in the nets: Electronic warfare- Lockpicking: About opening locks- The Arbeitsgemeinschaft freier Mailboxen introduces itself- In year 10 after Orwell ... Visions of the hacker scene THE EAVESDROPPING ATTACK This has to do with a proposed law making its way through the GermanParliament. The invitation describes this as "a proposed law reformallowing state authorities to listen in, even in private rooms, inorder to fight organized crime." This session was the centerpiece ofthe Congress. Bayerische Rundfunk, the Bavarian sender, sent areporter (or at least a big microphone with their logo on it). Thepanel consisted of: MdB - Mitglied des Bundestags (Member of Parliament) Peter PaternaDsB - Datenschutz Beauftragter Hamburg (Data privacy official) Peter ScharJournalist - from Die ZeitPTT - a representative from the German PTTStudent - writing a book about related issuesCCC - a few members of the Chaos Computer Club My notes are significantly less than a word-for-word transcript. Inthe following, I have not only excerpted and translated, butreorganized comments to make the threads easier to follow. IS IT JUSTIFIED? MdB - There is massive concern ("Beunruhigung") in Germany: 7 millioncrimes last year. Using the US as comparison for effectivity ofeavesdropping, it's only applicable in about 10-20 cases: this hasnothing to do with the 7 million. The congress is neverthelessreacting to the 7 million, not to the specifics. In principle, I amopposed and have concerns about opening a Pandora's box. CCC #1 - The 7 million crimes does not surprise me in the least. I amconvinced that there is a clear relationship between the number of lawsand the number of crimes. When you make more laws, you have morecrimes. Every second action in this country is illegal. Journalist - Laws/crimes correlation is an over-simplification. Thereare more murders, even though there are no more laws against it. MdB - There is a conflict between internal security, protecting theconstitution, and civil rights. How dangerous is 6 billion Marks ofwashed drug money to the nation? Taking the US as an example, thecorrosion may have gone so far that it's too late to undo it. I hopethat this point hasn't been reached yet in Germany. DsB - I am worried about a slippery slope. There is a tradeoff betweenfreedom and security, and this is the wrong place to make it; othermore effective measures aren't being taken up. EFFECTIVENESS OF CONTROLS ON EAVESDROPPING MdB - Supposedly federal controls are effective. Although there arevery few eavesdropping cases, even if you look at those that arecourt-approved, it's increasing exponentially. No proper brakes arebuilt into the system. As for controls for eavesdropping by theintelligence service, there is a committee of three members ofparliament, to whom all cases must be presented. They have final say,and I know one of the three, and have relatively much trust in him.They are also allowed to go into any PTT facility anytime, unannounced,to see whether or not something is being tapped or not. MdB - Policies for eavesdropping: if no trace of an applicableconversation is heard within the first "n" minutes, they must terminatethe eavesdropping [...] The question is, at which point the mosteffective brakes and regulations should be applied: in theconstitution? in the practice? PTT - True, but often the actual words spoken is not important, ratherwho spoke with whom, and when. DsB - There is no catalog for crimes, saying what measures can beapplied in investigating which crimes. It's quite possible to use themfor simple crimes, e.g. speeding. There is no law saying that the PTT*has to* store data; they *may*. They can choose technical andorganizational solutions that don't require it. MdB - This is a valid point, I don't waive responsibility for suchdetails. The PTT could be required to wipe out detailed information assoon as it is no longer needed, e.g. after the customer has been billedfor a call. TECHNICAL TRENDS Journalist - Digital network techniques make it easy to keep trails,and there is an electronic trail produced as waste product, which canbe used for billing as well as for other purposes. Load measurementsare allowable, but it can also be used for tracking movements. DsB - The PTT claims they need detailed network data to better plan thenetwork. The government says they need details in order to be able togovern us better. DsB - In the past, the trend has always been to increasinglyidentificable phone cards. There is economic pressure on the customerto use a billing card instead of a cash card, since a telephone unitcosts less. With "picocells," your movement profile is getting moreand more visible. PTT - As for the trend towards less-anonymous billing-cards: with thenew ISDN networks, this is necessary. Billing is a major cost, andthis is just a technical priority. Student - As for techniques to reduce potential for eavesdropping, itis for example technically possible to address a mobile phone withoutthe network operator needing to know its position. Why aren't suchthings being pursued? PTT - UMTS is quite preliminary and not necessarily economicallyfeasible. [Comments about debit cards]. We have more interest incustomer trust than anything else. But when something is according tothe law, we have no option other than to carry it out. But we don't doit gladly. THE BIG CONSPIRACY? CCC #2 - I don't give a shit about these phone conversations beingoverheard. I want to know why there is such a big controversy. Whowants what? Why is this so important? Why so much effort? Why are somany Mafia films being shown on TV when the eavesdropping law is beingdiscussed? What's up? Why, and who are the people? Student - I am writing a book about this, and I haven't figured thisout myself. My best theory: there are some politicians who have losttheir detailed outlook ("Feinbild"), and they should be done away with("abgeschaffen"). PTT - We're in a difficult position, with immense investments needed tobe able to overhear phone conversations [in digital networks (?)]. Wehave no interest in a cover-up. MdB - As for the earlier question about what NATO countries may do.During the occupation of Berlin, they did want they wanted on thenetworks. In western Germany, it has always been debated. Funnybusiness has never been proved, nor has suspicion been cleared up. CCC #2 - After further thought, I have another theory. Americancompanies are interested in spying on German companies in order to geta jump on their product offerings. MdB - That's clear, but there are more benign explanations. Governmentoffices tend towards creating work. Individuals are promoted if theiroffices expand, and they look for new fields to be busy in. In Bonn,we've gone from 4,000 people to 24,000 since the 50's. CCC #1 (to MdB) - Honestly, I don't see why you people in Bonn areanything other than one of these impenetrable bureaucracies like youdescribed, inaccessible, out of touch with reality, and interested onlyin justifying their own existence. MdB - Well, *my* federal government isn't that. CLIPPER CHIP CONTROVERSY Student - Observation/concern: in the US, AT&T's encryption system ischeap and weak. If this becomes a de facto standard, it is much harderto introduce a better one later. Journalist - In the US, the Clipper chip controversy has centered moreon the lost business opportunities for encryption technology, not onprinciples. There every suggestion for forbidding encryption hasencountered stiff opposition. Student - As for the Clipper algorithm, it's quite easy to invitethree experts to cursorily examine an algorithm (they weren't allowedto take documents home to study it) and then sign-off that they have nocomplaints. Journalist - As for the cursory rubber-stamping by the three expertswho certified the Clipper algorithm, my information is that they hadmultiple days of computing days on a supercomputer available. I don'tsee a problem with the algorithm. The problem lies in the "trustcenters" that manage the keys. I personally don't see why the wholequestion of cryptology is at all open ("zugaenglich") for thegovernment. CONCLUDING REMARKS DsB - The question is not only whether or not politicans are separatedfrom what the citizens want, but also of what the citizens want.Germans have a tendency to valuing security. Different tradition inthe US, and less eavesdropping. I can imagine how the basic law("Grundgesetz") could be eliminated in favor of regulations designed toreduce eavesdropping, the trade-off you (MdB) mentioned earlier. Theheadlines would look like "fewer cases of eavesdropping", "checks builtin to the system," etc., everyone would be happy, and then once the lawhas been abolished, it would creep back up, and then there's no limit. MdB - (Nods agreement) CCC #2 - There are things that must be administered centrally (like thePTT), and the government is the natural choice, but I suggest that wedon't speak of the "government," but rather of "coordination." Thisreduces the perceived "required power" aspect ... As a closing remark,I would like to suggest that we take a broader perspective, assume thata person may commit e.g. 5,000 DM more of theft in his lifetime, livewith that, and save e.g. 100,000 DM in taxes trying to prevent thisdegree of theft. MEDIA AND INFORMATION STRUCTURES In this session, a lot of time was wasted in pointless philosophicaldiscussion of what is meant by Truth, although once this topic wasforcefully ignored, some interesting points came up (I don'tnecessarily agree or disagree with these): - In electronic media, the receiver has more responsibility for judgingtruth placed on his shoulders. He can no longer assume that the senderis accountable. With "Network Trust," you would know someone who knowswhat's worthwhile, rather than filtering the deluge yourself. Aprimitive form of this already exists in the form of Usenet "kill" files. - A large portion of Usenet blather is due to people who just got theiraccounts cross-posting to the entire world. The actual posting is notthe problem, rather that others follow it up with a few dozen messagesdebating whether or not it's really mis-posted, or argue that theyshould stop discussing it, etc. People are beginning to learn however,and the ripple effect is diminishing. - Companies such as Microsoft are afraid of the Internet, because itsdistributed form of software development means they are no longer theonly ones able to marshal 100 or 1,000 people for a windowing systemlike X-Windows or Microsoft Windows. - If someone is trying to be nasty and knows what he's doing, a Usenetposting can be made to cost $500,000 in network bandwidth, disk space, etc. - At a Dutch university, about 50% of the network bandwidth could havebeen saved if copies of Playboy were placed in the terminal rooms.Such technical refinements as Gopher caching daemons pale in comparison. - All e-mail into or out of China goes through one node. Suspicious,isn't it? ALTERNATIVE NETWORKS Several people reported about computer networks they set up and areoperating. A sampling: APS+Hacktic - Rop Gonggrijp reported about networking services for themasses, namely Unix and Internet for about $15 per month, in Holland.There are currently 1,000 subscribers, and the funding is sufficient tobreak even and to expand to keep up with exponential demand. A German reported about efforts to provide e-mail to regions ofex-Yugoslavia that are severed from one another, either due todestroyed telephone lines or to phone lines being shut off by thegovernment. A foundation provided them with the funds to use London(later Vienna), which is reachable from both regions, as a common node. The original author of the Zerberus mail system used on many privateGerman networks complained about the degree of meta-discussion and howhis program was being used for people to complain about who is payingwhat for networking services and so forth. He said he did not createit for such non-substantial blather. The difference between now andseveral years ago is that now there are networks that work,technically, and the problem is how to use them in a worthwhile manner. A German of Turkish origin is trying to allow Turks in Turkey toparticipate in relevant discussions going on on German networks (inGerman) and is providing translating services (if I heard right, someof this was being done in Sweden). This killed the rest of thesession, which degenerated into a discussion of which languageswere/are/should be used on which networks. HOW AN INTELLIGENCE SERVICE WORKS: STASI TRAINING VIDEOS The person introducing the videos sat on the stage, the roomdarkened. The camera blotted out his upper body and face; all that wasto see on the video, projected behind him, was a pair of hands movingaround. It apparently didn't take much to earn a file in the Stasi archives.And once you were in there, the "10 W's: Wo/wann/warum/mit wem/..."("where/when/why/with whom/...") ensured that the file, as well asthose of your acquaintances, grew. The videos reported the following "case studies": - The tale of "Eva," whose materialistic lifestyle, contacts withWestern capitalists, and "Abenteuerromantik" tendencies made her aclear danger to the state, as well as a valuable operative. She sworeallegiance to the Stasi and was recruited. Eventually the good workingrelationship deteriorated, and the Stasi had to prevent her from tryingto escape to the West. The video showed how the different parts of theintelligence service worked together. - A member of the military made a call to the consulate of WestGermany in Hungary. The list of 10,000 possible travellers to Hungaryin the relevant time frame was narrowed down to 6,000 on the basis of adetermination of age and accent from the recorded conversation, thendown to 80 by who would have any secrets to sell, then down to three(by hunch? I don't remember now). One video showed how a subversive was discreetly arrested. Camerasthroughout the city were used to track his movements. When he arrivedat his home, a few workers were "fixing" the door, which they claimedcouldn't be opened at the moment. They walked him over to the nextbuilding to show him the entrance, and arrested him there. A dinkylittle East German car comes up, six people pile into it. Twouniformed police stand on the sidewalk pretending nothing is happening. WT02-B12-19IA087-000625-B043-80http://res2.resnet.upenn.edu:80/cis590/reading.050.html 130.91.195.242 19970122060515 text/html 2822HTTP/1.0 200 OKDate: Wed, 22 Jan 1997 06:04:52 GMTServer: Apache/1.1.1Content-type: text/htmlContent-length: 2651Last-modified: Tue, 22 Nov 1994 06:31:34 GMTwiretaps from Privacy digest Date: Sun, 9 Jan 1994 17:41:52 -0500 (EST)From: John Higgins <higgins@dorsai.dorsai.org>Subject: wiretaps Are the cops tapping your phone? If you live in Oklahoma, Rhode Island orVirginia, probably not. But if you're really paranoid don't move to New YorkCity, New Jersey or Florida. On Jan. 9. New York Newsday published an article on wiretaps listing them bylocation. Citing a report compiled by the Administrative Office of the UnitedStates Courts, the article said that New York State cops lead the country with197 wiretaps installed in 1992. The aforementioned low-tap states reportedintalling just 1 phone or room bug, but of the 39 states that have wiretapstatutes 17 reported no taps AT ALL (no, I don't know which states those are). Of the federal jurisdictions not on the list, 44 reported fewer than 10 tapsfor the year, including 19 who reported one tap and 36 who reported zero. I know that cops hate wiretaps, especially room bugs because they're so laborintensive, but this doesn't seem like a whole lot of wiretaps in some of theseareas. Only seven local taps in Massachusetts? Three state wiretaps in all ofCalifornia? If these are accurate reports, this is far less pervasive than Iwould have expected. STATE AND LOCAL WIRETAP ACTIVITY (1992)New York 197 Nebraska 4New Jersey 111 Nevada 4Florida 80 Utah 3Pennsylvania 77 Minnesota 3Maryland 17 California 3Georgia 16 Colorado 2Connecticut 15 New Hampshire 2Texas 14 New Mexico 2Arizona 12 Virginia 1Kansas 7 Rhode Island 1Massachusetts 7 Oklahoma 1 FEDERAL WIRETAP ACTIVITY (1992)Eastern Dist of NY 35 Central Dist of Calif. 14Southern Dist. of NY 25 Arizona 12Southern Dist of Fla. 20 Western Dist. of NY 12New Jersey 18 Easter Dist. of Penn. 12Northern DIst of Tex. 16 Middle Dist of Florida 11Colorado 15 Eastern Dist. of Mich. 10Maryland 15 Southern Dist. of Tex 10 I'm going to try and obtain the full report this week. John M. Higgins higgins@dorsai.dorsai.orgMultichannel News CIS:75266,3353 V)212-887-8390/F)212-887-8384 WT02-B12-20IA087-000625-B043-126http://res2.resnet.upenn.edu:80/cis590/reading.051.html 130.91.195.242 19970122060547 text/html 3798HTTP/1.0 200 OKDate: Wed, 22 Jan 1997 06:05:46 GMTServer: Apache/1.1.1Content-type: text/htmlContent-length: 3627Last-modified: Tue, 22 Nov 1994 06:31:35 GMT"INDUSTRY DEFIES CLINTON ON DATA ENCRYPTION" -- John Markoff "INDUSTRY DEFIES CLINTON ON DATA ENCRYPTION" -- John Markoff [The following item is copyrighted by the 1994 N.Y. Times, and appeared onThursday, 13 Jan 1994.] REDWOOD CITY, Calif. The Clinton administration's newly articulatedinformation technology policy of persuasion, rather than dictation, is gettingan early test. At an industry conference in Redwood City this week, computer hardware,software and telecommunications companies as well as a major bank, are sayingthey intend to adopt an industry coding standard for protecting the privacy ofelectronic communications, rather than support a standard being pushed by theadministration. Unlike the administration-backed standard, the technology, which has beencommercialized by RSA Data Security Inc., does not provide an electronic``trapdoor'' that would enable law-enforcement agencies to eavesdrop ondigital communications. The administration, whose standard is known as the Clipper chip, contendsthat a trapdoor is necessary to detect criminal activity or espionage becausesophisticated encryption techniques can make digital phone calls or computercommunications nearly impervious to wiretaps. Wednesday, Hewlett Packard Co. became the last of the leading United Statescomputer companies to license the RSA software, joining Apple Computer, IBM,Sun Microsystems, Digital Equipment and Unisys. Several companies announced at the conference that they planned to beginselling products that embed RSA's software. Among them are General Magic, asoftware developer; National Semiconductor; a consortium of five cellular datacompanies, and Bankers Trust Co. The conference was sponsored by RSA, which is based in Redwood City, andattracted many of the nation's best non-government cryptographers a group ofcode makers and code breakers who have generally been hostile to any form ofgovernment restrictions on their technology. They have sparred for more than a decade with the National Security Agency,the main proponent of the Clipper chip. The agency is responsible formonitoring electronic communications worldwide for the government, in the nameof national security. In addition to opposition from the cryptographers, the government's Clipperchip proposal has already stirred bitter opposition from civil libertiesorganizations and computer user groups, who fear the Clipper chip would makeelectronic communications too easy for anyone to eavesdrop. Now the industry's rush to embrace an encryption standard that does notprovide a way for the government to listen to data or voice conversations iscertain to put new pressure on the Clinton administration, which is now in thefinal stages of a classified review of its Clipper standard. ``It's clear that what is going on here today is contrary to the way theNSA wants the world to move,'' said Lynn McNulty, associate director forcomputer security at the National Institute for Standards and Technology, aCommerce Department agency. The institute proposed the Clipper standard lastApril, although most of its technical development was done by NSA researchers. Despite their defiance, researchers attending the conference worried thatthe government might still have the means to enforce its vision of a codingstandard. ``They have the trump card that we don't have,'' said Bruce Schneier, aformer government cryptography researcher, who is the author of a textbooktitled ``Applied Cryptography.'' ``They could make it a law that it'smandatory to use their standard.'' WT02-B12-21IA087-000625-B043-162http://res2.resnet.upenn.edu:80/cis590/reading.052.html 130.91.195.242 19970122060623 text/html 4488HTTP/1.0 200 OKDate: Wed, 22 Jan 1997 06:06:17 GMTServer: Apache/1.1.1Content-type: text/htmlContent-length: 4317Last-modified: Tue, 22 Nov 1994 06:31:36 GMTI believe this set of messages raise a set of real questions Posted-Date: Fri, 7 Jan 1994 15:08:29 -0500Date: Fri, 7 Jan 1994 14:11:59 -0600 (EST)From: Stephen Wolff <steve@nsf.gov>Subject: Re: Advisory Committee resourcesTo: James Love <love@essential.org>Cc: The future Ross Stapleton-Gray <STAPLETON@bpa.arizona.edu>, com-priv@psi.comMime-Version: 1.0 > > This is possible, but, having seen the issue come up in the context of the> > Federal Networking Council and FNC AC already, there might be good reasons> > for having an Advisory Committee resource *not* be on a Federal government> > site. This would have to do with what could or couldn't be made public,> > when and how, with respect to FOIA rules, statutory requirements, etc.>>> Ross, you have raised this issue before, according to scott Armstrong,> of ways that federal agencies can get around FOIA. Is there really any> reason why a federal advisory board that wants to make decisions that> will influence our telecommunications policy should not use a system that> is subject to FOIA? What could possible be discussed that should not be> part of the public record?> jamie Hold the phone! This is NOT a question of trying to "get around FOIA." We're talking about a private sector advisory committee to the federalgovernment, chartered according to the provisions of the Federal AdvisoryCommittee Act which requires, i.a., that its meetings be announced inadvance in the Federal Register, that all meeting sessions be open to thepublic unless specified to be closed in the meeting announcement, thatclosing a session can only be done for a VERY few reasons, and thatmeeting minutes be kept. Thus the deliberations of an advisory committee are open to the public -both at meetings and via the minutes, and any reports the committee mightmake and deliver to the government are thereupon subject to FOIA. BUT: There is (as far as I know) NO law (FOIA or other) thatcorrespondence (electronic or otherwise) among advisory committee membersbe public. Nor if that correspondence were stored on the computers of thecommittee members or any other private machine need it be open to thepublic. BUT, if it were stored on a government computer, it WOULD besubject to FOIA. Thus the government, in trying to accommodate itsadvisory committee by providing storage, would subject its members tounwarranted invasion of their privacy which is not required by law. This is NOT a question of trying to "get around FOIA," but of avoiding itsinappropriate application. -s Posted-Date: Fri, 7 Jan 1994 16:59:45 -0500Date: Fri, 7 Jan 1994 13:29:54 -0800 (PST)From: "Brock N. Meeks" <brock@well.sf.ca.us>Subject: Re: Advisory Committee resourcesTo: James Love <love@essential.org>Cc: Stephen Wolff <steve@nsf.gov>, The future Ross Stapleton-Gray <STAPLETON@bpa.arizona.edu>, com-priv@psi.comMime-Version: 1.0 In the discussion of whether the NII advisory council relatedcorrespondence would be available via FOIA, I think we can look at whathappened when Hillary Rodham Clinton tried to keep the deliberations ofher health care advisory committee secret. Bottom line was, she wasn'table to. I think Steve and Jamie both have valid points. Steve is certainly righton when he outlined how the FNC is set up and the guidelines it uses,even when there is a closed meeting. As he said, if one wants to findout what happened, they can get ahold of the minutes. However, Jamie also has a point when he's talking about the differencebetween private email between members of the AC *not* related to the NII.That correspondence can certainly go through other channels, not simplyout to some NII-AC-LIST. I also wouldn't be worried about anyone involved trying to "get around"FOIA requirements. If the AC follows the lead of Steve Wolff, there'scertainly nothing to worry about. Steve has set an outstanding exampleof a government official complying with FOIA requests, especially as theyrelate to electronic mail. He should get an award for that effort. Brock MeeksreporterCommunications Daily WT02-B12-22IA087-000625-B043-198http://res2.resnet.upenn.edu:80/cis590/reading.053.html 130.91.195.242 19970122060643 text/html 5004HTTP/1.0 200 OKDate: Wed, 22 Jan 1997 06:06:44 GMTServer: Apache/1.1.1Content-type: text/htmlContent-length: 4833Last-modified: Tue, 22 Nov 1994 06:31:37 GMTNotes from RSA Data Security Conference To: farber@central.cis.upenn.eduSubject: For Interesting PeopleDate: Tue, 18 Jan 94 16:57:23 -0500From: Stephen Walker <steve@tis.com> Notes from RSA Data Security Conference Stephen Walker Trusted Information Systems January 18, 1994 Over 400 people attended the third RSA Data Security Conferenceon January 12-14, 1994, at the Hotel Sofitel in Redwood City, CA. William Murray, of Deloitte & Touche, gave the keynotepresentation in which he described the major developments incryptography in this century. He stated that cryptography is nowcheap enough to be used by default but warned that the quantityof information that could benefit from use of cryptography isgoing up faster than its use. He cited "ambivalent governmentpolicies" as the main impediment to wide use of cryptography butadded that these issues will not be decided by government but bythe public, as individuals buy specific cryptographic products. Over a dozen major companies announced a wide array of productsthat are now or will soon be available using RSA technologies.Among them were Hewlett-Packard, National Semiconductor, Apple,McCaw Cellular, and Novell. A Cryptographers Expert Panel headed by Peter Neumann came to thetentative conclusion that the best follow-on to the DataEncryption Standard (DES) may well be triple DES (in the encrypt-decrypt-encrypt mode). There would be no need to search for a newstandard. The fifteen or more years of confidence buildinganalysis already applied to DES would be immediately applicable.The extra cost of running triple DES could be recovered inimproved hardware speeds. Following a question as to how to provide a means for recoveringencrypted data for which the key has been lost (the locksmithfunction), it was pointed out that there is a big differencebetween encryption used for data communications and that used fordata storage. The assumption is that encrypted messages intransit have little value since if they are lost they can be re-sent. Encrypted data in storage, on the other hand, has greatvalue. The cryptographic community has not spent enough effortdeveloping techniques for these storage issues. This is a majortopic that cryptographers will have to tackle in the future. In a Government panel, Lynn McNulty of NIST summarized the statusof NIST's standards efforts: - DES recertified for five years, - FIPS 140-1, Security Requirements for Cryptographic Modules has been approved, and - Nothing to say on the Digital Signature Standard (DSS) or the Escrowed Encryption Standard, but perhaps something will happen soon. Bruce Heiman, of Preston Gates, summarized the industryobjections to the present government export rules, and WhitDiffie, standing in for Clint Brooks, of NSA, who could notattend, gave a briefing on what he thought Clint might havewanted to say concerning the national security side of thecryptography argument. Dave Sobel, of CPSR, in discussing the Clipper initiative, statedthat he did not believe that Congress intended in the ComputerSecurity Act of 1987 that NIST put forth a classified encryptionalgorithm for protecting the public's unclassifiedcommunications. He also brought out several Constitutionalarguments regarding Clipper. As a first amendment issue, he citedproblems with any government activity that attempts to regulatehow we communicate. As the fourth amendment issue, in answeringthe question "Can the government seek to ensure its ability tocollect information by imposing new restrictions such as keyescrow?", he stated a basic premise of the Bill of Rights that,to protect average citizens from an overzealous government, "lawenforcement is supposed to be difficult." As a fifth amendmentissue regarding the prohibition against self incrimination, hestated that key escrow amounts to a surrender of this right inorder to communicate. Steve Kent, of BBN, described the ACM-sponsored CryptographicPolicy Panel, which started last fall and will issue a report"mid-year." The panel will not issue recommendations but,rather, a better articulation of the issues, attempting toseparate facts, opinions, and future speculations. Rumors flowed freely that "within two weeks" the government wouldproceed with the licensing of the Digital Signature Algorithm toPublic Key Partners. This would result in the promulgation ofthe DSS inspite of overwhelming public comment opposing it. Rumors aside, it is clear from this conference that a substantialportion of the market place has decided to use RSA-based publickey cryptography in a wide spectrum of generally availableproducts. WT02-B12-23IA087-000625-B043-230http://res2.resnet.upenn.edu:80/cis590/reading.054.html 130.91.195.242 19970122060700 text/html 21730HTTP/1.0 200 OKDate: Wed, 22 Jan 1997 06:06:59 GMTServer: Apache/1.1.1Content-type: text/htmlContent-length: 21558Last-modified: Tue, 22 Nov 1994 06:31:39 GMTCOMPETITION POLICY: UNLOCKING THE NATIONAL INFORMATION INFRASTRUCTURE. -- Council on Competitiveness [minor editing and formating was done to make the material readable viaemail. Errors are thus mine .. djf] Professor Farber: Erich Bloch, whom I work with at the Council on Competitiveness, thoughtyour "Interesting People" bulletin board might be interested in theCouncil's recently released report, COMPETITION POLICY: UNLOCKING THENATIONAL INFORMATION INFRASTRUCTURE. We would greatly appreciate it ifyou could make the following Press Release, Forward and Executive Summaryavailable to them. Thank you in advance for your help! Best regards, Amy E. Petri PRESS RELEASE CONTACT: STEPHANIE SCHOUMACHER(202) 785-3990 COMPETITION POLICY CONSENSUS FORGED BY COMPETITORS The Council on Competitiveness has released a report on competition policythat includes an unprecedented consensus among AT&T, regional bellcompanies, and the full range of information infrastructure providers. Thereport, Competition Policy: Unlocking the National InformationInfrastructure, is the second in a series of policy reports of theCouncil's 21st century information infrastructure project chaired by JohnYoung, former CEO of Hewlett- Packard and Charles Vest, president of theMassachusetts Institute of Technology. "This report marks the first timethat representatives from long distance and local telephone companies,alternative access providers, cable companies, utilities, informationcompanies, users, academic institutions, labor unions and public interestgroups have agreed on the need for full competition in the communicationsmarket and hammered out a transition framework to get us there," said PaulAllaire the new chairman of the Council on Competitiveness and CEO of XeroxCorporation. "By stimulating competition at home, consumers will benefitfrom greater choice, lower prices, and enhanced services. Moreover,U.S.-based firms will gain a competitive edge in world markets." The essential framework contained in this report applies to all providersand addresses four interlocking issues. Recommendations reflect consensuson the following: 1. Agreement by all providers, including the local telephone companies, toprovide access to their essential services. This "unbundling" of serviceswill speed the competitive interconnection and interoperability that areessential to developing a national information infrastructure. 2. Agreement to reduce the debate about entry into restricted lines ofbusiness to two options. Everyone agrees that essential facilities mustfirst be opened to competitors and regulatory safeguards must be in placeto prevent predatory pricing and cross-subsidies. They differ only onwhether competitors must also gain a predetermined share of the incumbentprovider's market before restrictions to enter new lines of business arelifted. 3. Agreement to provide dominant providers more pricing freedom (withcertain cap andfloor limits during the transition). This agreement will provideincentives for dominantproviders to lower costs, a key to ensuring universal service. 4. Agreement that support for universal service should be shared byproviders of essential services, and directed to users. Also, that anyuniversal service program should include those services that are necessaryto maintaining U.S. competitiveness. "It is remarkable that we could agree that in the end, everyone should beable to enter all lines of business," said John Young. "In doing so, theprivate sector has provided some fundamental guidelines for theAdministration and Congress as they develop national policy in thiscritical area." The Council on Competitiveness is a coalition of chief executives fromleading businesses, presidents of universities and presidents of laborunions whose mission is to improve the competitiveness of U.S. industryand its workers in a global marketplace. #### The following statement by the Vice President was released by the WhiteHouse on December 16, 1993: "If America is to develop a world class information superhighway, we mustpromote healthy competition at home -- competition that enhances consumerbenefits, stimulates the development of new products and services,unleashes new technologies, and gives U.S. based firms an edge in worldmarkets. The Council's report, Competition Policy: Unlocking the NationalInformation Infrastructure, outlines a policy framework designed to do justthat. We will consider it carefully as we develop our legislative packagein this area."#### The report can be ordered from the Council on Competitiveness at a cost ofUS $25.00 plus shipping and handling (domestic) and $3.50 (overseas). To order (please send order and check or money order) or for moreinformation please write: Publications OfficeCouncil on Competitiveness900 17th Street, NW -- Suite 1050Washington, DC 20006(202)785-3990(202)785-3998 COMPETITION POLICY: UNLOCKING THE NATIONAL INFORMATIONINFRASTRUCTURE FOREWORD America s information infrastructure is evolving faster than anyonethought possible. Although the Clinton Administration came to officepromising to accelerate deployment of the information superhighway, theprivate sector has been the real driving force behind progress. The past few months have witnessed a string of proposed mergers andacquisitions. U.S. West announced that it would acquire 25 percent ofTime Warner, the nation s second largest cable network. AT&T announcedplans to acquire McCaw Cellular Communications, America s largest cellulartelephone company. Bell Atlantic announced its decision to merge withTele-Communications, Inc. (TCI), America s largest cable corporation.Bell South decided to link with Prime Management s cable systems.Southwestern Bell decided to purchase cable systems from HauserCommunications. NYNEX announced its intention to invest in Viacom. These new alliances and others are fundamentally reshaping the informationand communications industry. Until recently, cable, telephone,broadcasting, computing, publishing, wireless communications and utilitieswere viewed as separate businesses. The steady push of market forces andthe rush of technology are rapidly breaking down the walls separating thesemarkets. Despite this market convergence, much of America s regulatory frameworkremains rooted in yesterday s notion of distinct and separate businesses.Many government officials have greeted with skepticism the announcementsabout major mergers and acquisitions. While the government s concernsabout equal access and fair prices are serious ones that must be addressedcarefully, they must be balanced against efforts to speed the realizationof the new national information infrastructure. Today s market shifts represent the beginnings of the new informationnetwork that will be at the center of tomorrow s economy. Just as nomanager or analyst can accurately predict the contours of thisinfrastructure, neither can any government official. If the governmentinsists on overly restrictive regulations, America s ability to create thenew information infrastructure will be in jeopardy. What the urgency ofthe marketplace and the unrelenting onrush of technology require are fewerregulations, not more. This interim policy report is the Council s attempt to understand thecompetitive pressures driving the evolution of the U.S.-basedcommunications industry. In it, we offer the best-thinking of a broadcross-section of the private sector on this complex and at times highlycontentious set of issues. Many diverse industry groups, as well asacademia and labor, helped forge the consensus represented in these pages. We recognize that we do not have all of the answers and that we do notaddress all the concerns surrounding the evolution of the informationinfrastructure. Given the complexity of the issue and the competinginterests involved, not everyone agrees on every detail of every point inthis report. What we offer is a consensus framework -- one that lays thefoundation for the transition to a fully competitive U.S. communicationsmarket that will drive America s economic performance and standard ofliving in the future. We hope that this framework will help inform the public policy debate, andwe stand ready to do whatever we can to assist that process. Paul AllaireCouncil ChairmanChairman and Chief Executive OfficerXerox George M. C. FisherFormer Council ChairmanChairman and Chief Executive OfficerEastman Kodak Company Charles M. VestProject Co-ChairmanPresidentMassachusetts Institute of Technology John A. YoungProject Co-ChairmanFormer President and Chief Executive OfficerHewlett-Packard Company Thomas E. EverhartCouncil Vice ChairmanPresidentCalifornia Institute of Technology . Henry B. SchachtCouncil Vice ChairmanChairman and Chief Executive OfficerCummins Engine Company, Inc Jack SheinkmanCouncil Vice ChairmanPresidentAmalgamted Clothing and Textile Workers Union, AFL-CIO, CLC EXECUTIVE SUMMARY In its report, Vision for a 21st Century Information Infrastructure, theCouncil articulated a vision for a new national information infrastructure(NII): The information infrastructure will enable all Americans to accessinformation and communicate with each other easily, reliably, securely andcost effectively in any medium -- voice, data, image or video -- anytime,anywhere. This capability will enhance the productivity of work and leadto dramatic improvements in social services, education and entertainment. This report expands on that vision, focusing on the need for a competitivecommunications environment as a prerequisite for a versatile informationinfrastructure. By creating an environment in which U.S.-based firms arepermitted to compete and encouraged to take advantage of the informationinfrastructure, we can sharpen America's performance in world markets andadvance national interests. The efficiencies that result from competitionwill induce cost reductions and lower prices, increase demand for servicesand products, and expand output of new applications, all to the benefit ofthe consumer. The market is already responding. The recent spate ofplanned strategic alliances among the telephone, cable, wireless andentertainment companies, coupled with the emergence of small local exchangecompetitors, indicates that a dramatic and volatile restructuring of thecommunications industry is beginning and will continue for some time. Noone can foresee the outcome. But the driving forces are becoming clear. There is no question that the nation is in a profound economic transition. As often happens during periods of transition, however, the government isstruggling to keep pace with market developments. Laws, regulations andgoverning processes, created under different market conditions and socialenvironments, should be adapted to new circumstances. Competition iscolliding with the regulated monopoly framework in the local cable andtelecommunications services markets. The NII will only develop fully ifcompetition can flourish at all levels of network operations and serviceprovision. It is imperative that industry and government focus on removingobstacles to competition in the immediate future. This report offers a framework for developing the transitional rulesrequired to ensure that a competitive communications environment emerges.It applies to all U.S.-based providers -- long distance and local telephonecompanies, cable companies, alternative access providers and powercompanies. It is particularly relevant to the local services market, wherethe regulated monopoly framework is colliding with competition. While theissues this framework confronts are well known, they have been dealt within a piece-meal fashion. This approach has contributed to today sfragmented regulatory and policy structure. The Council believes theseissues are inextricably linked and should be addressed concurrently toassure a coherent transition to a fully competitive marketplace. FINDINGS 1) TECHNOLOGY AND MARKETS ARE FUSING. New technologies and the prospect of an explosion in "tele-information"applications are forcing a restructuring of the communications industry.Companies that have traditionally seen themselves in fully separate andunrelated lines of business are finding themselves in direct competitionwith each other. At the same time, companies and industries are merging.The term "telecommunications" has become too limiting to describe anindustry that is being redefined to include the creation, processing,storage and delivery of voice, data, images and video. The broader terms"communications" and "information" are more accurate descriptors. Alongwith this redefinition, the long held tenet that the local communicationsmarket is a natural monopoly is eroding. The very definition of a "localexchange" may be obsolete. Technologies are offering the potential forchoice, and entrepreneurial firms are capitalizing on this potential inniche markets. 2) REGULATIONS AND POLICIES ARE FRAGMENTED. Current government policy views components of the communications sector asbusinesses restricted to traditional markets, despite the fact thattechnology is drawing them into new ones. Regulatory oversight and policydevelopment are fragmented. They are dispersed among local regulatorybodies, fifty-two state public utility commissions, Congress, the FederalCommunications Commission (FCC), the Executive Branch (NationalTelecommunications and Information Administration (NTIA), Office of Scienceand Technology Policy (OSTP) and other Administration agencies), and thecourts. 3) IT IS IMPOSSIBLE TO PREDICT ACCURATELY THE FUTURE PATH OF THE MARKET ORTECHNOLOGY. The current market is fluid. New companies and newtechnologies are emerging at a breathtaking pace. No one is certain whichtechnologies will succeed, which of the proposed mergers will work, orwhich products and services the market will demand. 4) GIVEN THE DRAMATIC RESTRUCTURING UNDERWAY, THE KEY ISSUE IS NOTWHETHER, BUT WHEN AND UNDER WHAT CONDITIONS, TO PERMIT FULL COMPETITION INALL MARKETS. Ultimately, any vendor should be able to offer anycommunications service to anyone anywhere using any technology. In thepresent market environment, regulated monopolies dominate certain segments,and state and federal regulations restrict companies from offering certainservices. Given this fact, government officials should recognize the needfor less regulation, not more, so that the market can proceed. RECOMMENDATIONS As policy makers develop the regulations and policies required to make thetransition to a fully competitive market, they must ensure that the processis evenhanded. The policy context should be industry neutral andtechnology neutral. Policy makers should focus on ensuring that theconsumer has a choice of providers, products and services at reasonableprices. Users and providers should be able to respond to marketopportunities without undue regulatory burden. Marketplace rules shouldpermit competition and encourage technology investment. Essentialregulation that ensures fairness should be encouraged while excessiveregulation that stifles innovation should be eliminated. The Council has four recommendations for policy makers and U.S.-basedcompanies that provide a core framework for developing the transition rulesrequired to move to a fully competitive market. These recommendationsshould be addressed concurrently since the issues they concern areinterlocking. 1) ENSURE INTERCONNECTION AND INTEROPERABILITY AMONG NETWORKS. Allproviders should be able to combine their facilities in a building-blockapproach. Elements of local distribution facilities, switch, transport andancillary services should be unbundled and priced separately. Operationalfeatures, such as switching elements, transport elements, signallingsystems and databases, that allow the network and its users to find eachother, to be found and to connect, are "essential facilities." Access tothese facilities is key to increased competition. 2) REMOVE BARRIERS TO MARKET ENTRY. This recommendation applies both tonew U.S.-based entrants into an incumbent provider s market and toincumbent providers into currently restricted lines of business. Thisincludes telephone companies entering the cable market, cable companiesentering the telephone market, new providers (including power companies)entering the local services market, local service providers entering thelong distance market, etc. Federal and state policies should be aligned topermit competition in all segments of the communications market. There is strong disagreement about which is the best policy path to pursuewith respect to incumbent entry into currently restricted lines ofbusiness. Out of the multitude of proposals, the Council has narrowed thedebate to two options. They differ on whether competitors should gain apredetermined share of the incumbent provider s market before the incumbentprovider is permitted to enter other lines of business. Option OnePermit a dominant provider, whether cable, telephone, power orsome other company, to enter other lines of business (including longdistance, manufacturing and/or video programming) as soon as: 1) essentialfacilities are open to all providers and 2) regulatory safeguards are inplace to prevent anti-competitive and monopolistic behavior during thetransition to a fully competitive market. Option Two Permit a dominant provider, whether cable, telephone, power or some othercompany, to enter other lines of business (including long distance,manufacturing and/or video programming) as soon as: 1) essential facilitiesare open to all providers, 2) regulatory safeguards are in place to preventanti-competitive and monopolistic behavior during the transition to a fullycompetitive market and 3) competitors have achieved a predetermined shareof the dominant provider s market. 3) LET PRICES REFLECT COMPETITIVE MARKET CONDITIONS. Transitionalregulations must balance protection against monopoly pricing abuse andcross-subsidies with the regulated incumbent provider s desire to respondto competition. Currently, incumbent providers have limited ability toadjust their prices to respond to new competitors. As competitionincreases, they should be granted greater pricing flexibility. During thetransition phase, there should be price ceilings to protect customers fromexcessive rate increases and price floors to protect nascent competition.As incumbent providers are permitted to enter other businesses, safeguardsshould be adopted to prevent cross-subsidization. 4) PROTECT UNIVERSAL SERVICE AND SHARE ITS COSTS. As competition emerges,adjustments must be made to ensure universal service. Where required,assistance should be directed to end-users so that they can purchaseservices from competitive providers. Providers of essential servicesshould equitably share the responsibility of contributing this support.Policies that encourage competition should result in providers reducingtheir costs. As lower costs are translated into lower prices, fewercustomers will require support mechanisms for essential services. Thisreport does not attempt to redefine universal service nor does it discusswhether all Americans should have access to some base level of educationalor cultural services distributed over the information infrastructure. Webelieve, however, that the definition of essential services should bereviewed and periodically updated. If new services have emerged that areessential to U.S. competitiveness, they should be considered for inclusionin the universal service program. ABOUT THE COUNCIL Founded in 1986, the Council on Competititveness is a nonprofit,nonpartisan organization of chief executives from business, highereducation and organized labor who have joined together to pursue a singleoverriding goal: to improve the ability of American companies and workersto compete more effectively in world markets, while maintaining a risingstandard of living at home. To build consensus within the public- and private-sectors on the actionsneeded to help Americans compete, the Council pursues a three-part agenda:increase public awareness of the breadth and severity of America's economicproblems; mobilize the political will required to set the United States ona positive economic course; and assist in the development of specificpublic policies and private-sector initiatives. To that end, the Councilfocuses on issues in the areas of fiscal policy, science and technology,international economics and trade, and human resources. The Council is governed by an executive committee and draws on theresources of its national affiliates -- over forty trade associations,professional societies and research organizations -- to help analyze issuesand develop consensus. The Council is privately supported throughcontributions from its members, foundations and other grantinginstitutions. WT02-B12-24IA087-000625-B043-282http://res2.resnet.upenn.edu:80/cis590/reading.055.html 130.91.195.242 19970122060844 text/html 3489HTTP/1.0 200 OKDate: Wed, 22 Jan 1997 06:08:41 GMTServer: Apache/1.1.1Content-type: text/htmlContent-length: 3318Last-modified: Tue, 22 Nov 1994 06:31:40 GMTCylex: the new cyber-lexicon -- a bit of New Year cheer From: Mike Godwin <mnemonic@eff.org>To: farber@central.cis.upenn.edu (David Farber)Date: Wed, 29 Dec 1993 09:31:36 -0500 (EST) This is the best paper produced in the class I taught at the School ofVisual Arts this fall. The student's name is Antoinette LaFarge."Cylex" is reprinted with permission. Feel free to use the words. --------- DDB2030.12.17.20:20:21GMTHomebase: ~U.S. Government Publishing Office.Download to: Mike Godwin, Electronic Frontier Foundation.Status: digsig not verified--no-interrupt.Checklist: autolott yesQupdate yes--images no--dtp formatno--search yes (art, pub, law)--update editor: AntoinetteLaFarge.Filename: *Cylex*File begin: Note on usage: *boldface* type indicates word being defined;_italic_ type indicates word defined elsewhere in Cylex or usedas an example. *Antilex*: (n) a variant on _Cylex_ published by a shiftingcoalition of _e-pubs_ who feel that Cylex is often bothinaccurate (because slanted toward the government viewpoint)and out of date. *autolott*: (n) short for *auto*mated *lott*ery, this is thestandard form of lottery now run by most major companies, thefederal government, and all state governments except Utah.Most digital transfers now automatically cause thedestination/recipient to be encoded and dropped into a lotterypool, from which prize drawings are then made. This form oflottery, in which one does not have to actively play to win, is anoutgrowth of the credit-card pools of the 1990s. Autolotts weredevised in part as a corporate marketing method to get aroundthe highly successful _doorman_ programs. *black bank*: (n) an underground institution for generating anddistributing digital signatures outside the government-approvedthree-bank scheme. Black banks tend to be small and to go inand out of business quickly as they are usually unable to sustainthe integrity of their security schemes and thus can lose all theirbusiness literally overnight. Although not technically illegal,they cater to an amorphous and shifting population of criminalsand _clans_ who for one reason or another don't trust theintegrity of the national digital-signature scheme. The Russian,South African, Korean, and Caribbean mafias are all known torun their own black banks. *bureaucrat*: (n) obsolete; see _hulk_. *bodyguard*: (n) general term covering localized software thatsearches out and destroys viruses, worms, trojan horses,scavengers, and other net wildlife. The U.S. government hasimposed severe restrictions on bodyguards to ensure that theydon't run loose in the net. (See also: _cannibal, hulk._) *borden*: (n) any nondigital object that figures as evidence ina legal proceeding, especially under criminal law. Since mostlegal proceedings are now carried out entirely in cyberspace,lawyers have largely lost the ability to sway juries by showingthem physical evidence of crimes. In cases where such evidenceis important, prosecutors (rarely defense lawyers) often pursuestrategies to get the case transferred from cyberspace to real-space courtrooms. Hence (v) _to borden_ means to obtain ortry to obtain such a change of venue. The word derivesindirectly from the b WT02-B12-25IA087-000625-B043-320http://res2.resnet.upenn.edu:80/cis590/reading.056.html 130.91.195.242 19970122060905 text/html 10984HTTP/1.0 200 OKDate: Wed, 22 Jan 1997 06:09:06 GMTServer: Apache/1.1.1Content-type: text/htmlContent-length: 10812Last-modified: Tue, 22 Nov 1994 06:31:40 GMTDEF CON ][ Initial Announcement Updated Last : 1.16.1994 xxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxx xx DEF CON ][ Convention Initial AnnouncementxxxxxxxXXXXxxxxxxxxxxxxxxx xx DEF CON ][ Convention Initial AnnouncementxxxxxxXXXXXXxxxxxx x x DEF CON ][ Convention Initial AnnouncementxxxxxXXXXXXXXxxxxxxx x DEF CON ][ Convention Initial AnnouncementxxxxXXXXXXXXXXxxxx xxxxxxxxx DEF CON ][ Convention Initial AnnouncementxxxXXXXXXXXXXXXxxxxxxxxxx x DEF CON ][ Convention Initial AnnouncementxxXXXXXXXXXXXXXXxxxxxx xx x DEF CON ][ Convention Initial AnnouncementxxxXXXXXXXXXXXXxxxxxxxx DEF CON ][ Convention Initial AnnouncementxxxxXXXXXXXXXXxxxxxxxx x xx DEF CON ][ Convention Initial AnnouncementxxxxxXXXXXXXXxxxxxxxxxx xx x DEF CON ][ Convention Initial AnnouncementxxxxxxXXXXXXxxxxxxxxx x DEF CON ][ Convention Initial AnnouncementxxxxxxxXXXXxxxxxxxxxxxxxxx DEF CON ][ Convention Initial Announcementxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxx DEF CON ][ Convention Initial Announcement READ & DISTRIBUTE & READ & DISTRIBUTE & READ & DISTRIBUTE & READ & DISTRIBUTE ============================================================================= What's this? This is the initial announcement and invitation to DEF CON ][,a convention for the "underground" elements of the computer culture. We tryto target the (Fill in your favorite word here): Hackers, Phreaks, Hammies,Virii coders, programmers, crackers, Cyberpunk Wannabees, Civil LibertiesGroups, CypherPunks, Futurists, Artists, Etc.. WHO: You know who you are, you shady characters.WHAT: A convention for you to meet, party, and listen to some speeches that you would normally never hear.WHEN: July 22, 23, 24 - 1994WHERE: Las Vegas, Nevada @ The Sahara Hotel So you heard about DEF CON I, and want to hit part ][? You heard about theparties, the info discussed, the bizarre atmosphere of Las Vegas and want tocheck it out in person? Load up your laptop muffy, we're heading to Vegas! Here is what Three out of Three people said about last years convention: "DEF CON I, last week in Las Vegas, was both the strangest and the bestcomputer event I have attended in years." -- Robert X. Cringely, Info World "Toto, I don't think we're at COMDEX anymore." -- Coderipper, Gray Areas "Soon we were at the hotel going through the spoils: fax sheets, catalogs,bits of torn paper, a few McDonald's Dino-Meals and lots of coffee grounds.The documents disappeared in seconds." -- Gillian Newson, New Media Magazine DESCRIPTION: Last year we held DEF CON I, which went over great, and this year we areplanning on being bigger and better. We have expanded the number ofspeakers to included midnight tech talks and additional speaking on Sunday.We attempt to bring the underground into contact with "legitimate" speakers.Sure it's great to meet and party with fellow hackers, but besides that wetry to provide information and speakers in a forum that can't be found atother conferences. While there is an initial concern that this is just another excuse for theevil hackers to party and wreak havok, it's just not the case. People cometo DEF CON for information and for making contacts. We strive to distinguishthis convention from others in that respect. WHAT'S NEW THIS YEAR: This year will be much larger and more organized than last year. We have amuch larger meeting area, and have better name recognition. Because of thiswe will have more speakers on broader topics. Expect speaking to runSaturday and Sunday, ending around 5 p.m. Some of the new things expectedinclude: o An INet connection with sixteen ports will be there, _BUT_ will only provide serial connections because terminals are too hard to ship. So bring a laptop with communications software if you want to connect to the network. Thanks to cyberlink communications for the connection. o There will be door prizes, and someone has already donated a Cell Phone to give away. o Dr. Ludwig will present his virii creation awards on Sunday. o A bigger and better "Spot The Fed" contest, which means more shirts to give away. o More room, we should have tables set up for information distribution. If you have anything you want distributed, feel free to leave it on the designated tables. Yes, this year there will be a true 24 hour convention space. o A 24 hour movie / video suite where we will be playing all type of stuff. VHS Format. Mail me with suggested titals to show, or bring your own. o Midnight Tech Talks on Friday and Saturday night to cover the more technical topics and leave the days free for more general discussions. WHO IS SPEAKING: I was going to run a list of the current speakers we have lined up, but atthis point things are still fluid. In a few months when the speakers listis more solidified I will release it. I'll name the poeple who havecommitted to attending in the next announcement. Trust me. WHERE THIS THING IS: It's in Las Vegas, the town that never sleeps. Really. There are no clocksanywhere in an attempt to lull you into believing the day never ends. Talkabout virtual reality, this place fits the bill with no clunky hardware. Ifyou have a buzz you may never know the difference. It will be at the SaharaHotel. Intel as follows: The Sahara Hotel: 1.800.634.6078 Room Rates: Single/Double $55, Tripple $65, Suite $120 (Usually $200) + 8% tax Transportation: Shuttles from the airport for cheap NOTE: Please make it clear you are registering for the DEF CON ][ convention to get the room rates. Our convention space price is based on how many people register. Register under a false name if it makes you feel better, 'cuz the more that register the better for my pocket book. No one under 21 can rent a room by themselves, so get your buddy who is 21 to rent for you and crash out. Don't let the hotel people get their hands on your baggage, or there is a mandatory $3 group baggage fee. Vegas has killer unions. OTHER STUFF: If you check out Wired like 1.5 or 1.6 there was a blurb about the newLuxor hotel with it's total VR experience. It looks like the first true VRride / experience for a group of people, it seats eight. Intense. A friendwas just over there, and tested out the various rides. Not to be outdonethe new MGM grand (Largest hotel in the world) has a ride called the R360which is basically a gyroscope they trap you into with goggles. We shouldget a group together and make a mass trek over there and check it out.If enough people are interested I'll call and see if we can book a timeto reserve space for a bunch of us. Both are within walking distance. I'll whip up a list of stuff that's cool to check out in town there so if forsome reason you leave the awesome conference you can take in some unrealsites in the city of true capitalism. MEDIA: Some of the places you can look for information from last year include: New Media Magazine, September 1993InfoWorld, 7-12-1993 and also 7-19-1993 by Robert X. CringelyGray Areas Magazine, Vol 2, #3 (Fall 1993)Unix World, ???Phrack #44 COST: Cost is whatever you pay for a hotel room split however many ways, plus$15 if you preregister, or $30 at the door. This gets you a nifty 24 bitcolor name tag (We're gonna make it niftier this year) and your foot in thedoor. There are fast food places all over, and there is alcohol all overthe place but the trick is to get it during a happy hour for maximumcheapness. ============================================================================ UPDATE: I wanted to thank whoever sent in the anonymous fax to Wired thatwas printed in issue 1.5 Cool deal! Dan Farmer posted his paper on unix security on the net, and I've put acopy of it on the ftp site if you want to grab it and take a look. It'scalled "zen.txt" I've recieved more scanned images from last year, and they will be put onthe ftp site. ============================================================================= FOR MORE INFORMATION: For InterNet users, there is a DEF CON anonymous ftp site at cyberspace.comin /pub/defcon. There are digitized pictures, digitized speeches and textfiles with the latest up to date info available. For email users, you can email dtangent@defcon.org for more information. For non-net people call: The Alliance BBS [612] 251.8596 16.8k speed Dual Standard Open Access. 24 Hours. Users get full access on 1st call. iirg disto site, Syncro Net, text files galore. Sysop: Metal Head (The huge guy from last year) A DEF CON directory is maintained here For Snail Mail send to: DEF CON, 2709 E. Madison Street Suite #102, Seattle, WA, 98112 For Voice Mail and maybe a human (me), 0-700-TANGENT on an AT&T phone. A DEF CON Mailing list is maintained, and the latest announcements are mailedautomatically to you. If you wish to be added to the list just send emailto dtangent@defcon.org. We also maintain a chat mailing list where peoplecan talk to one another and plan rides, talk, whatever. If you request tobe on this list your email address will be shown to everyone, just so youare aware. [Note: We need some good list-serv software for BSD, if anyone knows whereto find some, please e-mail me.] STUFF TO SPEND YOUR MONEY ON: > Tapes of last years speakers (four 90 minute tapes) are available for $20 > DEF CON I tee-shirts (white, large only) with large color logo on the front, and on the back the Fourth Amendment, past and present. This is shirt v 1.1 with no type-o's. These are $20, and sweatshirts are $25. > Pre-Register for next year in advance for $15 and save half. > Make all checks/money orders/etc. out to DEF CON, and mail to the address above. If you have any confidential info to send, use this PGP key to encrypt: -----BEGIN PGP PUBLIC KEY BLOCK-----Version: 2.3 mQCrAiyI6OcAAAEE8Mh1YApQOOfCZ8YGQ9BxrRNMbK8rP8xpFCm4W7S6Nqu4UhpodLfIfb/kEWDyLreM6ers4eEP6odZALTRvFdsoBGeAx0LUrbFhImxqtRsejMufWNfuZ9PtGD1yEtxwqh4CxxC8glNA9AFXBpjgAZ7eFvtOREYjYO6TH9sOdZSa8ahW7YQhXatVxhlQqve99fY2J83D5z35rGddDV5azd9AAUTtCZUaGUgRGFyayBUYW5nZW50IDxkdGFuZ2VudEBkZWZjb24ub3JnPg===ko7s-----END PGP PUBLIC KEY BLOCK----- The next announcement will have more updated information. I'll hold offon naming the speakers unless they commit to attending. It looks to bea great line up. - The Dark Tangent WT02-B12-26IA087-000625-B043-362http://res2.resnet.upenn.edu:80/cis590/reading.057.html 130.91.195.242 19970122060938 text/html 6414HTTP/1.0 200 OKDate: Wed, 22 Jan 1997 06:09:38 GMTServer: Apache/1.1.1Content-type: text/htmlContent-length: 6243Last-modified: Tue, 22 Nov 1994 06:31:41 GMTTHE CLIPPER CHIP: A TECHNICAL SUMMARY (by Dorothy) [for cis590] From: denning@guvax.acc.georgetown.eduNewsgroups: sci.cryptSubject: THE CLIPPER CHIP: A TECHNICAL SUMMARYDate: 19 Apr 93 18:23:27 -0400Organization: Georgetown University The following document summarizes the Clipper Chip, how it is used,how programming of the chip is coupled to key generation and theescrow process, and how law enforcement decrypts communications.Since there has been some speculation on this news group about myown involvement in this project, I'd like to add that I was not inany way involved. I found out about it when the FBI briefed me onThursday evening, April 15. Since then I have spent considerabletime talking with the NSA and FBI to learn more about this, and Iattended the NIST briefing at the Department of Commerce on April 16.The document below is the result of that effort. Dorothy Denning THE CLIPPER CHIP: A TECHNICAL SUMMARY Dorothy Denning April 19, 1993 INTRODUCTION On April 16, the President announced a new initiative that will bringtogether the Federal Government and industry in a voluntary programto provide secure communications while meeting the legitimate needs oflaw enforcement. At the heart of the plan is a new tamper-proof encryptionchip called the "Clipper Chip" together with a split-key approach toescrowing keys. Two escrow agencies are used, and the key parts fromboth are needed to reconstruct a key. CHIP STRUCTURE The Clipper Chip contains a classified 64-bit block encryptionalgorithm called "Skipjack." The algorithm uses 80 bit keys (comparedwith 56 for the DES) and has 32 rounds of scrambling (compared with 16for the DES). It supports all 4 DES modes of operation. Throughput is16 Mbits a second. Each chip includes the following components: the Skipjack encryption algorithm F, an 80-bit family key that is common to all chips N, a 30-bit serial number U, an 80-bit secret key that unlocks all messages encrypted with the chip ENCRYPTING WITH THE CHIP To see how the chip is used, imagine that it is embedded in the AT&Ttelephone security device (as it will be). Suppose I call someone andwe both have such a device. After pushing a button to start a secureconversation, my security device will negotiate a session key K withthe device at the other end (in general, any method of key exchange canbe used). The key K and message stream M (i.e., digitized voice) are thenfed into the Clipper Chip to produce two values: E[M; K], the encrypted message stream, and E[E[K; U] + N; F], a law enforcement block. The law enforcement block thus contains the session key K encryptedunder the unit key U concatenated with the serial number N, allencrypted under the family key F. CHIP PROGRAMMING AND ESCROW All Clipper Chips are programmed inside a SCIF (secure computerinformation facility), which is essentially a vault. The SCIF containsa laptop computer and equipment to program the chips. About 300 chipsare programmed during a single session. The SCIF is located atMikotronx. At the beginning of a session, a trusted agent from each of the two keyescrow agencies enters the vault. Agent 1 enters an 80-bit value S1into the laptop and agent 2 enters an 80-bit value S2. These valuesserve as seeds to generate keys for a sequence of serial numbers. To generate the unit key for a serial number N, the 30-bit value N isfirst padded with a fixed 34-bit block to produce a 64-bit block N1.S1 and S2 are then used as keys to triple-encrypt N1, producing a64-bit block R1: R1 = E[D[E[N1; S1]; S2]; S1] . Similarly, N is padded with two other 34-bit blocks to produce N2 andN3, and two additional 64-bit blocks R2 and R3 are computed: R2 = E[D[E[N2; S1]; S2]; S1] R3 = E[D[E[N3; S1]; S2]; S1] . R1, R2, and R3 are then concatenated together, giving 192 bits. Thefirst 80 bits are assigned to U1 and the second 80 bits to U2. Therest are discarded. The unit key U is the XOR of U1 and U2. U1 and U2are the key parts that are separately escrowed with the two escrowagencies. As a sequence of values for U1, U2, and U are generated, they arewritten onto three separate floppy disks. The first disk contains afile for each serial number that contains the corresponding key partU1. The second disk is similar but contains the U2 values. The thirddisk contains the unit keys U. Agent 1 takes the first disk and agent2 takes the second disk. The third disk is used to program the chips.After the chips are programmed, all information is discarded from thevault and the agents leave. The laptop may be destroyed for additionalassurance that no information is left behind. The protocol may be changed slightly so that four people are in theroom instead of two. The first two would provide the seeds S1 and S2,and the second two (the escrow agents) would take the disks back tothe escrow agencies. The escrow agencies have as yet to be determined, but they will notbe the NSA, CIA, FBI, or any other law enforcement agency. One orboth may be independent from the government. LAW ENFORCEMENT USE When law enforcement has been authorized to tap an encrypted line, theywill first take the warrant to the service provider in order to getaccess to the communications line. Let us assume that the tap is inplace and that they have determined that the line is encrypted withClipper. They will first decrypt the law enforcement block with thefamily key F. This gives them E[K; U] + N. They will then take awarrant identifying the chip serial number N to each of the key escrowagents and get back U1 and U2. U1 and U2 are XORed together to producethe unit key U, and E[K; U] is decrypted to get the session key K.Finally the message stream is decrypted. All this will be accomplishedthrough a special black box decoder operated by the FBI. ACKNOWLEDGMENT AND DISTRIBUTION NOTICE. All information is based oninformation provided by NSA, NIST, and the FBI. Permission todistribute this document is granted. - -- ------- End of Forwarded Message WT02-B12-27IA087-000625-B043-400http://res2.resnet.upenn.edu:80/cis590/reading.058.html 130.91.195.242 19970122061004 text/html 4296HTTP/1.0 200 OKDate: Wed, 22 Jan 1997 06:10:04 GMTServer: Apache/1.1.1Content-type: text/htmlContent-length: 4125Last-modified: Tue, 22 Nov 1994 06:31:42 GMTCRYPTOGRAPHY: POLICY AND TECHNOLOGY TRENDS [ no surprises at this level. If anyone wants the text and can not ftp it, please send me a note .. djf] The following report is available by anonymous ftp from ftp.gwu.edu underdirectory /pub/hoffman. The document is stored under the name "cryptpol".It is a NIST-sponsored study. The table of contents and abstract follows here. CRYPTOGRAPHY: POLICY AND TECHNOLOGY TRENDS Lance J. Hoffman Faraz A. Ali Steven L. Heckler Ann Huybrechts December 1, 1993 CONTENTS EXECUTIVE SUMMARY 1. INTRODUCTION 2. TECHNOLOGY 3. MARKET ANALYSIS 4. EXPORT CONTROLS 5. PUBLIC POLICY ISSUES 5.1 EXECUTIVE BRANCH 5.2 CONGRESS 5.3 TRENDS 6. POTENTIAL SCENARIOS EXECUTIVE SUMMARY During the past five years, encryption technology has become easily availableto both individuals and businesses, affording them a level of securityformerly available practically to only military, national security, and lawenforcement agencies. As a result, a debate within the United States aboutthe proper balance between national security and personal freedom has beeninitiated. Law enforcement and national security agencies would like tomaintain tight control over civilian encryption technologies, while industryand individual and privacy rights advocates fight to expand their ability todistribute and use cryptographic products as they please. This report analyzes trends in encryption technology, markets, exportcontrols, and legislation. It identifies five trends which will have astrong influence on cryptography policy in the United States: * The continued expansion of the Internet and the progressive miniaturization of cryptographic hardware combined with the increasing availability and use of strong cryptographic software means that the strongest encryption technologies will continue to become more easily obtainable everywhere in the years ahead. * Additional growth in networked and wireless communication will fuel a strong demand for encryption hardware and software both domestically and abroad, causing the U. S. high-technology industry to be increasingly interested in selling encryption products overseas and in modifying current export restrictions. * Due to the responsibilities and bureaucratic dispositions of key Executive Branch agencies, products using strong encryption algorithms such as DES will continue to face at least some export restrictions, despite the widespread availability of strong encryption products overseas. * The American public is likely to become increasingly concerned about its privacy and about cryptographic policy as a result of the increased amount of personal information available online and the growing number of wireless and networked communications. The development and increasingly widespread use of the National Information Infrastructure will heighten these concerns. * Encryption policy is becoming an important public policy issue that will engage the attention of all branches of government. Congress will become increasingly visible in this debate due to its power of agency oversight and its role in passing laws accommodating the United States' rapid rate of technological change. Agencies will remain very important since they have the implementing and, often, the planning responsibilities. Since individuals and industry have more direct influence over Congress than over most other branches of government, Congress may place somewhat more emphasis on personal freedom than many other government actors. Four potential scenarios are likely: mandatory escrowed encryption, voluntaryescrowed encryption, complete decontrol of encryption, or domestic decontrolwith strict export regulations. WT02-B12-28IA087-000625-B044-34http://res2.resnet.upenn.edu:80/cis590/reading.059.html 130.91.195.242 19970122061046 text/html 1093HTTP/1.0 200 OKDate: Wed, 22 Jan 1997 06:10:36 GMTServer: Apache/1.1.1Content-type: text/htmlContent-length: 923Last-modified: Tue, 22 Nov 1994 06:31:44 GMTRe: CRYPTOGRAPHY: POLICY AND TECHNOLOGY TRENDS [ no surprises at this level. If anyone wants the text and can not ftp it, please send me a note .. djf] Actually, I did see a surprise at this level. > Four potential scenarios are likely: mandatory escrowed encryption, voluntary> escrowed encryption, complete decontrol of encryption, or domestic decontrol> with strict export regulations. In the U.S., domestic use of cryptography is not controlled. Ithasn't been controlled, and there's been absolutely no discussion ofimposing controls, except, of course, as a hypothetical idea needed tomake sense of the Clipper proposal. ("If there's no prohibition ofnon-Clipper cryptography, how can Clipper be successful?") Mandatory escrowed encryption is unlikely but hypothetically possible. "Domestic decontrol" is not a potential scenario because there's nocontrol in place now. WT02-B12-29IA087-000625-B044-108http://res2.resnet.upenn.edu:80/cis590/reading.060.html 130.91.195.242 19970122061145 text/html 63595HTTP/1.0 200 OKDate: Wed, 22 Jan 1997 06:11:41 GMTServer: Apache/1.1.1Content-type: text/htmlContent-length: 63423Last-modified: Tue, 22 Nov 1994 06:31:45 GMTCryptography: Policy and Technology Trends This is a copy of the original article, ftp://ftp.gwu.edu/pub/hoffman/cryptpol. Lance J. Hoffman Faraz A. Ali Steven L. Heckler Ann Huybrechts December 1, 1993 under contract DE-AC05-84OR21400 Work supported in part by the U. S. Department of Energy under contract DE-AC05-84OR21400. The views and opinions of authors expressed herein do notnecessarily state or reflect those of the United States Government or anyagency thereof. CONTENTS EXECUTIVE SUMMARY 1. INTRODUCTION 2. TECHNOLOGY 3. MARKET ANALYSIS 4. EXPORT CONTROLS 5. PUBLIC POLICY ISSUES 5.1 EXECUTIVE BRANCH 5.2 CONGRESS 5.3 TRENDS 6. POTENTIAL SCENARIOS REFERENCES EXECUTIVE SUMMARY During the past five years, encryption technology has become easily availableto both individuals and businesses, affording them a level of securityformerly available practically to only military, national security, and lawenforcement agencies. As a result, a debate within the United States aboutthe proper balance between national security and personal freedom has beeninitiated. Law enforcement and national security agencies would like tomaintain tight control over civilian encryption technologies, while industryand individual and privacy rights advocates fight to expand their ability todistribute and use cryptographic products as they please. This report analyzes trends in encryption technology, markets, exportcontrols, and legislation. It identifies five trends which will have astrong influence on cryptography policy in the United States: * The continued expansion of the Internet and the progressive miniaturization of cryptographic hardware combined with the increasing availability and use of strong cryptographic software means that the strongest encryption technologies will continue to become more easily obtainable everywhere in the years ahead. * Additional growth in networked and wireless communication will fuel a strong demand for encryption hardware and software both domestically and abroad, causing the U. S. high-technology industry to be increasingly interested in selling encryption products overseas and in modifying current export restrictions. * Due to the responsibilities and bureaucratic dispositions of key Executive Branch agencies, products using strong encryption algorithms such as DES will continue to face at least some export restrictions, despite the widespread availability of strong encryption products overseas. * The American public is likely to become increasingly concerned about its privacy and about cryptographic policy as a result of the increased amount of personal information available online and the growing number of wireless and networked communications. The development and increasingly widespread use of the National Information Infrastructure will heighten these concerns. * Encryption policy is becoming an important public policy issue that will engage the attention of all branches of government. Congress will become increasingly visible in this debate due to its power of agency oversight and its role in passing laws accommodating the United States' rapid rate of technological change. Agencies will remain very important since they have the implementing and, often, the planning responsibilities. Since individuals and industry have more direct influence over Congress than over most other branches of government, Congress may place somewhat more emphasis on personal freedom than many other government actors. Four potential scenarios are likely: mandatory escrowed encryption, voluntaryescrowed encryption, complete decontrol of encryption, or domestic decontrolwith strict export regulations. 1. INTRODUCTION During the past five years, encryption technology has become easily availableto both individuals and businesses, affording them a level of securityformerly available practically to only military, national security, and lawenforcement agencies. This availability and the desirability of encryptingsome communications is just starting to be generally recognized by Americanbusiness, and the encryption market is just now beginning to emerge as asignificant part of the computer security market. As a result, a debatewithin the United States about the proper balance of national security, lawenforcement, and personal freedom has been initiated. Law enforcement andnational security agencies would like to maintain tight control over civilianencryption technologies, while industry and individual and privacy rightsadvocates fight to expand their ability to distribute and use cryptographicproducts as they please.1 This report analyzes trends in encryption technology and policy against thisbackdrop. It is one in a trilogy of research papers being prepared under thedirection of Professor James Chandler of the George Washington UniversityNational Law Center and Professor Lance Hoffman of the George WashingtonUniversity School of Engineering and Applied Science, Department ofElectrical Engineering and Computer Science. The papers cover the followingtopics: Issues Regarding the Use of Cryptographic Technologies in the Commercial Sector. Review and analysis of U.S. laws, regulations, and case law pertaining to the use of commercial encryption products for voice and data communications between private parties located within continental U.S. boundaries and with parties in foreign jurisdictions, including examination of all applicable Federal statutes, regulations, executive orders, and other publicly available sources of legally binding directives. Laws or regulations which have been interpreted as mandating the use of cryptographic systems are also included. 2 Foreign Encryption Technology Controls. Identification and analysis of foreign laws and regulations pertaining to the use and control of commercial encryption products for voice and data communications. 3 Cryptography: Trends in Technology and Policy (this paper). Encapsulation of current legislation and analysis of trends based on the above papers with future implications for encryption technology and the use of commercial encryption products. This report is divided into four primary sections: * Technology: future trends in high technology and, more specifically, encryption technology. * Market Analysis: trends in the global market for encryption products, especially DES- and RSA-based products. * Export Controls: trends that may influence the wording and implementation of laws restricting export of encryption products manufactured in the United States. * Public Policy Issues: factors and trends that may determine the future direction of policy decisions and legislation related to cryptography in the United States. After discussions of these topics, four potential scenarios are brieflypresented as possibilities. The authors appreciate the constructive criticism of early drafts and helpfulsuggestions made by Diana Arrington, Donna Berkelhammer, James Chandler,Larry E. Christensen, Dorothy Denning, Bill Franklin, Lou Giles, LamarisGill, Lynn McNulty, Randolph Williams, Doug Miller, Robert Rarog, AllanSuchinsky, and others. Conclusions or opinions in this paper are, however,those solely of the authors and are not necessarily shared by any of theother persons. 2. TECHNOLOGY Commercial encryption technology has evolved since the popular 'DataEncryption Standard' (DES)4 was released to the public in 1977 and willcontinue to do so during the foreseeable future. From a situation then whenonly private key systems were generally in use, public key systems havebecome increasingly popular, especially for authentication. Detailed reviewsof the evolution of cryptography over the last sixteen years or so can befound in [5] and [6]. In particular, hardware encryption devices willbecome smaller, users will use signatures and digests (typically public keysystems7, 8 as well as private key systems), and encryption algorithms willbecome increasingly powerful.9 A cryptographic system generally provides for two functions: encryption anddecryption. The encryption function converts data from 'plaintext,' ornormal text, into 'ciphertext,' which is incomprehensible to the casualobserver. The decryption function reverses this process, restoring the datato its original form. In order to perform either of these functions (i.e. tosend or receive an encrypted message), the system's user must have a unique'key,' a sequence of bits. This key is input to the algorithm tosuccessfully perform the desired conversion. The strength of an encryptionscheme is dependent both upon the strength of its algorithm and, often, onthe length of the keys used for encryption and decryption. Longer keylengths mean more possible keys for an intruder to try and thus imply greatersecurity. Encryption and decryption are generally performed by a computerwith the assistance of hardware and/or software cryptographic products. A trend in encryption products, concurrent with the same trend in computertechnology in general, is towards increasing miniaturization. For example,in 1988 the primary encryption device manufactured by AT&T weighed seventeenpounds. Now, with the advent of PCMCIA (Personal Computer Memory CardIndustry Association) technology, it is widely anticipated that one or moremanufacturers will soon release encryption-capable modems the size of acredit card. Some observers feel a trend is developing from hardware or software/hardwareproducts to software-only products9, 10 because software is cheaper, easier toinstall and use, and takes up less space on a computer than hardware. Othersdisagree, thinking that the future of encryption technology may be inhardware-based products, because they are faster, harder to compromise, andalso take up very little space now because of developments in VLSI (VeryLarge Scale Integrated) chip design .11 There is also a growing use of 'public-key' cryptography systems.9, 13 Undera more traditional single key system, the same key is used both forencrypting and decrypting the message. Although this is reasonably secure,there is a risk that this key will be intercepted when the parties involvedexchange keys. A public key system, however, does not necessitate theexchange of a secret key in the transmission of messages. The senderencrypts the message with the recipient's freely-disclosed, unique publickey. The recipient, in turn, uses her unique private key to decrypt themessage.7 It is also possible to encrypt messages with the sender's privatekey, allowing anyone who knows the sender's public key to decrypt themessage. This process is crucial to creating digital signatures, asdiscussed later. Coincident with the increase in electronic communications is the need towrite one's own signature on both business and personal transactions. At themoment, writing one's own signature requires written messages. Now, however,electronic communications have become so heavily used that many business andpersonal transactions will flourish between parties who never actually seeeach other and physically sign no paper; increasingly, digital signatureswill be used to provide message authentication. Public-key cryptography also enables the user to produce a digital signatureby encrypting with her private key, which, when decrypted with her publickey, provides verification that the message originated from that user.Possible applications for this technology include online financialtransactions and business negotiations. The DES (Data Encryption Standard) and RSA (named after its inventors Rivest,Shamir, and Adelman) algorithms are generally considered two of the strongestalgorithms on the market. DES is a strong, private-key algorithm developedby IBM and made a standard by the United States government in the late1970's. RSA, in turn, is the most popular public-key algorithm.14 It isbased on prime number generation, using the fact that it is very difficult tofactor the product of two large prime numbers. Encryption hardware andsoftware products incorporating DES and RSA are widely available bothdomestically and abroad. Over two million instantiations of RSA have beendistributed in the United States, in almost every case seamlessly embedded bythe vendor. By the end of 1994, this number will rise to five million and bythe end of 1995, it will double.15 PGP (Pretty Good Privacy), 16 which originally incorporated RSA, employspublic-key cryptography and puts together strong algorithms for bothauthentication and message transmission. It now uses a combination of theIDEA (International Data Encryption Algorithm)17 and DES algorithms, is free,and can be obtained over the Internet via anonymous FTP ("file transferprotocol"). DES continues to be an important standard for encrypting data, particularlywithin the U. S. and foreign financial communities. The National Institutesfor Standard and Technology (NIST) is in the process of recertifying DES asa national standard for the next five years. However, the security of DES inthe future is worrisome to some scientists, who contend that advances intechnology will soon make it possible to break DES by 'brute force,' using apowerful computer to try every possible combination of keys until the correctkey is discovered. Indeed, in ten years, DES may no longer be secure.18 In contrast, SKIPJACK, the classified encryption/decryption algorithm used inthe White House's key escrow ('Clipper') initiative, utilizes an 80-bit key,24 bits longer than the 56-bit key used in DES. The interim report of theSKIPJACK evaluators chosen by NSA and NIST came to three conclusions:19 1. Under an assumption that the cost of processing power is halved every eighteen months, it will be 36 years before the cost of breaking SKIPJACK by exhaustive search will be equal to the cost of breaking DES today. Thus, there is no significant risk that SKIPJACK will be broken by exhaustive search in the next 30-40 years. 2. There is no significant risk that SKIPJACK can be broken through a shortcut method of attack. 3. While the internal structure of SKIPJACK must be classified in order to protect law enforcement and national security objectives, the strength of SKIPJACK against a cryptanalytic attack does not depend on the secrecy of the algorithm. Other sources report that many industry representatives believe thatprocessing power doubles about every six months to a year. This would reducethe "safe time" of the first point above to approximately 12-18 years, ratherthan 30-40 years. Other escrow schemes are also available. Micali20 has proposed a multikeyescrow capability in which multiple trusted parties authenticate a messageand/or allow eavesdropping. In a recent unpublished paper, Desmedt, Frankel,and Yung state that threshold cryptosystems (as presented at recent Crypto,Asiacrypt, and Eurocrypt conferences) can have the same functionality as keyescrow schemes without relying on "(expensive) tamperproof devices."21 The increasing use and availability of encryption technology logicallyaccompanies the exponential increase in electronic communications over thepast few years. Commercial use of the Internet has increased dramaticallyduring the past two years, and noncommercial use is on the rise as well.22Indeed, as the New York Times whimsically notes, "Forget Elaine's. Internetis currently the world's most fashionable rendezvous." It touches down in137 countries and links 15 million to 30 million people and is growing by amillion users each month.23 This growth in the popularity of the Internet has created a demand forsecurity. Electronic mail users who desire confidentiality and senderauthentication increasingly are demanding encryption. Some are already usingPGP. Others are starting to use Privacy Enhanced Mail (PEM), an Internetencryption mechanism which was funded by the Advanced Research ProjectsAgency of the Defense Department and has recently been introduced as acommercial product by Trusted Information Systems, Inc. It uses the DESalgorithm for encryption and the RSA algorithm for sender authentication andkey management. Privacy Enhanced Mail also provides support fornonrepudiation; this allows the third-party recipient of a forwarded messageto verify the identity of the message originator (not just the messageforwarder) and to verify if any of the original text has been altered.24, 25Although PEM is not yet widespread, a number of vendors are offering it inconjunction with or integrated into their commercial electronic mailapplications and the European Community has adopted PEM for its PASSWORDproject26 which is part of an attempt to establish a pilot securityinfrastructure for network applications for the European research community.Ironically, a Federally funded chip, Clipper, now is being pushed as asubstitute for this mechanism which has already been paid for largely bygovernment funds and is already in place. The increasing number of electronic funds transfers (EFTs) between banks hasnecessitated the increasing use of message authentication systems, todetermine if a message has originated from its proper source and to determineif there have been any modifications.27 One institution alone, the ClearingHouse Interbank Payment System, currently moves an average of one trilliondollars each day via wire and satellite.28 Strong encryption is necessary toprovide security and authentication for these electronic money transfers (andis also why export restrictions on the DES algorithm have been relaxed forfinancial institutions). Despite these leaps in technology, telefacsimile (fax) transmissions are notyet widely encrypted, even though fax is a widely used form of datacommunications. According to a Datapro 1993 report27, there are only 11encryption devices which accommodate FAX transmissions. It is inconvenientto equip both the sending and receiving machine with compatible encryptionbefore facsimile transmission; the fax protocol has no convenient place forinserting non-fax functions such as encryption; and, until recently, therehas been little awareness of security threats among fax users. However,increasing use of fax transmissions by businesses who wish to keep theircorporate information and finances confidential and an increasing awarenessof the security problems will require the availability of more products whichencrypt fax communications. Credit cards and ATMs are the forerunners of what may soon become 'digitalcash.' On the average, people use less pocket cash every year. Indeed,credit-card purchases are now used for one-tenth of all consumer payments.29David Chaum, head of the Cryptography Group at the Center for Mathematics andComputer Science (CWI) in Amsterdam, has proposed a distributed smart cardsystem which, using public key cryptography, allows anonymous cash embodiedby the cards to be used like real money.28 This is another consequence of theincreasing digitization of financial transactions: 'Ubiquitous digital cashdovetails well with massive electronics networks. It's a pretty sound betthe Internet-today's version of the Net-will be the first place that e-moneywill infiltrate deeply.' 29 One of the consequences of an increasingly electronics-oriented economy willbe the need to provide some amount of anonymity and privacy for users of sucha digital cash system in order to ensure that electronic money remainsanonymous and untraceable, except by the payer and payee. Governmentapproval will be requisite for digital cash to gain full approval by thebusiness community and public, and the government may require access to thesetransaction records to prevent what might otherwise become "perfect crimes."30 In conclusion, the current trends in encryption technology include increasingminiaturization, increasing use of public and private-key cryptography, andthe continued development of increasingly secure algorithms. These trendsare all coincident with the skyrocketing use of the Internet and other typesof electronic communications, particularly electronic money communications. 3. MARKET ANALYSIS The market for encryption products is rapidly growing.27 This market trend isconcomitant with the increasing use of personal computers, fax machines, ande-mail for electronic communications. A large encryption market has alsoarisen because of wireless communications, such as cellular telephones. Thereare already 12 million subscribers to cellular telephone services in theUnited States, and the trend is toward more wireless communications in thefuture. Since they are easier to intercept than wire-based ones, the demandfor encryption technology will increase as concern for data integrityincreases.9 This growth in the market for encryption is occurring both in the UnitedStates and abroad. According to International Resource Development, the U.S. data encryption market reached an estimated $384 million in 1991, and willjump to $946 million by 1996. The total worldwide market, estimated at $695million in 1991, is predicted to grow at a similar rate, reaching $1.8billion by 1996.31 The encryption market is no longer left to United States companies todominate. A Software Publishers Association (SPA) survey shows 264 foreignencryption products and 288 domestic products. These findings contrastsharply with the large global market shares (approximately 75%) enjoyed byUnited States software publishers and hardware manufacturers in other areas.32Of the 264 foreign products, 123 products use DES.36 Citing the relatively stringent export controls enforced by the United Statesgovernment as being one of the main reasons for the increasing market shareof foreign cryptographic products in the global market, many manufacturersare currently lobbying the government to relax these export controls in aneffort to keep United States technology competitive abroad. The SPA claimsthat most software and hardware vendors, aware of these export controls,decide not to manufacture encryption technology because they realize thattheir very best technology cannot be exported. Thus, they claim, there arefar fewer domestic vendors than would otherwise exist.10 Many commentators have speculated on the influence of the escrow encryptionstandard (Clipper) on the global market. Georgetown University ProfessorDorothy Denning, one of the evaluators of the SKIPJACK algorithm used in theproposed key-escrow arrangement and an advocate of its deployment, statesthat if the technology provided by Clipper catches on, it could become the defacto standard in the United States, either the only device or thepredominant device available on the market.33 Marc Rotenberg, director of the Washington office of Computer Professionalsfor Social Responsibility (CPSR), believes that the government would be ableto wield considerable clout in making the key-escrow arrangement a de factostandard on the market.13 He explains that the government can exert enormousauthority on creating, developing, and enforcing technical standards throughthe procurement process. Through this procurement process, the governmentcan require any manufacturer selling phones to the government or governmentcontractors to install the key-escrow arrangement in their phones. AT&Tsupplies an enormous amount of telecommunications services and equipment tothe government, thus making the government one of AT&T's largest customers.In response to the Presidentially approved Clipper initiative, AT&T hasstarted incorporating the key-escrow arrangement in some of its phones, apowerful illustration of the enormous spending power of the government. However, the Federal government does not represent a large percentage of themarket or the revenue for all American companies providing communications orcomputer technology. For example, Bill Ferguson of Semaphore CommunicationsCorp. states that government purchases are less than one percent ofSemaphore's global sales potential. With trade restrictions applied, thegovernment still supplies less than five percent of Semaphore's expectedsales.34 Companies such as Semaphore and many represented by the SPA seeforeign markets as potentially larger sources of income than the U. S.government and therefore want trade restrictions relaxed so that more marketopportunities can open up. As it stands now, many in the encryption industryfear that products using the Clipper chip will be effectively unexportabledue to United States government retention of the keys.35,36 The Clinton administration has stated that use of a key escrow system willnot be mandatory ("The Administration has progressed far enough in its reviewto conclude it will not propose new legislation to limit use of encryptiontechnology.")37. However, if this decision were reversed (perhaps by a lateradministration), there is some danger that the proposed key-escrowarrangement could function as a 'Digital Volstead Act,' the 1920'sprohibition on alcohol. Like Prohibition and the organized crime thatresulted from it, the key-escrow arrangement could encourage contempt for lawenforcement and a complete disregard of the law.35 Doug Miller of the SPAfeels that a black market would almost certainly arise if the United Statesgovernment makes some standard mandatory.10 Given the increased use of computers and networks, a steady increase in themarket for encryption products is likely, as is a continued expansion intothis market by foreign manufacturers. United States hardware and softwareproducers, stymied by relatively stringent export restrictions imposed by theUnited States government and possibly further hindered by the necessity ofaccommodating what may be an unexportable Clipper standard, may find it evenmore difficult to remain competitive players in international markets. 4. EXPORT CONTROLS Existing controls on the export of encryption software and hardware has beena topic of concern for United States manufacturers and vendors. Despite aFebruary 1991 COCOM decision to decontrol all mass market software, includingencryption software, as other commercial, dual-use items, United Statesexport control policy continues to categorize many encryption items as'munitions-related', thereby subjecting them to applicable export laws.38Anyone wishing to export the strongest encryption products is thereforerequired, under the Arms Export Control Act, to obtain individual licensesfrom the Office of Defense Trade Controls at the State Department (thoughsome products of lesser strength are under the control of the CommerceDepartment).39 This has led to a prohibition on export of encryption productsusing the popular and relatively powerful DES algorithm for file and dataencryption (except for financial applications and use by subsidiaries of U.S. companies abroad). Obtaining a license for these restricted encryption products includes areview of the product by the National Security Agency (NSA) to determine itsexportability. According to Allan Suchinsky, Chief of Electronic and CombatSystems Licensing at the Office of Defense Trade Controls at the Departmentof State, this process normally takes between one and six weeks.40 Accordingto some officials and business people, however, a newly developed encryptionproduct can actually take up to ten months to go through the review process,although products employing certain algorithms are either on a list ofautomatically approved items or eligible for 'fast track' consideration. Inthe high-tech arena where product cycles are often measured in months, largemarket shares can be lost due to such delays. Some industry representativeshave complained that the average time it takes to obtain a similar licensefor encryption products outside the United States is much less.34 The market analysis above describes the steadily growing global market forstrong encryption products, one that is potentially worth millions (if notbillions) of dollars. But United States manufacturers believe that theirhands are tied by stringent export laws which, for 'national security'reasons, prohibit the export of encryption products of DES strength orstronger to anyone other than financial institutions. They also believe thatforeign manufacturers in Europe and elsewhere are not similarly restricted,and are free to manufacture and export DES- and RSA-based products. Thisasymmetry in export laws has undesirable consequences for United Statesmanufacturers of encryption products. DES-based products are already being used in encryption products manufacturedin foreign countries including Japan, Russia, Germany, France, Austria, UK,Switzerland, Netherlands, Austria, Australia and Sweden.32 The DES algorithm,in fact, is also freely obtainable via the Internet, as is DES-basedencryption software. The encryption 'genie' would appear to be out of thebottle, and at this point it is not clear to United States companies why theState Department is inhibiting the wide proliferation of DES technology,41 nowthat it is not in a position to prevent it. Along with this, one mustconsider the trends towards implementation of encryption products insoftware, and the miniaturization of encryption hardware. Taken together,these trends indicate that it will become increasingly difficult to enforcethe existing export laws, and tougher to prevent the spread of DES-caliberalgorithms. Despite this, many government officials have continued to speakstrongly in favor of continued restrictions on DES, stating that attemptingto control export of products using the algorithm still prevents asignificant number of international terrorists, criminals, and unfriendlyforeign powers from acquiring advanced encryption technology. As a result,they believe that export restrictions on DES remain in the United States'best interest, even if they may not always be fully effective.40 The current export restrictions have a detrimental effect on many U.S.companies. According to Addison Fischer of Fischer International, "exportcontrols are estimated to have cost Fischer International millions of dollarsin lost revenue for cryptographic products"42 due to rejection by foreigncustomers of the weaker encryption products United States companies areforced to supply, lost sales opportunities, and delays with paperworknecessary for obtaining the appropriate licenses. And since DES is alreadyeasily available overseas, Fischer feels that existing export restrictionsare simply placing an embargo on United States DES-based products. Similarcomplaints have been voiced by other United States companies. The ComputerSystems Security and Privacy Advisory Board agrees that "current controls arenegatively impacting U. S. competitiveness in the world market and are notinhibiting the foreign production and use of cryptography [DES and RSA]." 43 Thus, if the United States government continues to control DES-strengthencryption manufactured in the U.S., the following results may come to pass: * Foreign competitors of United States encryption companies will likely gain control of the global market for encryption products. * United States companies will lose significant market share in the global market for encryption products. They are likely to lose sales opportunities as they compete in the electronic security market against products based on DES and RSA with their own weaker versions based on RC2 and RC4. * DES strength encryption will continue to proliferate to foreign destinations, either through foreign companies or through the ever-growing Internet. The effort of current United States export policy to inhibit this by restricting exports on DES-based technology is unlikely to succeed. * If, indeed, United States companies get displaced in the international encryption marketplace, United States 'national security' will also be threatened by a weakened domestic encryption (and computer) industry. In July 1992, the Software Publishers Association reached an agreement withthe Bush Administration that would permit an expedited 7-day review processfor products based on RC2 and RC4 algorithms. These algorithms are stillmuch weaker than DES; but they are also stronger than any other algorithmswhich were exportable prior to this agreement. This was an importantdevelopment in the effort to decontrol the export of encryption products fromthe United States. Projecting forward from this milestone, it is likely thatas the private sector continues to push for further relaxation of thesecontrols, more and stronger encryption products will be put on similar'autolists' for automatic export approval. The Federal government seeks to encourage the use of key escrow systems forencrypting telecommunications.44 The standard proposed for these systems, the"Clipper" escrowed encryption standard,45 is particularly noteworthy in lightof the fact that law enforcement officials, with a court order, can obtainboth parts of a special key that enables them to decrypt transmissionsencrypted with a particular chip. At the time of this writing, how Clipperwill be treated for export purposes is not clear. If it is treated the sameway as DES, it will certainly provide another example of the Byzantine natureof U. S. export policy. In any case, it is likely that foreign customerswill reject these products, due to fears of both United States tampering andthe possible existence of a secret 'trap door,' which would enableunauthorized parties to decrypt Clipper-encrypted transmissions, even withoutthe escrowed parts of the special key. Chris Sundt of the multinationalInternational Computers Ltd. (ICL) claims this very fear will be the basis ofrejecting Clipper as an encryption alternative in international markets.46Other United States based companies share his concern that the key escrowchip is effectively unexportable.47 In spite of the concerns described above, it appears unlikely that UnitedStates export laws will become as relaxed as those in many Europeancountries. DES-based products for file and data encryption will probably notbe removed from the munitions list in the near future. Almost everyoneinterviewed for this report felt that NSA will continue to play anincreasingly dominant role in the debate over cryptography in the U.S., andwill continue to have influence much stronger than NIST's on encryptionpolicy issues. NSA will continue to strongly voice its opinions to thePresident and pressure him to keep DES-based encryption on the munitions listand under the jurisdiction of the Department of State. 5. PUBLIC POLICY ISSUES 5.1 EXECUTIVE BRANCH Due to the increasing public availability of strong hardware- andsoftware-based encryption products, a debate over their regulation and use isemerging.48 The debate over Clipper and regulation of other encryptiontechnologies is, in many ways, the continuation of an ongoing discussion inthe United States about the proper balance between national security andindividual freedom of action. On one side of the debate are those agenciescharged with defending America from crime, terrorism, and external threat,such as the Federal Bureau of Investigation (FBI), the National SecurityAgency (NSA), the Central Intelligence Agency, the Department of State, andthe Department of Justice. These powerful agencies, in turn, are challengedby advocacy groups and high-technology industries, which place a greateremphasis on individual rights, in particular personal privacy, or corporateprofits. The United States Congress may play a major role in determining thebalance between the two. There are several powerful agencies which are leading the Administration'seffort to control encryption technology. First and foremost among these isthe National Security Agency, which for years was the sole controller ofstrong encryption in the United States. NSA has two primary goals on itsagenda. The most overt one is the protection of United States nationalsecurity, which the NSA does largely with the help of signal intelligence.49If terrorists of foreign agents were to obtain and use strong encryptionhardware or software, NSA's efforts to learn about and thwart theiractivities would be considerably more difficult. Indeed, as Marc Rotenbergof Computer Professionals for Social Responsibility comments, the continueddevelopment of encryption technologies poses one of the most significantchallenges the agency has faced during the post-Cold War era.13 Less obvious but also important is NSA's effort to protect its preeminentrole in civilian cryptography. For years, NSA had almost complete controlover developments in the encryption field. In recent years, however, thiscontrol has begun to erode as private firms and individuals have begunaggressively developing and using encryption technologies. The end of theCold War and the assignment of responsibility by the Computer Security Act of1987 50 for development of federal unclassified computer security standards(including cryptography standards) to NIST has threatened many aspects ofNSA's traditional role. Doug Miller of the Software Publishers Associationobserved that 'NSA throughout its existence . . . has had every incentive todelay the inevitable' (individuals obtaining full control of their owncryptography).10 The FBI is primarily concerned with investigating serious crimes andthwarting domestic terrorism. In a small number of important cases, such asthose involving drug trafficking, organized crime, or terrorism, the FBIgathers information via wiretaps. Indeed, wiretaps have been used in togather evidence in 90% of terrorism cases brought to trial.51 However, theFBI has not been able to point to a single case to date where encryption hashampered their investigation of a case. Several developments, however, are making these wiretaps progressively moredifficult to conduct. Two of these are the increasing complexity of theUnited States telecommunications infrastructure and the gradual replacementof copper wires by fiber optics, which can carry thousands of conversationsin a single strand of fiber. Both of these changes make it more difficultfor agents, even with phone companies' help, to isolate individualconversations.49 In addition, the development of publicly availableencryption threatens to delay or prevent the FBI's ability to utilize thecontents of these wiretaps. This poses serious risks to the lives and safetyof the American people whom the FBI is charged to protect, especially incases where the Bureau is relying on real-time interception of phone calls toprotect citizens from harm or to apprehend a suspect.52 Most of the other executive agencies and departments involved in theregulation of encryption technology have similar agendas: protectingAmerican citizens from harm and defending their areas of responsibility andinfluence within the government.49 There are Constitutional issues related to encryption controls, and theClinton administration recognized this when it announced the Clipperinitiative.44 Its later review has so far found no impinging on Americans'Constitutional rights.37 Our colleagues at the GW National Law Centerbasically agree.2,3 Other lawyers have differing points of view.53, 54 Professor James Chandler of the George Washington University National LawCenter observes that some United States industries and proponents ofindividual rights tend to place a stronger emphasis on freedom of action thannational security and thus oppose stringent limitations on encryptiontechnology.55 The software publishing community and vendors ofhardware-based encryption devices have generally focused their opposition oncurrent United States export restrictions, which cost them millions ofdollars annually.11 Making a somewhat different argument, individual rightsadvocacy groups such as Computer Professionals for Social Responsibility(CPSR) and the American Civil Liberties Union (ACLU) assert that governmentis too often intrusive in people's lives and needs to be restrained in thisdomain. As a result, they tend to oppose any policy initiative which wouldincrease the ability of the government to monitor activities of persons.55 5.2 CONGRESS Congress, with its power to make laws and oversee the activities of federalagencies, can be a significant factor in this ongoing debate. While theplayers named so far have their own, narrowly defined agendas, Congress'actions are more likely to pay closer attention to the will of the Americanpeople, on whose vote and support their jobs depend. Indeed, this dynamichas already been demonstrated. In 1991, the FBI sponsored the Digital Telephony Proposal, which requiredtelecommunications equipment manufacturers and service providers to make surethat their products had a built-in means whereby law enforcement officialscould successfully tap into any conversation provided they obtained awarrant.1 This initiative was undertaken by the FBI in response to increasingfear that with the advent of digital phone lines, fiber optics, and advancedtelephony in general, law enforcement might no longer be able to conductwiretaps in the near future. Unfortunately for the FBI, the DigitalTelephony Proposal angered a large number of voters and telecommunicationsequipment manufacturers, who in turn put pressure on their congressmen.10 Asa result, the proposal was never allowed to reach the House floor. Congress has very recently mandated a comprehensive study of cryptographytechnology and national cryptography policy by the National Academy ofSciences.56 Opponents pointed out that this proposal, while in some waysmeritorious, might also have the effect of preserving the status quo forseveral years, even though the status quo was characterized by some as earlyas 1981 as needing to be "realigned to promote both national security,broadly defined, and encourage private-sector competence in designing andapplying secure systems."57 The study will start up in late 1993 or early1994. Marc Rotenberg of CPSR observed that the FBI and NSA have learned from thefate of the Digital Telephony Proposal and have attempted to avoidCongressional intervention with the Clipper initiative by going through theWhite House instead of Congress. Barring such intervention at this point,he feels the administration will likely face only limited opposition withinthe Administration to the Clipper initiative.13 Thus, any slowdown of thisinitiative is more likely to materialize, if it does at all, in Congress. Asmore people perform an increasing number and range of transactions overelectronic networks, they are becoming increasingly concerned about theintegrity of their personal information and about maintaining their privacy.Of those interviewed in a Macworld poll released July 1993,58 78% expressedconcerns about their personal privacy (up from 64% in 1978) and 68% felttheir privacy was threatened by computers (up from 38% in 1974). Otherindependent surveys confirm this trend.59 While many of the survey resultsrelate specifically to databases, often in specific sectors such as creditreporting, computer systems as a whole, including those with insecurecommunication lines, are coming under increasing scrutiny. Congress will beplaced under escalating pressure to pass new laws governing informationtechnology, especially with the increased attention being devoted to thedesign and development of the National Information Infrastructure.60 Congress' decisions in this area and indeed the outcomes of the debate overencryption policy in general will be the result of the ongoing struggle inAmerican society among government, individuals, and industries. Althoughthis struggle will likely result in oscillations in policy, national securitymay be gradually redefined in terms of economic security. This is theexpectation of Professor James Chandler,55 who anticipates that controls onthe export of encryption hardware and software will eventually be lifted. There are already some signs that Congress may be willing to easerestrictions on the export of encryption products and perhaps in otherencryption-related areas as well. In early 1991, the Software PublishersAssociation suggested an amendment to the renewal of the ExportAdministration Act that would have transferred authority over softwareexports to the Commerce Department. This amendment, the Levine Amendment,was accepted by the House Foreign Affairs Committee, prompting aggressivelobbying by the National Security Agency of key congressmen in order toprevent inclusion of this amendment in the reauthorization bill. Despitethis lobbying, the full House kept the amendment in the Export AdministrationAct reauthorization.61 NSA later succeeded in persuading President GeorgeBush to promise a veto of any reauthorization bill which included the LevineAmendment or similar provisions, but this incident does demonstrate Congress'more liberal stance on encryption export regulation. And, of course, thereis a different administration now in power. H. R. 3627, introduced in theclosing days of Congress' 1993 session,62 effectively does the same thing, andit is conceivable that it will pass in 1994. 5.3 TRENDS To summarize public policy trends, * Due to their strong emphasis on national security and fighting crime, the FBI and the NSA will continue to advocate restraints on encryption technology and encourage the development of encryption devices and telecommunications systems which allow the government to continue conducting wiretaps. * The National Security Agency is likely to continue protecting its 'turf' by advocating continued restrictions on encryption technology. It may attempt to expand its domain within the government, most likely at the expense of NIST. * As part of its efforts to reassert its control over encryption technology, the NSA will likely continue to favor closed forums where it can present sensitive, classified material which may not have been obtained had U. S. enemies been able to obtain effective encryption. These forums such as the National Security Council, will be favored by them over open ones. The agency will continue its effort to keep relevant decisions out of the hands of Congress. * Many high-technology industries, particularly software publishing, will place increasing pressure on the government to liberalize restrictions on the use and export of encryption software and hardware. * Since the encryption policy issue has now been politicized63, any action taken to reverse the Clinton administration's progress on the Clipper initiative or the current system of export controls will involve Congress as well as the executive branch. The judicial branch (notably the Supreme Court) has not had occasion to rule on the issues surrounding the debate. 6. POTENTIAL SCENARIOS If and when a new cryptography policy emerges, there will be winners andlosers among the pool of 'players,' a pool that roughly consists of lawenforcement agencies, United States manufacturers and vendors of encryptionproducts, and the United States public. Based on the results of the precedinganalysis, four scenarios can be envisioned. 1. Complete decontrol of cryptography. The use of strong encryption by the United States public, as well as its export by United States manufacturers, could be completely decontrolled by the government at the direct expense of law enforcement and national security. This would please some members of the public, for they would have maintained control over their privacy. United States manufacturers of encryption products would also likely benefit from this move. 2. Domestic decontrol of cryptography with export regulations. Strong encryption could remain decontrolled for use by the general public, but strict regulations would remain on its export. While the American public would still be relatively content, United States industries would lose sales and potential market share due to exclusion from the lucrative international market for encryption products. The large domestic market, however, would remain open, guaranteeing some revenues for encryption product manufacturers. Law enforcement agencies, on the other hand, would lose in the short term in either of these scenarios, because their electronic surveillance abilities would be diminished. 3. Voluntary escrowed encryption. Escrow a de facto standard. (This is the Clinton administration's proposed scenario.) The escrowed encryption standard could become a de facto national standard for voice, fax, and data communications over the public switched telephone network. While other encryption products would be built, they would gain little market acceptance because of demand for interoperability. Thus, law enforcement would be able to listen in on most transmissions. The encryption technology might be exportable to countries that implemented the same or a similar scheme and agreed to cooperate in international investigations. United States manufacturers might gain or lose in this scenario; they would gain only if Clipper received widespread acceptance. Law enforcement agencies would gain. 4. Mandatory escrowed encryption. The government could choose to keep complete control over encryption and enforce a technology similar to the escrowed encryption standard. Law enforcement agencies would come out as winners for having maintained their surveillance capabilities. But a black market for foreign encryption products smuggled into the United States would probably be created by members of the public, including criminals, who desire more secrecy. How United States companies would react in this scenario depends on whether this government enforced standard is designed to be exportable or not. If it is unexportable, United States companies currently involved in the manufacture and sale of encryption products would be almost completely blocked from the international market and would be restricted to marketing the government enforced standard domestically. This would result in considerable financial loss for the industry. Some observe [65] that mandatory escrowed encryption can never be exportable, since if it were then products would be used in one country whose keys were escrowed elsewhere (or not at all), and this would not come to the attention of the exporting country's authorities until they attempted to snoop on someone; they would be reduced to prosecuting that person, if at all, for using a non-escrowed encryption device. If, on the other hand, the standard is an exportable item, and designed with an eye to the requirements of the international market, then United States companies would be better off and could maintain a level of international economic competitiveness. It is very difficult to determine which scenario is most likely and what itsconsequences really might be. The policy debate has to date been carried outwith each side making their own assumptions, not all of which are publiclystated. The economic implications for the Clipper proposal have not beenexamined adequately.43 Use of an explicit model of the situation would makethese assumptions explicit, thus contributing to an informed discussion. Recently, a user-friendly computer model64 based on an Excel spreadsheet hasbeen developed to investigate the costs, risks, and benefits of issuesrelated to the National Information Infrastructure. Issues addressed includedigital telephony, export controls of cryptography, key escrow systems,security features in communications hardware, etc. It is designed to allowusers with varying political perspectives to make tradeoffs based on variedparameter values, which the users have complete control over. Whileconceding that no mathematical model can adequately represent intangiblevalues or political tradeoffs completely, it offers a useful first steptowards a common ground for analyzing at least some of the problems describedabove. It has recently been offered to both to government and its opponentsin the key escrow debate. Though it is beyond the scope of this particularproject, some of the investigators of this study plan to use it to furtherexplore the scenarios above. REFERENCES 1. Dorothy Denning, 'To tap or not to tap?' Communications of the ACM vol. 36, no. 3 (March 1993): 25-44. 2. J. Chandler, D. Arrington, and L. Gill, "Issues Regarding the Use of Cryptographic Technologies in the Commercial Sector," George Washington University, National Law Center, 1993. 3. J. Chandler, D. Arrington, and L. Gill, "Foreign Encryption Technology Controls," George Washington University, National Law Center, 1993. 4. National Bureau of Standards, "Data Encryption Standard," FIPS PUB 46, (Washington, D. C.: January 1977). 5. G. Simmons, Contemporary Cryptology (Piscataway, NJ: IEEE Press, 1992). 6. Dorothy Denning, Cryptography and Data Security (Reading, Massachusetts: Addison-Wesley, 1982). 7. R. Rivest, A. Shamir, and L. Adelman, 'A method for obtaining digital signatures and public-key cryptosystems,' Communications of the ACM (February 1978): 120-126. 8. W. Diffie and M. E. Hellman, "New Directions in Cryptography," IEEE Transactions on Information Theory, vol. IT-22 (November 1976): 644- 654. 9. Peter Wayner, Statement in "Cryptographic Issue Statements Submitted to the Computer System Security and Privacy Advisory Board," by NIST, 27 May 1993, pp. 13-17. 10. Douglas Miller, Interview by Steven Heckler and Ann Huybrechts, 26 July 1993, Software Publishers Association, Washington, D. C. 11. Martin Hellman (Stanford University electrical engineering professor), Interview by Faraz Ali, 11 August 1993, phone. 12. Ilene Rosenthal, Testimony before the Computer System Security and Privacy Advisory Board, 3 June 1993. 13. Marc Rotenberg (Computer Professionals for Social Responsibility), Interview by Steven Heckler and Ann Huybrechts, 27 July 1993, Washington, D. C. 14. Ivars Peterson, 'Encrypting Controversy,' Science News, 19 June 1993, 394-396. 15. Jim Bidzos, Private communication with Lance J. Hoffman, 3 November 1993. 16. Philip Zimmerman, Pretty Good Privacy 2.2 Manual, 6 March 1993. 17. Peter Schweitzer, Statement in "Cryptographic Issue Statements Submitted to the Computer System Security and Privacy Advisory Board," by NIST, 27 May 1993, 200-203. 18. Dorothy Denning, Testimony before the Computer System Security and Privacy Advisory Board, 29 July 1993. 19. E. Brickell et al., "SKIPJACK Review Interim Report: The SKIPJACK Algorithm", 28 July 1993, Posted on sci.crypt and many other places on the Internet. Available from NIST. 20. S. Micali, Fair Cryptosystems, Report MIT/LCS/TR-579.b, MIT Laboratory for Computer Science, Cambridge, Mass, November 1993. 21. Y. Desmedt, Y. Frankel, and M. Yung, "A Scientific Statement on the Clipper Chip Technology and Alternatives," paper distributed at the Clipper session of the 16th National Computer Security Conference, 21 September 1993. 22. Gary H. Anthes, 'Use outpaces addresses on Internet,' Computerworld vol. 27, no. 17 (26 April 1993): 51-52. 23. John Markoff, "Thing," The New York Times, 5 September 1993, Section 9, p. 11. 24. Stephen Kent, 'Internet Privacy Enhanced Mail," Communications of the ACM vol. 36, no. 8 (August 1993): 48. 25. Stephen Crocker, 'Internet Privacy Enhanced Mail,' The Third CPSR Cryptography and Privacy Conference Source Book, 7 June 1993. 26. Peter Williams, OSISEC Introduction and Overview, University College, London, 15 April 1993. 27. Datapro, Inc., Datapro Report on Encryption Devices, Delran, NJ, March 1993. 28. David Chaum, 'Achieving Electronic Privacy,' Scientific American vol. 267, no. 2 (August 1992): 96-101. 29. Kevin Kelly, 'E-Money,' Whole Earth Review, Summer 1993. 30. S. Von Solms and D. Naccache, "On Blind Signatures and Perfect Crimes," Computers and Security vol. 11, no. 6 (October 1992): 581- 583. 31. International Resource Development, Data, Fax, and Voice Encryption Equipment Worldwide, Report #782 (December 1991), New Canaan, CT, pp. 267-271. 32. Douglas Miller, Statement before the Computer System Security and Privacy Advisory Board, 1 September 1993. 33. Dorothy Denning, Interview by Steven Heckler and Ann Huybrechts, 26 July 1993, Georgetown University, Washington, D. C. 34. William Ferguson, Testimony Before the Computer System Security and Privacy Advisory Board, 29 July 1993. 35. Lance J. Hoffman, 'Clipping Clipper,' Communications of the ACM vol. 36, no. 9 (September 1993): 15-17. 36. Stephen T. Walker, Testimony before the Subcommittee on Economic Policy, Trade and Environment of the Committee on Foreign Affairs of the U. S. House of Representatives, 12 October 1993. 37. J. Podesta, White House memo to Jerry Berman, Digital Privacy and Security Working Group, on Key Escrow Encryption Technology, July 29, 1993. 38. L. E. Christensen, "Technology and Software Controls" in Law and Policy of Export Controls: Recent Essays on Key Export Issues, Section of International Law and Practice of American Bar Association, August 1993, pp. 3-33. 39. International Traffic in Arms Regulation (ITAR), 22 CFR 120-130. 40. Allan Suchinsky, Presentation at George Washington University, Washington, D.C., 30 June 1993. 41. Edward Regan, 'United States Business Views On Encryption and The Key Escrow Chip,' Testimony before the Computer System Security and Privacy Advisory Board, 30 July 1993. 42. Addison Fischer, Statement in "Cryptographic Issue Statements Submitted to the Computer System Security and Privacy Advisory Board," by NIST, 27 May 1993, pp. 204-215. 43. Computer System Security and Privacy Advisory Board Resolution 93-5, 1-2 September 1993. 44. The White House, Press release concerning the key escrow initiative, 16 April 1993. 45. National Institute of Standards and Technology, "A Proposed Federal Information Processing Standard for an Escrowed Encryption Standard (EES)," Federal Register vol. 58, no. 145 (30 July 1993): 40791- 40794. 46. Chris Sundt, Testimony before the Computer System Security and Privacy Advisory Board, 29 July 1993. 47. Testimony of representatives from Fisher International, Hewlett-Packard, and Racal-Guardata before the Computer System Security and Privacy Advisory Board, 29 July 29 1993. 48. Clark Weissman, 'A national debate on encryption exportability,' Communications of the ACM vol. 34, no. 10 (October, 1991): 162. 49. Lou Giles, Presentation delivered at George Washington University, Washington, D. C., 4 August 1993. 50. Computer Security Act of 1987, Public Law 100-235 (H.R. 145), 101 Stat. 1724-1730. 51. James Kallstrom, Testimony before the Computer System Security and Privacy Advisory Board, 29 July 1993. 52. Alan MacDonald, Interview by Steven Heckler, 22 July 1993. 53. Statement of the American Civil Liberties Union in "Cryptographic Issue Statements Submitted to the Computer System Security and Privacy Advisory Board," by NIST, 27 May 1993, pp. 195-199. 54. Digital Privacy and Security Working Group, white paper on key escrow encryption technology, 30 September 1993. 55. James Chandler, Interview by Faraz Ali and Steven Heckler, 6 August 1993, George Washington Univeristy, Washington, D. C. 56. National Defense Authorization Act for Fiscal Year 1994 (H.R. 2401, Sec. 267). 57. V. C. Walling, Jr., D. B. Parker, and C. C. Wood, "Impacts of Federal Policy Options for Nonmilitary Cryptography," SRI International Research Report 32, April 1981, Menlo Park, CA. 58. Charles Piller, 'Privacy in Peril: Macworld Special Report on Electronic Privacy," Macworld, vol. 10, no. 7, July 1993, pp. 8-14. 59. L. Harris and Associates, Harris-Equifax Consumer Privacy Survey 1992, New York: Louis Harris and Associates, 1992. 60. Information Infrastructure Task Force, The National Information Infrastructure: Agenda for Action, Department of Commerce, 15 September 1993. 61. Jonathan Groner, 'When it Comes to Software, U.S. Sees Military Hardware; Concern over Spread of Encryption Codes Hurts Exports,' The Connecticut Law Tribune, 21 December 1992, p. 12. 62. H. R. 3627, "A Bill to Amend the Export Administration Act of 1979 with respect to the control of computer and related equipment," 1993. 63. J. Mintz and J. Schwartz, "Encryption Program Draws Fresh Attacks," The Washington Post, 18 September 1993, p. C1. 64. Dave Kohls and Lance J. Hoffman, "TurboTrade: A National Information Infrastructure Cost/Risk/Benefit Model," Report GWU-IIST-93-17, Department of Electrical Engineering and Computer Science, The George Washington University, Washington, D. C., September 1993. 65. R. Needham, private communication, 21 December 1993. WT02-B12-30IA087-000625-B044-167http://res2.resnet.upenn.edu:80/cis590/reading.061.html 130.91.195.242 19970122061311 text/html 10639HTTP/1.0 200 OKDate: Wed, 22 Jan 1997 06:13:06 GMTServer: Apache/1.1.1Content-type: text/htmlContent-length: 10467Last-modified: Tue, 22 Nov 1994 06:31:46 GMTPrivacy As Roadkill Date: Sun, 30 Jan 1994 21:00:50 -0800From: "Brock N. Meeks" <brock@well.sf.ca.us> Jacking in from a "Private No More" Port: Washington, DC -- If privacy isn't already the first victim ofroadkill along the information superhighway, then it's about to be. A law enforcement panel addressing the Administration's InformationInfrastructure Task Force Working Group on Privacy told a publicmeeting here last week that it wanted to "front load" the NationalInformation Infrastructure with trap door technologies that wouldallow them to easy access to digital conversations; eavesdroppingon any conversation or capturing electronic communicationsmidstream. But only for "the bad guys." Us honest, hard working, law abidingcitizens have nothing to fear from these law enforcement agenciesselling out our privacy rights to make their jobs easier. Nope, wecan rest easy, knowing that child pornographers, drug traffickersand organized crime families will be sufficiently thwarted by lawenforcement's proposed built-in gadgetry for the nationalinformation infrastructure. There's just a small problem: Law enforcement agencies, any lawenforcement agency, has yet to prove it needs all these proposeddigital trap doors. In fact, according to a U.S. AssistantAttorney appearing on the panel, "Right now most law enforcementpersonnel don't have any idea what the NII is." Gore Gives Go Ahead=================== Panel members, representing the Justice Dept., FBI and U.S.Attorney's office, said that they took Vice President Gore'spromise that the White House would work to ensure that the NIIwould "help law enforcement agencies thwart criminals andterrorists who might use advanced telecommunications to commitcrimes," as tacit approval of their proposals to push for digitalwiretap access and government mandated encryption policies. Gore buried those remarks deep in a speech he made in Los Angelesearlier this month when the Administration first fleshed out how itplanned to rewrite the rules for communications in a newer, perhapsmore enlightened age. Those remarks went unnoticed by themainstream press. But readers here were forewarned. Fuck Ross Perot's NAFTA-induced "giant sucking sound." That"thump" you just heard was Law Enforcement running over the privacyrights of the American public on its way to the informationsuperhighway. The real crime is that the collision barely dentedthe damn fender. This cunning and calculated move by law enforcement to installinterception technologies all along the information superhighwaywas blithely referred to as "proactive" law enforcement policy byAssistant U.S. Attorney, Northern Dist. of California Kent Walker.Designing these technologies into future networks, which includeall telephone systems, would ensure that law enforcementorganizations "have the same capabilities that we all enjoy rightnow," Walker said. With today's wiretap operations, the Feds must get a court toapprove their request, but only after supplying enough evidencewarrant one. But Walker seemed to be lobbying for the opposite.Giving the Feds the ability to listen in first and givejustification later was "no big difference," he said. Besides, "itwould save time and money." It's Us vs. Them================= For Walker privacy issues weighed against law enforcement needs areblack and white, or rather "good guys" vs. "bad guys." Forexample, he said the rapid rise of private (read: non-governmentcontrolled) encryption technologies didn't mean law enforcementwould have to work harder. On the contrary, "it only means we'llcatch less criminals," he said. But if law enforcement is merely concerned with the task of "justputting the bad guys in jail," as James Settle, head of the FBI'sNational Computer Crime Squad states, then why are we seeing anunprecedented move by government intelligence agencies into areasthey have historically shied from? Because law enforcementagencies know their window of opportunity for asserting theirinfluence is right now, right at the time the government is aboutto take on a fundamental shift in how it deals privacy issueswithin the networks that make up the NII, says David Sobel, generalcounsel for Computer Professionals for Social Responsibility(CPSR), who also spoke as a panel member. "Because of law enforcement's concerns (regarding digitaltechnologies), we're seeing an unprecedented involvement by federalsecurity agencies in the domestic law enforcement activities,"Sobel said. Sobel dropped-kicked this chilling fact from behind the closeddoors of the Clinton Administration into the IITF's lap: For thefirst time in history, the National Security Agency (NSA) "is nowdeeply involved in the design of the public telecommunicationsnetwork." Go ahead. Read it again. Sobel backs up his claims with hundreds of pages of previouslyclassified memos and reports obtained under the Freedom ofInformation Act. The involvement of the NSA in the design of ourtelephone networks is, Sobel believes, a violation of federalstatutes. Sobel's also concerned that the public might soon be looking downthe throat of a classified telecommunications standard beingcreated. Another move he calls "unprecedented," is that if theNSA, FBI and other law enforcement organizations have their way,the design of the national telecommunications network will end upclassified and withheld from the public. Sobel is dead bang on target with his warnings. The telecommunications industry and FBI have set up an ad hocworking group to see if a technical fix for digital wiretapping canbe found to make the Bureau happy. That way, legislation doesn'tneed to be passed that might mandate such FBI access and stick theBaby Bells with eating the full cost of reengineering theirnetworks. This joint group was formed during a March 26, 1992 meeting atFBI's Quantico, Va., facilities, according previously classifiedFBI documents released under Freedom of Information Act. The groupwas only formalized late last year, working under the auspices ofthe Alliance for Telecommunications Industry Solutions (ATIS). Thejoint industry-FBI group operates under the innocuous sounding nameof the Electronic Communications Service Provider Committee(ECSPC). The ECSPC meets monthly with intent of seeking a technological"solution" to the FBI's request for putting a trap door intodigital switches that would allow them easy access to thoseconversations. To date, no industry solution has been found for thedigital wiretap problem, according to Kenneth Raymond, a Nynextelephone company engineer, who is the industry co-chairman of thegroup. Oh, there's also a small, but nagging problem: The FBI hasn'tprovided a concrete basis that such solutions are needed, Raymondsaid. CPSR's Sobel raised these same points during the paneldiscussion. The telecommunications industry is focused on "trying to evaluatejust what is the nature of the [digital access] problem and how wecan best solve it in some reasonable way that is consistent withcost and demand," Raymond said. One solution might be to writedigital wiretap access into future switch specifications, he said. If and when the industry does find that solution, do you think theFBI will put out a press release to tell us about it? "I doubt itvery much," said FBI agent Barry Smith with the Bureau'sCongressional Affairs office. "It will be done quietly, with nomedia fanfare." Is it just me or are these headlights getting REALLY close? The FBI's Settle is also adamant about trap door specificationsbeing written into any blue prints for the National InformationInfrastructure. But there's a catch. Settle calls these "securitymeasures," because they'll give his office a better chance at"catching bad guys." He wants all networks "to be required toinstall some kind of standard for security." And who's writingthose standards? You guessed it: The NSA with input from the FBIand other assorted spook agencies. Settle defends these standards saying that the "best we have goingfor us is that the criminal element hasn't yet figured out how touse this stuff [encryption and networks in general]. When they do,we'll be in trouble. We want to stay ahead of the curve." In the meantime, his division has to hustle. The FBI currently hasonly 25 "net literate" personnel, Settle admitted. "Most of thesewere recruited 2 years ago," he said. Most have computer sciencedegrees and were systems administrators at time, he said. You think that's funny? Hell, the Net is a still small community,relatively speaking. One of your friends is probably an FBI NetSnitch, working for Settle. Don't laugh. Don't Look Now, Your Privacy Is Showing======================================= The law enforcement establishment doesn't think you really knowwhat you expect when it comes to privacy. U.S. Attorney Walker says: "If you ask the public, 'Is privacymore important than catching criminals?' They'll tell you, 'No.'" (Write him with your own thoughts, won't you?) Because of views like Walker's, the Electronic CommunicationsPrivacy Act (ECPA) "needs to be broader," said Mike Godwin, legalservices counsel, for Electronic Frontier Foundation, speaking asa panel member. The ECPA protects transmitted data, but it alsoneeds to protect stored data, he said. "A person's expectation ofprivacy doesn't end when they store something on a hard disk." But Walker brushed Godwin aside saying, "It's easy to get caught upin the rhetoric that privacy is the end all be all." Do you have an expectation of privacy for things you store on yourhard disk, in your own home? Walker says that idea is up fordebate: "Part of this working group is to establish what is areasonable expectation of privacy." That's right. Toss everything you know or thought you knew aboutprivacy out the fucking window, as you cruise down the fast lane ofthe information superhighway. Why? Because for people likeWalker, those guardians of justice, "There has to be a balancebetween privacy needs and law enforcement needs to catchcriminals," he says. Balance, yes. Total abrogation of my rights? Fat chance. Meeks out... WT02-B12-31IA087-000625-B044-234http://res2.resnet.upenn.edu:80/cis590/reading.062.html 130.91.195.242 19970122061408 text/html 8388HTTP/1.0 200 OKDate: Wed, 22 Jan 1997 06:14:04 GMTServer: Apache/1.1.1Content-type: text/htmlContent-length: 8217Last-modified: Tue, 22 Nov 1994 06:31:47 GMTWhen You Use E-Mail at Work the Boss May Be Looking In from telecom digest When You Use E-Mail at Work the Boss May Be Looking InBy James McNair, {The Miami Herald}Knight-Ridder/Tribune Business News Jan. 30 -- AMID the sterile drudgery of office work, a computer screenbeckons your wandering mind with the chance to escape. You send amessage to a friend elsewhere in the building. It could signal afleeting thought: After-work plans, an interesting new employee or adumb decision by a boss. Or it could open up a more riveting subject:a smear campaign against the boss, a moonlighting venture on companytime, or stealing customer lists. Whatever you drop into the electronic mailbox, it could come back tohaunt you. In many companies, what seems to be a private communicationsnetwork -- protected by passwords, no less -- is equipped with a backdoor in the computer room. In other words, your plots, your off-color barbs and your work-unrelateddigressions might be camped on a computer disk somewhere, waiting to beread. "It's pretty much on every network," said Edward Gomez, a consultantfor Byte Computers in Miami. "There are utilities that tell you whatpeople are doing, what files are opening up and how much time peopleare spending on the computer." Sounds like an invitation to employee rebellion, but corporationsinsist they restrain themselves from systematic E-mail peeping. Whenthey do play back the disks, it's for legitimate business reasons,such as investigating crimes, tracing security breaches or interceptingcustomer inquiries when an employee is absent. "Some people may say it's offensive and violates their privacy, butthe employer just wants to ensure that its interests are protected,"said Mike Losey, president of the Society for Human ResourceManagement. For now, employers are having their way. The 1986 ElectronicCommunications Privacy Act shields E-mail messages over publictelephone lines, but not the inter-office variety. In privacy-invasionlawsuits across the country, courts have predominantly ruled in favorof employers. The false belief in E-mail privacy is so great that Congress isconsidering a law requiring employers to post policies, spelling outtheir E-mail access rights. Some South Florida companies such asBlockbuster Entertainment Corp., Barnett Banks and First Union Corp.have already taken this step. Nearly 27 million U.S. workers will have an E-mail password in 1994,up from 19 million in 1993, according to WorkGroup Technologies Inc.,a research firm in Hampton, N.H. Given how E-mail is flourishing, theconflict between employee right to privacy and employer right toaccess was inevitable. Technology gets the brunt of the blame. Ever since desktop computernetworks started popping up as a mainstream business tool ten yearsago, computers have become alarmingly more powerful. The deliveryspeed of E-mail in a typical IBM-compatible or Macintosh network hasmade intracompany phone calls an absurd waste of time, handwrittenmemos a relic of the past. But what turned sealed letters into open books on the E-mail system isthe new breed of networking software built into or added to computers.Professional computer installers say the network's ability to call upemployee messages is now standard equipment. "They never ask for it," said Tim White, a consultant for TechnologySolutions in Fort Lauderdale. "It's always something companiesdiscover after it's there." But maybe not. According to a survey of 301 companies by Macworld magazine last July,six percent said they read employees' in-house messages. One of fivecompanies said electronic monitoring is a good way to verify an act ofwrongdoing. Two of three don't bother warning their employees. Alana Shoars, former E-mail manager at Epson America in Torrance,Calif., was one of those who told employees that their messages weresecret. Then one day in 1990, she stumbled upon a supervisor's printercranking out every message sent on the network. She complained and wasfired. Shoars and 170 employees sued for invasion of privacy, but lost thecase. Six months after leaving Epson, Warner Bros. hired her to run a3,500-user E- mail system in which privacy would be guaranteed. The same Los Angeles court that ruled in favor of Epson also sidedwith Nissan Motor Co. in its defense of a privacy-invasion lawsuitfiled by two employees whose messages had been read by managers theycriticized. Mentor Graphics of Wilsonville, Ore., settled a similar lawsuit filedby two employees, even though it said the E-mail trail showed that theemployees had been stealing trade secrets. Occasionally, corporations are the first to go to court. Last year,Borland International of Scotts Valley, Calif., pressed chargesagainst a vice president who had been sending marketing plans andproduct-release dates to the president of a cross-town rival. Both menwere indicted, but they defended themselves by accusing Borland ofviolating the Electronic Communications Privacy Act ban on tappingmessages sent on commercial E-mail lines. The charges and a related lawsuit filed by Borland are still pending.Lawsuits are repulsive ways to settle differences, but they haveserved a good purpose in fomenting a spirited debate between employeeand employer rights on the E-mail network. Privacy advocates take theside of the Bill of Rights. On the other side is a well-entrenchedbusiness lobby fighting for the plain right to use its equipment as itsees fit. Lewis Maltby, director of the American Civil Liberties Union'sWorkplace Rights Project, said corporate E-mail systems should allowfor some, if not full privacy. As it is, he said, the issuance of passwords and their suggestion ofconfidentiality gives employees a false impression of privacy. "Employers should think twice about reading messages because employeeswill clam up," Maltby said. "No one's going to be candid if they knowsomeone's looking over their shoulder all the time." Some companies actually share employees' desire for E-mail privacy.Among those in South Florida, IBM Corp., Motorola, Siemens and the lawfirm Greenberg Traurig all say they can't read or recall employees'messages. Companies that can tap the E-mail system say they do so withrestraint. "Managers don't have the ability to say, 'Print me out areport of all the E-mail communications that went out of my group lastmonth,"' said Ken Smalling, a spokesman for Electronic Data Systems,which has about 300 employees at its System One airline reservationsunit in Miramar. Others ducked questions about their E-mail monitoring powers. "Noone's comfortable with saying something publicly," said Ryder Systemspokeswoman Terri Kopec. "We don't want our employees reading about itin the paper." "We'll take a pass on this one," said W.R. Grace spokesman Fred Bona.Government E-mail users have the least privacy of all -- even in theOval Office. Last year, a federal judge ruled that millions of E-mailmessages stored during the Reagan and Bush years must be preservedunder the same guidelines as paper communications. In Broward County, all E-mail notes are public records. In Metro Dade,the issue is moot because the computer system isn't capable ofrecalling E- mail. While lawmakers and courts have upheld employers' full access toE-mail content, bills winding through Congress would ensure thatemployees are explicitly warned. Sponsored by Sen. Paul Simon, D-Ill.,and Rep. Pat Williams, D-Mont., it would require companies to postE-mail policy statements in the workplace. Many companies -- partly at the urging of their attorneys -- are aheadof the law, including First Union, Barnett Banks and BlockbusterEntertainment. First Union's policy, released last August, lists whenthe bank can rifle through E-mail files. "We saw a need to put a policy into place so that everybody knewexactly what we could and couldn't do," said First Union spokesmanMonty Hagler. "It's a big issue when you have 18,000 users. You don'twant to wait for trouble." WT02-B12-32IA087-000625-B044-290http://res2.resnet.upenn.edu:80/cis590/reading.063.html 130.91.195.242 19970122061509 text/html 58920HTTP/1.0 200 OKDate: Wed, 22 Jan 1997 06:14:59 GMTServer: Apache/1.1.1Content-type: text/htmlContent-length: 58748Last-modified: Tue, 22 Nov 1994 06:31:48 GMT Selling Wine Without Bottles, by John Perry Barlow Selling Wine Without Bottles The Economy of Mind on the Global Net by John Perry Barlow If nature has made any one thing less susceptible than all others of exclusive property, it is the action of the thinking power called an idea, which an individual may exclusively possess as long as he keeps it to himself; but the moment it is divulged, it forces itself into the possession of everyone, and the receiver cannot dispossess himself of it. Its peculiar character, too, is that no one possesses the less, because every other possesses the whole of it. He who receives an idea from me, receives instruction himself without lessening mine; as he who lights his taper at mine, receives light without darkening me. That ideas should freely spread from one to another over the globe, for the moral and mutual instruction of man, and improvement of his condition, seems to have been peculiarly and benevolently designed by nature, when she made them, like fire, expansible over all space, without lessening their density at any point, and like the air in which we breathe, move, and have our physical being, incapable of confinement or exclusive appropriation. Inventions then cannot, in nature, be a subject of property.                           -- Thomas Jefferson Throughout the time I've been groping around Cyberspace, there hasremained unsolved an immense conundrum that seems to be at the root ofnearly every legal, ethical, governmental, and social vexation to befound in the Virtual World. I refer to the problem of digitizedproperty. The riddle is this: if our property can be infinitely reproduced andinstantaneously distributed all over the planet without cost, withoutour knowledge, without its even leaving our possession, how can weprotect it? How are we going to get paid for the work we do with ourminds? And, if we can't get paid, what will assure the continuedcreation and distribution of such work? Since we don't have a solution to what is a profoundly new kind ofchallenge, and are apparently unable to delay the gallopingdigitization of everything not obstinately physical, we are sailinginto the future on a sinking ship. This vessel, the accumulated canon of copyright and patent law, wasdeveloped to convey forms and methods of expression entirely differentfrom the vaporous cargo it is now being asked to carry. It is leakingas much from within as without. Legal efforts to keep the old boat floating are taking three forms: afrenzy of deck chair rearrangement, stern warnings to the passengersthat if she goes down, they will face harsh criminal penalties, andserene, glassy-eyed denial. Intellectual property law cannot be patched, retrofitted, or expandedto contain the gasses of digitized expression any more than realestate law might be revised to cover the allocation of broadcastingspectrum. (Which, in fact, rather resembles what is being attemptedhere.) We will need to develop an entirely new set of methods asbefits this entirely new set of circumstances. Most of the people who actually create soft property--the programmers,hackers, and Net surfers--already know this. Unfortunately, neitherthe companies they work for nor the lawyers these companies hire haveenough direct experience with immaterial goods to understand why theyare so problematic. They are proceeding as though the old laws cansomehow be made to work, either by grotesque expansion or by force.They are wrong. The source of this conundrum is as simple as its solution is complex.Digital technology is detaching information from the physical plane,where property law of all sorts has always found definition. Throughout the history of copyrights and patents, the proprietaryassertions of thinkers have been focused not on their ideas but on theexpression of those ideas. The ideas themselves, as well as factsabout the phenomena of the world, were considered to be the collectiveproperty of humanity. One could claim franchise, in the case ofcopyright, on the precise turn of phrase used to convey a particularidea or the order in which facts were presented. The point at which this franchise was imposed was that moment when the"word became flesh" by departing the mind of its originator andentering some physical object, whether book or widget. The subsequentarrival of other commercial media besides books didn't alter the legalimportance of this moment. Law protected expression and, with few (andrecent) exceptions, to express was to make physical. Protecting physical expression had the force of convenience on itsside. Copyright worked well because, Gutenberg notwithstanding, it washard to make a book. Furthermore, books froze their contents into acondition that was as challenging to alter as it was to reproduce.Counterfeiting or distributing counterfeit volumes were obvious andvisible activities, easy enough to catch somebody in the act of doing.Finally, unlike unbounded words or images, books had material surfacesto which one could attach copyright notices, publisher's marques, andprice tags. Mental to physical conversion was even more central to patent. Apatent, until recently, was either a description of the form intowhich materials were to be rendered in the service of some purpose ora description of the process by which rendition occurred. In eithercase, the conceptual heart of patent was the material result. If nopurposeful object could be rendered due to some material limitation,the patent was rejected. Neither a Klein bottle nor a shovel made ofsilk could be patented. It had to be a thing and the thing had towork. Thus the rights of invention and authorship adhered to activities inthe physical world. One didn't get paid for ideas but for the abilityto deliver them into reality. For all practical purposes, the valuewas in the conveyance and not the thought conveyed. In other words, the bottle was protected, not the wine. Now, as information enters Cyberspace, the native home of Mind, thesebottles are vanishing. With the advent of digitization, it is nowpossible to replace all previous information storage forms with onemeta-bottle: complex--and highly liquid--patterns of ones and zeros. Even the physical/digital bottles to which we've become accustomed,floppy disks, CD- ROM's, and other discrete, shrink-wrappablebit-packages, will disappear as all computers jack in to the globalNet. While the Internet may never include every single CPU on theplanet, it is more than doubling every year and can be expected tobecome the principal medium of information conveyance if, eventually,the only one. Once that has happened, all the goods of the Information Age--all ofexpressions once contained in books or film strips or records ornewsletters--will exist either as pure thought or something very muchlike thought: voltage conditions darting around the Net at the speedof light, in conditions which one might behold in effect, as glowingpixels or transmitted sounds, but never touch or claim to "own" in theold sense of the word. Some might argue that information will still require some physicalmanifestation, such as its magnetic existence on the titanic harddisks of distant servers, but these are bottles that have nomacroscopically discrete or personally meaningful form. Some will also argue that we have been dealing with unbottledexpression since the advent of radio, and they would be right. But formost of the history of broadcast, there was no convenient way tocapture soft goods from the electromagnetic ether and reproduce themin anything like the quality available in commercial packages. Onlyrecently has this changed and little has been done legally ortechnically to address the change. Generally, the issue of consumer payment for broadcast products wasirrelevant. The consumers themselves were the product. Broadcastmedia were supported either by selling the attention of their audienceto advertisers, using government to assess payment through taxes, orthe whining mendicancy of annual donor drives. All of broadcast support models are flawed. Support either byadvertisers or government has almost invariably tainted the purity ofthe goods delivered. Besides, direct marketing is gradually killingthe advertiser support model anyway. Broadcast media gave us another payment method for a virtual productin the royalties which broadcasters pay songwriters through suchorganizations as ASCAP and BMI. But, as a member of ASCAP, I canassure you this is not a model that we should emulate. The monitoringmethods are wildly approximate. There is no parallel system ofaccounting in the revenue stream. It doesn't really work. Honest. In any case, without our old methods of physically defining theexpression of ideas, and in the absence of successful new models fornon-physical transaction, we simply don't know how to assure reliablepayment for mental works. To make matters worse, this comes at a timewhen the human mind is replacing sunlight and mineral deposits as theprincipal source of new wealth. Furthermore, the increasing difficulty of enforcing existing copyrightand patent laws is already placing in peril the ultimate source ofintellectual property, the free exchange of ideas. That is, when the primary articles of commerce in a society look somuch like speech as to be indistinguishable from it, and when thetraditional methods of protecting their ownership have becomeineffectual, attempting to fix the problem with broader and morevigorous enforcement will inevitably threaten freedom of speech. The greatest constraint on your future liberties may come not fromgovernment but from corporate legal departments laboring to protect byforce what can no longer be protected by practical efficiency orgeneral social consent. Furthermore, when Jefferson and his fellow creatures of TheEnlightenment designed the system that became American copyright law,their primary objective was assuring the widespread distribution ofthought, not profit. Profit was the fuel that would carry ideas intothe libraries and minds of their new republic. Libraries wouldpurchase books, thus rewarding the authors for their work inassembling ideas, which otherwise "incapable of confinement" wouldthen become freely available to the public. But what is the role oflibraries if there are no books? How does society now pay for thedistribution of ideas if not by charging for the ideas themselves? Additionally complicating the matter is the fact that along with thephysical bottles in which intellectual property protection hasresided, digital technology is also erasing the legal jurisdictions ofthe physical world, and replacing them with the unbounded and perhapspermanently lawless seas of Cyberspace. In Cyberspace, there are not only no national or local boundaries tocontain the scene of a crime and determine the method of itsprosecution, there are no clear cultural agreements on what a crimemight be. Unresolved and basic differences between European and Asiancultural assumptions about intellectual property can only beexacerbated in a region where many transactions are taking place inboth hemispheres and yet, somehow, in neither. Even in the most local of digital conditions, jurisdiction andresponsibility are hard to assess. A group of music publishers filedsuit against Compuserve this fall for it having allowed its users toupload musical compositions into areas where other users might getthem. But since Compuserve cannot practically exercise much controlover the flood of bits that pass between its subscribers, it probablyshouldn't be held responsible for unlawfully "publishing" these works. Notions of property, value, ownership, and the nature of wealth itselfare changing more fundamentally than at any time since the Sumeriansfirst poked cuneiform into wet clay and called it stored grain. Only avery few people are aware of the enormity of this shift and fewer ofthem are lawyers or public officials. Those who do see these changes must prepare responses for the legaland social confusion that will erupt as efforts to protect new formsof property with old methods become more obviously futile, and, as aconsequence, more adamant. From Swords To Writs To Bits Humanity now seems bent on creating a world economy primarily based ongoods that take no material form. In doing so, we may be eliminatingany predictable connection between creators and a fair reward for theutility or pleasure others may find in their works. Without that connection, and without a fundamental change inconsciousness to accommodate its loss, we are building our future onfuror, litigation, and institutionalized evasion of payment except inresponse to raw force. We may return to the Bad Old Days of property. Throughout the darker parts of human history, the possession anddistribution of property was a largely military matter. "Ownership"was assured those with the nastiest tools, whether fists or armies,and the most resolute will to use them. Property was the divine rightof thugs. By the turn of the First Millennium A.D., the emergence of merchantclasses and landed gentry forced the development of ethicalunderstandings for the resolution of property disputes. In the lateMiddle Ages, enlightened rulers like England's Henry II began tocodify this unwritten "common law" into recorded canons. These lawswere local, but this didn't matter much as they were primarilydirected at real estate, a form of property that is local bydefinition. And which, as the name implied, was very real. This continued to be the case as long as the origin of wealth wasagricultural, but with dawning of the Industrial Revolution, humanitybegan to focus as much on means as ends. Tools acquired a new socialvalue and, thanks to their own development, it became possible toduplicate and distribute them in quantity. To encourage their invention, copyright and patent law were developedin most western countries. These laws were devoted to the delicatetask of getting mental creations into the world where they could beused--and enter the minds of others--while assuring their inventorscompensation for the value of their use. And, as previously stated,the systems of both law and practice that grew up around that taskwere based on physical expression. Since it is now possible to convey ideas from one mind to anotherwithout ever making them physical, we are now claiming to own ideasthemselves and not merely their expression. And since it is likewisenow possible to create useful tools that never take physical form. wehave taken to patenting abstractions, sequences of virtual events, andmathematical formulae--the most un-real estate imaginable. In certain areas, this leaves rights of ownership in such an ambiguouscondition that once again property adheres to those who can muster thelargest armies. The only difference is that this time the armiesconsist of lawyers. Threatening their opponents with the endless Purgatory of litigation,over which some might prefer death itself, they assert claim to anythought that might have entered another cranium within the collectivebody of the corporations they serve. They act as though these ideasappeared in splendid detachment from all previous human thought. Andthey pretend that thinking about a product is somehow as good asmanufacturing, distributing, and selling it. What was previously considered a common human resource, distributedamong the minds and libraries of the world, as well as the phenomenaof nature herself, is now being fenced and deeded. It is as though anew class of enterprise had arisen which claimed to own air and water. What is to be done? While there is a certain grim fun to be had in it,dancing on the grave of copyright and patent will solve little,especially when so few are willing to admit that the occupant of thisgrave is even deceased and are trying to up by force what can nolonger be upheld by popular consent. The legalists, desperate over their slipping grip, are vigorouslytrying to extend it. Indeed, the United States and other proponentsof GATT are making are making adherence to our moribund systems ofintellectual property protection a condition of membership in themarketplace of nations. For example, China will be denied Most Favorednation trading status unless they agree to uphold a set of culturallyalien principles that are no longer even sensibly applicable in theircountry of origin. In a more perfect world, we'd be wise to declare a moratorium onlitigation, legislation, and international treaties in this area untilwe had a clearer sense of the terms and conditions of enterprise inCyberspace. Ideally, laws ratify already developed social consensus.They are less the Social Contract itself than a series of memorandaexpressing a collective intent that has emerged out of many millionsof human interactions. Humans have not inhabited Cyberspace long enough or in sufficientdiversity to have developed a Social Contract that conforms to thestrange new conditions of that world. Laws developed prior toconsensus usually serve the already established few who can get thempassed and not society as a whole. To the extent that either law or established social practice exists inthis area, they are already in dangerous disagreement. The lawsregarding unlicensed reproduction of commercial software are clear andstern...and rarely observed. Software piracy laws are so practicallyunenforceable and breaking them has become so socially acceptable thatonly a thin minority appears compelled, either by fear or conscience,to obey them. I sometimes give speeches on this subject, and I always ask how manypeople in the audience can honestly claim to have no unauthorizedsoftware on their hard disks. I've never seen more than ten percent ofthe hands go up. Whenever there is such profound divergence between the law and socialpractice, it is not society that adapts. And, against the swift tideof custom, the Software Publishers' current practice of hanging a fewvisible scapegoats is so obviously capricious as to only furtherdiminish respect for the law. Part of the widespread popular disregard for commercial softwarecopyrights stems from a legislative failure to understand theconditions into which it was inserted. To assume that systems of lawbased in the physical world will serve in an environment that is asfundamentally different as Cyberspace is a folly for which everyonedoing business in the future will pay. As I will discuss in the next segment, unbounded intellectual propertyis very different from physical property and can no longer beprotected as though these differences did not exist. For example, ifwe continue to assume that value is based on scarcity, as it is withregard to physical objects, we will create laws that are preciselycontrary to the nature of information, which may, in many cases,increase in value with distribution. The large, legally risk-averse institutions most likely to play by theold rules will suffer for their compliance. The more lawyers, guns,and money they invest in either protecting their rights or subvertingthose of their opponents, the more commercial competition willresemble the Kwakiutl Potlatch Ceremony, in which adversaries competedby destroying their own possessions. Their ability to produce newtechnology will simply grind to a halt as every move they make drivesthem deeper into a tar pit of courtroom warfare. Faith in law will not be an effective strategy for high techcompanies. Law adapts by continuous increments and at a pace secondonly to geology in its stateliness. Technology advances in thelunging jerks, like the punctuation of biological evolutiongrotesquely accelerated. Real world conditions will continue to changeat a blinding pace, and the law will get further behind, moreprofoundly confused. This mismatch is permanent. Promising economies based on purely digital products will either beborn in a state of paralysis, as appears to be the case withmultimedia, or continue in a brave and willful refusal by their ownersto play the ownership game at all. In the United States one can already see a parallel economydeveloping, mostly among small fast moving enterprises who protecttheir ideas by getting into the marketplace quicker then their largercompetitors who base their protection on fear and litigation. Perhaps those who are part of the problem will simply quarantinethemselves in court while those who are part of the solution willcreate a new society based, at first, on piracy and freebooting. Itmay be that when the current system of intellectual property law hascollapsed, as seems inevitable, that no new legal structure will arisein its place. But something will happen. After all, people do business. When acurrency becomes meaningless, business is done in barter. Whensocieties develop outside the law, they develop their own unwrittencodes, practices, and ethical systems. While technology may undo law,technology offers methods for restoring creative rights. A Taxonomy Of Information It seems to me that the most productive thing to do now is to lookhard into the true nature of what we're trying to protect. How muchdo we really know about information and its natural behaviors? What are the essential characteristics of unbounded creation? How doesit differ from previous forms of property? How many of our assumptionsabout it have actually been about its containers rather than theirmysterious contents? What are its different species and how does eachof them lend itself to control? What technologies will be useful increating new virtual bottles to replace the old physical ones? Of course, information is, by its nature, intangible and hard todefine. Like other such deep phenomena as light or matter, it is anatural host to paradox. And as it is most helpful to understand lightas being both a particle and a wave, an understanding of informationmay emerge in the abstract congruence of its several differentproperties that might be described by the following three statements: Information is an activity. Information is a life form. Information is a relationship. In the following section, I will examine each of these. Information Is An Activity Information Is a Verb, Not a Noun. Freed of its containers, information is obviously not a thing. Infact, it is something that happens in the field of interaction betweenminds or objects or other pieces of information. Gregory Bateson, expanding on the information theory of ClaudeShannon, said, "Information is a difference which makes a difference."Thus, information only really exists in the  [delta]. The makingof that difference is an activity within a relationship. Informationis an action that occupies time rather than a state of being whichoccupies physical space, as is the case with hard goods. It is thepitch, not the baseball, the dance, not the dancer. Information Is Experienced, Not Possessed Even when it has been encapsulated in some static form like a book ora hard disk, information is still something that happens to you as youmentally decompress it from its storage code. But, whether it'srunning at gigabits per second or words per minute, the actualdecoding is a process that must be performed by and upon a mind, aprocess that must take place in time. There was a cartoon in the Bulletin of Atomic Scientists a few yearsago which illustrated this point beautifully. In the drawing, a holdupman trains his gun on the sort of bespectacled fellow you'd figuremight have a lot of information stored in his head. "Quick," ordersthe bandit, "Give me all your ideas." Information Has To Move Sharks are said to die of suffocation if they stop swimming, and thesame is nearly true of information. Information that isn't movingceases to exist as anything but potential...at least until it isallowed to move again. For this reason, the practice of informationhoarding, common in bureaucracies, is an especially wrong-headedartifact of physically based value systems. Information is Conveyed by Propagation, Not Distribution The way in which information spreads is also very different from thedistribution of physical goods. It moves more like something fromnature than from a factory. It can concatenate like falling dominos orgrow in the usual fractal lattice, like frost spreading on a window,but it cannot be shipped around like widgets, except to the extentthat it can be contained in them. It doesn't simply move on. It leavesa trail of itself everywhere it's been. The central economic distinction between information and physicalproperty is the ability of information to be transferred withoutleaving the possession of the original owner. If I sell you my horse,I can't ride him after that. If I sell you what I know, we both knowit. Information Is A Life Form Information wants to be free. Stewart Brand is generally credited with this elegant statement of theobvious, recognizing both the natural desire of secrets to be told andthe fact that they might be capable of possessing something like a"desire" in the first place. English Biologist and Philosopher Richard Dawkins proposed the idea of"memes," self- replicating, patterns of information that propagatethemselves across the ecologies of mind, saying they were like lifeforms. I believe they are life forms in every respect but a basis in thecarbon atom. They self- reproduce, they interact with theirsurroundings and adapt to them, they mutate, they persist. Like anyother life form they evolve to fill the possibility spaces of theirlocal environments, which are, in this case the surrounding beliefsystems and cultures of their hosts, namely, us. Indeed, the sociobiologists like Dawkins make a plausible case thatcarbon-based life forms are information as well, that, as the chickenis an egg's way of making another egg, the entire biological spectacleis just the DNA molecule's means of copying out more informationstrings exactly like itself. Information Replicates into the Cracks of Possibility Like DNA helices, ideas are relentless expansionists, always seekingnew opportunities for lebensraum. And, as in carbon-based nature, themore robust organisms are extremely adept at finding new places tolive. Thus, just as the common housefly has insinuated itself intopractically every ecosystem on the planet, so has the meme of "lifeafter death" found a niche in most minds, or psycho-ecologies. The more universally resonant an idea or image or song, the more mindsit will enter and remain within. Trying to stop the spread of a reallyrobust piece of information is about as easy as keeping killer beesSouth of the Border. The stuff just leaks. Information Wants To Change If ideas and other interactive patterns of information are indeed lifeforms, they can be expected to evolve constantly into forms that willbe more perfectly adapted to their surroundings. And, as we see, theyare doing this all the time. But for a long time, our static media, whether carvings in stone, inkon paper, or dye on celluloid, have strongly resisted the evolutionaryimpulse, exalting as a consequence the author's ability to determinethe finished product. But, as in an oral tradition, digitizedinformation has no "final cut." Digital information, unconstrained by packaging, is a continuingprocess more like the metamorphosing tales of prehistory than anythingthat will fit in shrink wrap. From the Neolithic to Gutenberg,information was passed on, mouth to ear, changing with everyre-telling (or re-singing). The stories that once shaped our sense ofthe world didn't have authoritative versions. They adapted to eachculture in which they found themselves being told. Because there was never a moment when the story was frozen in print,the so-called "moral" right of storytellers to keep the tale their ownwas neither protected nor recognized. The story simply passed througheach of them on its way to the next, where it would assume a differentform. As we return to continuous information, we can expect theimportance of authorship to diminish. Creative people may have torenew their acquaintance with humility. But our system of copyright makes no accommodation whatever forexpressions that don't at some point become "fixed" nor for culturalexpressions which lack a specific author or inventor. Jazz improvisations, standup comedy routines, mime performances,developing monologues, and unrecorded broadcast transmissions all lackthe Constitutional requirement of fixation as a "writing. Withoutbeing fixed by a point of publicatoin the liquid works of the futurewill all look more like these continuously adapting and changing formsand will therefore exist beyond the reach of copyright. Copyright expert Pamela Samuelson tells of having attended aconference last year convened around the fact that Western countriesmay legally appropriate the music, designs, and biomedical lore ofaboriginal people without compensation to their tribe of origin sincethat tribe is not an "author" or "inventor." But soon most information will be generated collaboratively by thecyber-tribal hunter- gatherers of Cyberspace. Our arrogant legaldismissal of the rights of "primitives" will be back to haunt us soon. Information is Perishable With the exception of the rare classic, most information is like farmproduce. Its quality degrades rapidly both over time and in distancefrom the source of production. But even here, value is highlysubjective and conditional. Yesterday's papers are quite valuable tothe historian. In fact, the older they are, the more valuable theybecome. On the other hand, a commodities broker might consider news ofan event that is more than an hour old to have lost any relevance. Information Is A Relationship Meaning Has Value and Is Unique to Each Case In most cases, we assign value to information based on itsmeaningfulness. The place where information dwells, the holy momentwhere transmission becomes reception, is a region that has manyshifting characteristics and flavors depending on the relationship ofsender and receiver, the depth of their interactivity. Each such relationship is unique. Even in cases where the sender is abroadcast medium, and no response is returned, the receiver is hardlypassive. Receiving information is often as creative an act asgenerating it. The value of what is sent depends entirely on the extent to which eachindividual receiver has the receptors...shared terminology, attention,interest, language, paradigm...necessary to render what is receivedmeaningful. Understanding is a critical element increasingly overlooked in theeffort to turn information into a commodity. Data may be any set offacts, useful or not, intelligible or inscrutable, germane orirrelevant. Computers can crank out new data all night long withouthuman help, and the results may be offered for sale as information.They may or may not actually be so. Only a human being can recognizethe meaning that separates information from data. In fact, information, in the economic sense of the word, consists ofdata that have been passed through a particular human mind and foundmeaningful within that mental context. One fella's information is alljust data to someone else. If you're an anthropologist, my detailedcharts of Tasaday kinship patterns might be critical information toyou. If you're a banker from Hong Kong, they might barely seem to bedata. Familiarity Has More Value Than Scarcity With physical goods, there is a direct correlation between scarcityand value. Gold is more valuable than wheat, even though you can't eatit. While this is not always the case, the situation with informationis usually precisely the reverse. Most soft goods increase in value asthey become more common. Familiarity is an important asset in theworld of information. It may often be the case that the best thing youcan do to raise the demand for your product is to give it away. While this has not always worked with shareware, it could be arguedthat there is a connection between the extent to which commercialsoftware is pirated and the amount that gets sold. Broadly piratedsoftware, such as Lotus 1-2-3 or WordPerfect, becomes a standard andbenefits from Law of Increasing Returns based on familiarity. Regarding my own soft product, rock and roll songs, there is noquestion that the band I write them for, the Grateful Dead, hasincreased its popularity enormously by giving them away. We have beenletting people tape our concerts since the early seventies, butinstead of reducing the demand for our product, we are now the largestconcert draw in America, a fact that is at least in part attributableto the popularity generated by those tapes. True, I don't get any royalties on the millions of copies of my songsthat have been extracted from concerts, but I see no reason tocomplain. The fact is, no one but the Grateful Dead can perform aGrateful Dead song, so if you want the experience and not its thinprojection, you have to buy a ticket from us. In other words, ourintellectual property protection derives from our being the onlyreal-time source of it. Exclusivity Has Value The problem with a model that turns the physical scarcity/value ratioon its head is that sometimes the value of information is very muchbased on its scarcity. Exclusive possession of certain facts makesthem more useful. If everyone knows about conditions that might drivea stock price up, the information is valueless. But again, the critical factor is usually time. It doesn't matter ifthis kind of information eventually becomes ubiquitous. What mattersis being among the first who possess it and act on it. While potentsecrets usually don't stay secret, they may remain so long enough toadvance the cause of their original holders. Point of View and Authority Have Value In a world of floating realities and contradictory maps, rewards willaccrue to those commentators whose maps seem to fit their territorysnugly, based on their ability to yield predictable results for thosewho use them. In aesthetic information, whether poetry or rock 'n' roll, people arewilling to buy the new product of an artist, sight-unseen, based ontheir having been delivered a pleasurable experience by previous work. Reality is an edit. People are willing to pay for the authority ofthose editors whose filtering point of view seems to fit best. Andagain, point of view is an asset that cannot be stolen or duplicated.No one but Esther Dyson sees the world as she does and the handsomefee she charges for her newsletter is actually for the privilege oflooking at the world through her unique eyes. Time Replaces Space In the physical world, value depends heavily on possession, orproximity in space. One owns that material that falls inside certaindimensional boundaries and the ability to act directly, exclusively,and as one wishes upon what falls inside those boundaries is theprincipal right of ownership. And of course there is the relationshipbetween value and scarcity, a limitation in space. In the virtual world, proximity in time is a value determinant. Aninformational product is generally more valuable the closer thepurchaser can place himself to the moment of its expression, alimitation in time. Many kinds of information degrade rapidly witheither time or reproduction. Relevance fades as the territory they mapchanges. Noise is introduced and bandwidth lost with passage away fromthe point where the information is first produced. Thus, listening to a Grateful Dead tape is hardly the same experienceas attending a Grateful Dead concert. The closer one can get to theheadwaters of an informational stream, the better his changes offinding an accurate picture of reality in it. In an era of easyreproduction, the informational abstractions of popular experienceswill propagate out from their source moments to reach anyone who'sinterested. But it's easy enough to restrict the real experience ofthe desirable event, whether knock-out punch or guitar lick, to thosewilling to pay for being there. The Protection of Execution In the hick town I come from, they don't give you much credit for justhaving ideas. You are judged by what you can make of them. As thingscontinue to speed up, I think we see that execution is the bestprotection for those designs that become physical products. Or, asSteve Jobs once put it, "Real artists ship." The big winner is usuallythe one who gets to the market first (and with enough organizationalforce to keep the lead). But, as we become fixated upon information commerce, many of us seemto think that originality alone is sufficient to convey value,deserving, with the right legal assurances, of a steady wage. In fact,the best way to protect intellectual property is to act on it. It'snot enough to invent and patent, one has to innovate as well. Someoneclaims to have patented the microprocessor before Intel. Maybe so. Ifhe'd actually started shipping microprocessors before Intel, his claimwould seem far less spurious. Information as Its Own Reward It is now a commonplace to say that money is information. With theexception of Krugerands, crumpled cab-fare, and the contents of thosesuit-cases which drug lords are reputed to carry, most of the money inthe informatized world is in ones and zeros. The global money supplysloshes around the Net, as fluid as weather. It is also obvious, as Ihave discussed, that information has become as fundamental to thecreation of modern wealth as land and sunlight once were. What is less obvious is the extent to which information is acquiringintrinsic value, not as a means to acquisition but as the object to beacquired. I suppose this has always been less explicitly the case. Inpolitics and academia, potency and information have always beenclosely related. However, as we increasingly buy information with money, we begin tosee that buying information with other information is simple economicexchange without the necessity of converting the product into and outof currency. This is somewhat challenging for those who like cleanaccounting, since, information theory aside, informational exchangerates are too squishy to quantify to the decimal point. Nevertheless, most of what a middle class American purchases haslittle to do with survival. We buy beauty, prestige, experience,education, and all the obscure pleasures of owning. Many of thesethings can not only be expressed in non-material terms, they can beacquired by non-material means. And then there are the inexplicable pleasures of information itself,the joys of learning, knowing, and teaching. The strange good feelingof information coming into and out of oneself. Playing with ideas is arecreation which people must be willing to pay a lot for, given themarket for books and elective seminars. We'd likely spend even moremoney for such pleasures if there weren't so many opportunities to payfor ideas with other ideas. This explains much of the collective "volunteer" work that fills thearchives, newsgroups, and databases of the Internet. Its denizens arenot working for nothing, as is widely believed. Rather they aregetting paid in something besides money. It is an economy thatconsists almost entirely of information. This may become the dominant form of human trade, and if we persist inmodeling economics on a strictly monetary basis, we may be gravelymisled. GETTING PAID IN CYBERSPACE How all the foregoing relates to solutions to the crisis inintellectual property is something I've barely started to wrap my mindaround. It's fairly paradigm-warping to look at information throughfresh eyes--to see how very little it is like pig iron or porkbellies, to imagine the tottering travesties of case law we will stackup if we go on treating it legally as though it were. As I've said, I believe these towers of outmoded boilerplate willbe a smoking heap sometime in the next decade and we mind miners willhave no choice but to cast our lot with new systems that work. I'm not really so gloomy about our prospects as readers of thisjeremiad so far might conclude. Solutions will emerge. Nature abhorsa vacuum and so does commerce. Indeed, one of the aspects of the electronic frontier that I havealways found most appealing--and the reason Mitch Kapor and I usedthat phrase in naming our foundation--is the degree to which itresembles the 19th Century American West in its natural preference forsocial devices which emerge from it conditions rather than those whichare imposed from the outside. Until the West was fully settled and "civilized" in this century,order was established according to an unwritten Code of the West thathad the fluidity of etiquette rather than the rigidity of law. Ethicswere more important than rules. Understandings were preferred overlaws, which were, in any event, largely unenforceable. I believe that law, as we understand it, was developed to protect theinterests that arose in the two economic "waves" which Alvin Toffleraccurately identified in The Third Wave. The First Wave wasagriculturally based and required law to order ownership of theprincipal source of production, land. In the Second Wave,manufacturing became the economic mainspring, and the structure ofmodern law grew around the centralized institutions that neededprotection for their reserves of capital, manpower, and hardware. Both of these economic systems required stability. Their laws weredesigned to resist change and to assure some equability ofdistribution within a fairly static social framework. The possibilityspaces had to be constrained to preserve the predictability necessaryto either land stewardship or capital formation. In the Third Wave we have now entered, information to a large extentreplaces land, capital, and hardware, and as I have detailed in thepreceding section, information is most at home in a much more fluidand adaptable environment. The Third Wave is likely to bring afundamental shift in the purposes and methods of law that will affectfar more than simply those statutes that govern intellectual property. The "terrain" itself--the architecture of the Net--may come to servemany of the purposes that could only be maintained in the past bylegal imposition. For example, it may be unnecessary toconstitutionally assure freedom of expression in an environment that,in the words of my fellow EFF co-founder John Gilmore, "treatscensorship as a malfunction" and re-routes proscribed ideas around it. Similar natural balancing mechanisms may arise to smooth over thesocial discontinuities that previously required legal intercession toset right. On the Net, these differences are more likely to be spannedby a continuous spectrum that connects as much as it separates. And, despite their fierce grip on the old legal structure, companieswhich trade in information are likely to find that in their increasinginability to deal sensibly with technological issues, the courts willnot produce results that are predictable enough to be supportive oflong-term enterprise. Every litigation becomes like a game of Russianroulette, depending on the depth the presiding judge'sclue-impairment. Uncodified or adaptive "law," while as "fast, loose, and out ofcontrol" as other emergent forms, is probably more likely to yieldsomething like justice at this point. In fact, one can already see indevelopment new practices to suit the conditions of virtual commerce.The life forms of information are evolving methods to protect theircontinued reproduction. For example, while all the tiny print on a commercial disketteenvelope punctiliously requires much of that who would open it, thereare, as I say, few who read those provisos, let alone follow them tothe letter. And yet, the software business remains a very healthysector of the American economy. Why is this? Because people seem to eventually buy the software theyreally use. Once a program becomes central to your work, you want thelatest version of it, the best support, the actual manuals, allprivileges that are attached to ownership. Such practicalconsiderations will, in the absence of working law, become more andmore important in important in getting paid for what might easily beobtained for nothing. I do think that some software is being purchased in the service ofethics or the abstract awareness that the failure to buy it willresult in its not being produced any longer, but I'm going to leavethose motivators aside. While I believe that the failure of law willalmost certainly result in a compensating re-emergence of ethics asthe ordering template of society, this is a belief I don't have roomto support here. Instead, I think that, as in the case cited above, compensation forsoft products will be driven primarily by practical considerations,all of them consistent with the true properties of digitalinformation, where the value lies in it, and how it can be bothmanipulated and protected by technology. While the conundrum remains a conundrum, I can begin to see thedirections from which solutions may emerge, based in part onbroadening those practical solutions that are already in practice. Relationship and Its Tools I believe one idea is central to understanding liquid commerce:Information economics, in the absence of objects, will be based moreon relationship than possession. One existing model for the future conveyance of intellectual propertyis real time performance, a medium currently used only in theater,music, lectures, stand-up comedy and pedagogy. I believe the conceptof performance will expand to include most of the information economyfrom multi-casted soap operas to stock analysis. In these instances,commercial exchange will be more like ticket sales to a continuousshow than the purchase of discrete bundles of that which is beingshown. The other model, of course, is service. The entire professionalclass--doctors, lawyers, consultants, architects, etc.--are alreadybeing paid directly for their intellectual property. Who needscopyright when you're on a retainer? In fact, this model was applied to much of what is now copyrighteduntil the late 18th Century. Before the industrialization of creation,writers, composers, artists, and the like produced their products inthe private service of patrons. Without objects to distribute in amass market, creative people will return to a condition somewhat likethis, except that they will serve many patrons, rather than one. We can already see the emergence of companies that base theirexistence on supporting and enhancing the soft property they createrather than selling it by the shrink-wrapped piece or embedding it inwidgets. Trip Hawkins' new company for creating and licensing multimedia tools,3DO, is an example of what I'm talking about. 3DO doesn't intend toproduce any commercial software or consumer devices. Instead, theywill act as a kind of private standards setting body, mediating amongsoftware and device creators who will be their licensees. They willprovide a point of commonalty for relationships between a broadspectrum of entities. In any case, whether you think of yourself as a service provider or aperformer, the future protection of your intellectual property willdepend on your ability to control your relationship to the market--arelationship that will most likely live and grow over time. The value of that relationship will reside in the quality ofperformance, the uniqueness of your point of view, the validity ofyour expertise, its relevance to your market, and, underlyingeverything, the ability of that market to access your creativeservices swiftly, conveniently, and interactively. Interaction and Protection Direct interaction will provide a lot of intellectual propertyprotection in the future, and, indeed, it already has. No one knowshow many software pirates have bought legitimate copies of a programafter calling its publisher for technical support and being asked forsome proof of purchase, but I would guess the number is very high. The same kind of controls will be applicable to "question and answer"relationships between authorities (or artists) and those who seektheir expertise. Newsletters, magazines, and books will besupplemented by the ability of their subscribers to ask directquestions of authors. Interactivity will be a billable commodity even without authorship. Aspeople move into the Net and increasingly get their informationdirectly from its point of production, unfiltered by centralizedmedia, they will attempt to develop the same interactive ability toprobe reality which only experience has provided them in the past.Live access to these distant "eyes and ears" will be much easier tocordon than access to static bundles of stored but easily reproducibleinformation. In most cases, control will be based on restricting access to thefreshest, highest bandwidth information. It will be a matter ofdefining the ticket, the venue, the performer, and the identity of theticket holder, definitions that I believe will take their forms fromtechnology, not law. In most cases, the defining technology will be cryptography. Crypto Bottling Cryptography, as I've said perhaps too many times, is the "material"from which the walls, boundaries--and bottles--of Cyberspace will befashioned. Of course there are problems with cryptography or any other purelytechnical method of property protection. It has always appeared to methat the more security you hide your goods behind, the more likely youare to turn your sanctuary into a target. Having come from a placewhere people leave their keys in their cars and don't even have keysto their houses, I remain convinced that the best obstacle to crime isa society with its ethics intact. While I admit that this is not the kind of society most of us live in,I also believe that a social over-reliance on protection by barricadesrather than conscience will eventually wither the latter by turningintrusion and theft into a sport, rather than a crime. This is alreadyoccurring in the digital domain as is evident in the activities ofcomputer crackers. Furthermore, I would argue that initial efforts to protect digitalcopyright by copy protection contributed to the current condition inwhich most otherwise ethical computer users seem morally untroubled bytheir possession of pirated software. Instead of cultivating among the newly computerized a sense of respectfor the work of their fellows, early reliance on copy protection ledto the subliminal notion that cracking into a software package somehow"earned" one the right to use it. Limited not by conscience but bytechnical skill, many soon felt free to do whatever they could getaway with. This will continue to be a potential liability of theencryption of digitized commerce. Furthermore, it's cautionary to remember that copy protection wasrejected by the market in most areas. Many of the upcoming efforts touse cryptography-based protection schemes will probably suffer thesame fate. People are not going to tolerate much which makes computersharder to use than they already are without any benefit to the user. Nevertheless, encryption has already demonstrated a certain bluntutility. New subscriptions to various commercial satellite TV servicessky-rocketed recently after their deployment of more robust encryptionof their feeds. This, despite a booming backwoods trade in blackdecoder chips conducted by folks who'd look more at home runningmoonshine than cracking code. Another obvious problem with encryption as a global solution is thatonce something has been unscrambled by a legitimate licensee, it maybe openly available to massive reproduction. In some instances, reproduction following decryption may not be aproblem. Many soft products degrade sharply in value with time. It maybe that the only real interest in some such products will be amongthose who have purchased the keys to immediacy. Furthermore, as software becomes more modular and distribution movesonline, it will begin to metamorphose in direct interaction with itsuser base. Discontinuous upgrades will smooth into a constant processof incremental improvement and adaptation, some of it man-made andsome of it arising through genetic algorithms. Pirated copies ofsoftware may become too static to have much value to anyone. Even in cases such as images, where the information is expected toremain fixed, the unencrypted file could still be interwoven with codewhich could continue to protect it by a wide variety of means. In most of the schemes I can project, the file would be "alive" withpermanently embedded software that could "sense" the surroundingconditions and interact with them, For example, it might contain codethat could detect the process of duplication and cause it toself-destruct. Other methods might give the file the ability to "phone home" throughthe Net to its original owner. The continued integrity of some filesmight require periodic "feeding" with digital cash from their host,which they would then relay back to their authors. Of course files that possess the independent ability to communicateupstream sound uncomfortably like the Morris Internet Worm. "Live"files do have a certain viral quality. And serious privacy issueswould arise if everyone's computer were packed with digital spies. The point is that cryptography will enable a lot of protectiontechnologies that will develop rapidly in the obsessive competitionthat has always existed between lock- makers and lock-breakers. But cryptography will not be used simply for making locks. It is alsoat the heart of both digital signatures and the afore-mentioneddigital cash, both of which I believe will be central to the futureprotection of intellectual property. I believe that the generally acknowledged failure of the sharewaremodel in software had less to do with dishonesty than with the simpleinconvenience of paying for shareware. If the payment process can beautomated, as digital cash and signature will make possible, I believethat soft product creators will reap a much higher return from thebread they cast upon the waters of Cyberspace. Moreover, they will be spared much of the overhead that presentlyadheres to the marketing, manufacture, sales, and distribution ofinformation products, whether those products are computer programs,books, CD's, or motion pictures. This will reduce prices and furtherincrease the likelihood of non-compulsory payment. But of course there is a fundamental problem with a system thatrequires, through technology, payment for every access to a particularexpression. It defeats the original Jeffersonian purpose of seeingthat ideas were available to everyone regardless of their economicstation. I am not comfortable with a model that will restrict inquiryto the wealthy. An Economy of Verbs The future forms and protections of intellectual property are denselyobscured from the entrance to the Virtual Age. Nevertheless, I canmake (or reiterate) a few flat statements that I earnestly believewon't look too silly in fifty years. In the absence of the old containers, almost everything wethink we know about intellectual property is wrong. We are going tohave to unlearn it. We are going to have to look at information asthough we'd never seen the stuff before. The protections that we will develop will rely far more onethics and technology than on law. Encryption will be the technical basis for most intellectualproperty protection. (And should, for this and other reasons, be mademore widely available.) The economy of the future will be based on relationship ratherthan possession. It will be continuous rather than sequential. And finally, in the years to come, most human exchange will be virtualrather than physical, consisting not of stuff but the stuff of whichdreams are made. Our future business will be conducted in a world mademore of verbs than nouns. Ojo Caliente, New Mexico, October 1, 1992 New York, New York, November 6, 1992 Brookline, Massachusetts, November 8, 1992 New York, New York, November 15, 1993 San Francisco, California, November 20, 1993 Pinedale, Wyoming, November 24-30, 1993 New York, New York, December 13-14, 1993 This expression has lived and grown to this point over the time periodand in the places detailed above. Despite its print publication here,I expect it will continue to evolve in liquid form, possibly foryears. The thoughts in it have not been "mine" alone but have assembledthemselves in a field of interaction that has existed between myselfand numerous others, to whom I am grateful. They particularly include:Pamela Samuelson, Kevin Kelly, Mitch Kapor, Mike Godwin, StewartBrand, Mike Holderness, Miriam Barlow, Danny Hillis, Trip Hawkins, andAlvin Toffler. However, I should note in honesty that when Wired sends me a check forhaving temporarily "fixed" it on their pages, I alone will cash it... WT02-B12-33IA087-000625-B044-341http://res2.resnet.upenn.edu:80/cis590/reading.064.html 130.91.195.242 19970122061612 text/html 9065HTTP/1.0 200 OKDate: Wed, 22 Jan 1997 06:16:11 GMTServer: Apache/1.1.1Content-type: text/htmlContent-length: 8894Last-modified: Tue, 22 Nov 1994 06:31:49 GMT Notes on key escrow meeting with NSA and Bell Labs Notes on key escrow meeting with NSA and Bell Labs Date: Wed, 02 Feb 94 16:10:26 -0500 From: Matt Blaze <mab@research.att.com> A group from NSA and FBI met the other day with a group of us at BellLabs to discuss the key escrow proposal. They were surprisinglyforthcoming and open to discussion and debate, and were willing to atleast listen to hard questions. They didn't object when asked if wecould summarize what we learned to the net. Incidentally, the peopleat the meeting seemed to base a large part of their understanding ofpublic opinion on Usenet postings. Postings to sci.crypt andtalk.politics.crypto seem to actually have an influence on ourgovernment. A number of things came out at the meeting that we didn't previouslyknow or that clarified previously released information. What followsis a rough summary; needless to say, nothing here should be taken asgospel, or representing the official positions of anybody. Also,nothing here should be taken as an endorsement of key escrow, clipper,or anything else by the authors; we're just reporting. These notesare based on the collective memory of Steve Bellovin, Matt Blaze, JackLacy, and Mike Reiter; there may be errors or misunderstandings.Please forgive the rough style. Note also the use of "~ ~" for'approximate quotes' (a marvelous Whit Diffie-ism). NSA's stated goals and motives for all this: DES is at the end of its useful life Sensitive, unclassified government data needs protection This should be made available to US Citizens US business data abroad especially needs protection The new technology should not preclude law enforcement access They indicated that the thinking was not that criminals would use keyescrowed crypto, but that they should not field a system thatcriminals could easily use against them. The existence of key escrowwould deter them from using crypto in the first place. The FBIrepresentative said that they expect to catch "~only the stupidcriminals~" through the escrow system. Another stated reason for key escrow is that they do not think thateven government-spec crypto devices can be kept physically secure.They do expect enough to be diverted to the black market that they feelthey need a response. NSA's emphasis was on the foreign black market... There seems to be a desire to manipulate the market, by having thefixed cost of key escrow cryptography amortized over the governmentmarket. Any private sector devices would have to sell a much largernumber of units to compete on price. (This was somewhere between animplication and an explicit statement on their part.) When asked about cryptography in software, "~...if you want USgovernment cryptography, you must do it with hardware~". Clipper chips should be available (to product vendors) in June. Youcan't just buy loose chips - they have to be installed in approvedproducts. Your application interface has to be approved by NIST foryou to get your hands on the chips. An interesting point came up about the reverse-engineering resistanceof the chips: they are designed to resist reverse engineering the datain the chip without destroying the chip. It is not clear (from theinformation presented at the meeting) whether the chips are equallyresistant to destructive reverse-engineering to learn the skipjackalgorithm. They said the algorithm was patented, but they may havebeen joking. ("~And if that doesn't scare you enough, we'll turn thepatent over to PKP.~") The resistance to reverse engineering is not considered absolute byNSA. They do feel that "~it would require the resources of a nationallaboratory, and anyone with that much money can design their owncryptosystem that's just as strong.~" They repeated several times that there are "~no plans to regulate theuse of alternate encryption within the US by US citizens.~" They alsoindicated they "~weren't naive~" and didn't think that they could ifthey wanted to. There were 919 authorized wiretaps, and 10,000 pen register monitors,in 1992. They do not have any figures yet on how often cryptographywas used to frustrate wiretaps. They do not yet have a production version of the "decoder" box used bylaw enforcement. Initially, the family key will be split (by the sameXOR method) and handled by two different people in the athorizedagencies. There is presently only one family key. The specificationsof the escrow exploitation mechanism are not yet final, either; theyare considering the possibility of having the central site strip offthe outer layers of encryption, and only sending the session key backto the decoder box. The escrow authorities will NOT require presentation of a court orderprior to releasing the keys. Instead, the agency will fill out a formcertifying that they have a legal authorization. This is also backedup with a separate confirmation from the prosecutor's office. Theescrow agencies will supply any key requested and will not themselvesverify that the keys requested are associated with the particular courtorder. The NSA did not answer a question as to whether the national securitycommunity would obtain keys from the same escrow mechanism for their(legally authorized) intelligence gathering or whether some othermechanism would exist for them to get the keys. The masks for the Clipper/Capstone chip are unclassified (but areprotected by trade secret) and the chips can be produced in anunclassified foundry. Part of the programming in the secure vaultincludes "~installing part of the Skipjack algorithm.~" Laterdiscussion indicated that the part of the algorithm installed in thesecure vault are the "S-tables", suggesting that perhaps unprogrammedClipper chips can be programmed to implement other 80-bit key, 32 roundciphers. The Capstone chip includes an ARM-6 RISC processor that can be used forother things when no cryptographic functions are performed. Inparticular, it can be used by vendors as their own on-board processor.The I/O to the processor is shut off when a crypto operation is inprogress. They passed around a Tessera PCMCIA (type 1) card. These cardscontain a Capstone chip and can be used by general purpose PCapplications. The cards themselves might not be export controlled.(Unfortunately, they took the sample card back with them...) The cardwill digitally sign a challenge from the host, so you can't substitutea bogus card. The cards have non-volatile onboard storage for users'secret keys and for the public keys of a certifying authority. They are building a library/API for Tessera, called Catapult, thatwill provide an interface suitable for many different applications.They have prototype email and ftp applications that already uses it.They intend to eventually give away source code for this library.They responded favorably to the suggestion that they put it up foranonymous ftp. Applications (which can use the library and which the NSA approves forgovernment use) will be responsible for managing the LEAF field. Notethat they intend to apply key escrowed Skipjack to other applications,including mail and file encryption. The LEAF would be included insuch places as the mail header or the file attributes. This impliesthat it is possible to omit sending the LEAF -- but the decrypt chipwon't work right if it doesn't get one. When asked, they indicated that it might be possible wire up a pair ofClipper/Capstone chips to not transmit the LEAF field, but that theway to do this is "~not obvious from the interface we give you~" and"~you'd have to be careful not to make mistakes~". They gave a lot ofattention to obvious ways to get around the LEAF. The unit key is generated via Skipjack itself, from random seedsprovided by the two escrow agencies (approximately monthly, thoughthat isn't certain yet). They say they prefer a software generationprocess because its correct behavior is auditable. Capstone (but not Clipper) could be configured to allow independentloading of the two key halves, in separate facilities. "~It's yourmoney [meaning American taxpayers].~" The LEAF field contains 80 bits for the traffic key, encrypted via theunit key in "~a unique mode <grin>~", 32 bits for the unit id, and a 16bit checksum of some sort. (We didn't waste our breath asking what thechecksum algorithm was.) This is all encrypted under the family keyusing "~another mode <grin>~". They expressed a great deal of willingness to make any sort ofreasonable changes that vendors needed for their products. They aretrying very hard to get Skipjack and key escrow into lots ofproducts. WT02-B12-34IA087-000625-B044-387http://res2.resnet.upenn.edu:80/cis590/reading.065.html 130.91.195.242 19970122061646 text/html 11575HTTP/1.0 200 OKDate: Wed, 22 Jan 1997 06:16:45 GMTServer: Apache/1.1.1Content-type: text/htmlContent-length: 11403Last-modified: Tue, 22 Nov 1994 06:31:50 GMTa selection of material incl Q&A from todays Clipper briefings at the WH. EFF has supplied these to IP (and others). There are more if you want all the released PR .. djf THE WHITE HOUSEOFFICE OF THE VICE PRESIDENT EMBARGOED UNTIL, 3: 00 PM EST CONTACT: 202/456-7035February 4, 1994 STATEMENT OF THE VICE PRESIDENT Today's announcements on encryption represent important steps inthe implementation of the Administration's policy on this criticalissue. Our policy is designed to provide better encryption toindividuals and businesses while ensuring that the needs of lawenforcement and national security are met. Encryption is a law and order issue since it can be used by criminalsto thwart wiretaps and avoid detection and prosecution. It also hashuge strategic value. Encryption technology and cryptoanalysisturned the tide in the Pacific and elsewhere during World War II. [end of statement] Statement ofDr. Martha HarrisDeputy Assistant Secretary of Statefor Political-Military AffairsFebruary 4, 1994 Encryption -- Export Control Reform The Secretary of State is announcing today measures arising fromthe Administration's decision to reform export control proceduresapplicable to products incorporating encryption technology. Thesereforms are part of the Administration's effort to eliminateunnecessary controls and ensure efficient implementation. Thereforms will simplify encryption product export licensing andspeed the review of encryption product exports, thus helping U.S.manufacturers to compete more effectively in the global market.While there will be no changes in the types of equipmentcontrolled by the Munitions List, we are announcing measures toexpedite licensing. Last year the President announced an initiative to encourage U.S.manufacturers and users of encryption to take advantage of agovernment technology (the key-escrow chip) that providesexcellent security while ensuring that the Government has a meansto decode the encryption when lawfully authorized, such as whenexecuting a court-authorized warrant in connection with a criminalinvestigation. At the time he announced this initiative, thePresident directed a comprehensive review of U.S. policy regardingdomestic use and export of encryption technology. The reforms weare announcing today result from that review. The President has determined that vital U.S. national security andlaw enforcement interests compel maintaining appropriate controlof encryption. Still, there is much that can be done to reformexisting controls to ensure that they are efficiently implementedand to maintain U.S. leadership in the world market for encryptiontechnology. Accordingly, the President has asked the Secretary ofState to take immediate action to implement a number of proceduralreforms. The reforms are: * License Reform: Under new licensing arrangements, encryptionmanufacturers will be able to ship their products from the UnitedStates directly to customers within approved regions withoutobtaining individual licenses for each end user. This will improvethe ability of our manufacturers to provide expedited delivery ofproducts, and to reduce shipping and tracking costs. It shouldalso reduce the number of individual license requests, especiallyfor small businesses that cannot afford internationaldistributors. * Rapid review of export license applications: A significantnumber of encryption export license applications can be reviewedmore quickly. For such exports, we have set a license turnaroundgoal of two working days. * Personal use exemption: We will no longer require that U.S.citizens obtain an export license prior to taking encryptionproducts out of the U.S. temporarily for their own personal use.In the past, this requirement caused delays and inconvenience forbusiness travellers. * Allow exports of key-escrow encryption: After initial review,key-escrow encryption products may now be exported to most endusers. Additionally, key-escrow products will qualify for speciallicensing arrangements. These reforms should have the effect of minimizing the impact ofexport controls on U.S. industry. The Department of State willtake all appropriate actions to ensure that these reforms areimplemented as quickly as possible. The Secretary of State asksthat encryption product manufacturers evaluate the impact of thesereforms over the next year and provide feedback both on how thereforms have worked out and on recommendations for additionalprocedural reforms. The contact point for further information on these reforms is RoseBiancaniello, Office of Defense Trade Controls, Bureau ofPolitical-Military Affairs, Department of State, (703) 875-6644. QUESTIONS AND ANSWERS ABOUT THECLINTON ADMINISTRATION'S ENCRYPTION POLICY Q. What were the findings of the encryption technology review? A. The review confirmed that sound encryption technology isneeded to help ensure that digital information in both computerand telecommunications systems is protected against unauthorizeddisclosure or tampering. It also verified the importance ofpreserving the ability of law enforcement to understand encryptedcommunications when conducting authorized wiretaps. Key escrowtechnology meets these objectives. Specific decisions were made to enable federal agencies and theprivate sector to use the key escrow technology on a voluntarybasis and to allow the export of key escrow encryption products. In addition, the Department of State will streamline exportlicensing procedures for products that can be exported undercurrent regulations in order to help U.S. companies to sell theirproducts abroad. To meet the critical need for ways to verify the author and senderof an electronic message -- something that is crucial to businessapplications for the National Information Infrastructure -- thefederal government is committed to ensuring the availability of aroyalty-free, public-domain Digital Signature Standard. Finally, an interagency working group has been established tocontinue to address these issues and to maintain a dialogue withindustry and public interest groups. Q. Who has been consulted during this review? The Congress?Industry? What mechanism is there for continuing consultation? A. Following the President's directive announced on April 16,1993, extensive discussions have been held with Congress,industry, and privacy rights groups on encryption issues. Formalpublic comment was solicited on the Escrowed Encryption Standardand on a wide variety of issues related to the review through theComputer System Security and Privacy Advisory Board. The White House Office of Science and Technology Policy and theNational Security Council will chair the interagency workinggroup. The group will seek input from the private sector bothinformally and through several existing advisory committees. Italso will work closely with the Information Policy Committee ofthe Information Infrastructure Task Force, which is responsiblefor coordinating Administration telecommunications and informationpolicy. Q. If national security and law enforcement interests requirecontinued export controls of encryption, what specific benefitscan U.S. encryption manufacturers expect? A. The reforms will simplify encryption product export licensingand speed the review of encryption product exports. Among otherbenefits, manufacturers should see expedited delivery of products,reduced shipping and reporting costs, and fewer individual licenserequests -- especially for small businesses that cannot affordinternational distributors. A personal exemption for businesstravellers using encryption products will eliminate delays andinconvenience when they want to take encryption products out ofthe U.S. temporarily. Q. Why is the key escrow standard being adopted? A. The key escrow mechanism will provide Americans andgovernment agencies with encryption products that are more secure,more convenient, and less expensive than others readily availabletoday -- while at the same time meeting the legitimate needs oflaw enforcement. Q. Will the standard be mandatory? A. No. The Administration has repeatedly stressed that the keyescrow technology, and this standard, is for voluntary use byfederal and other government agencies and by the private sector.The standard that is being issued only applies to federal agencies-- and it is voluntary. Does this approach expand the authority of government agencies tolisten in on phone conversations? No Key escrow technology provides government agencies with no[sic] new authorities to access the content of the privateconversations of Americans. Q. Will the devices be exportable? Will other devices that usethe government hardware? A. Yes. After an initial review of the product, the StateDepartment will permit the export of devices incorporating keyescrow technology to most end users. One of the attractions ofthis technology is the protection it can give to U.S. companiesoperating at home and abroad. Q. Suppose a law enforcement agency is conducting a wiretap on adrug smuggling ring and intercepts a conversation encrypted usingthe device. What would they have to do to decipher the message? A. They would have to obtain legal authorization, normally acourt order, to do the wiretap in the first place. They would thenpresent documentation, including a certification of thisauthorization, to the two entities responsible for safeguardingthe keys. (The key is split into component parts, which are storedseparately in order to ensure the security of the key escrowsystem.) They then obtain the components for the keys for thedevice being used by the drug smugglers. The components are thencombined and the message can be read. Q. Who will hold the escrowed keys? A. The Attorney General has selected two U.S. agencies to holdthe escrowed key components: the Treasury Department's AutomatedSystems Division and the Commerce Department's National Instituteof Standards and Technology. Q. How strong is the security in the device? How can I be surehow strong the security is? A. This system is more secure than many other voice encryptionsystem readily available today. While the algorithm upon which theEscrowed Encryption Standard is based will remain classified toprotect the security of the system, an independent panel ofcryptography experts found that the algorithm provides significantprotection. In fact, the panel concluded that it will be 36 yearsuntil the cost of breaking the algorithm will be equal to the costof breaking the current Data Encryption Standard now being used. Q. Is there a "trap door" that would allow unauthorized accessto the keys? A. No. There is no trapdoor. Q. Whose decision was it to propose this product? A. The National Security Council, the Justice Department, theCommerce Department, and other key agencies were involved in thisdecision. The approach has been endorsed by the President, theVice President, and appropriate Cabinet officials. WT02-B12-35IA087-000625-B045-38http://res2.resnet.upenn.edu:80/cis590/reading.066.html 130.91.195.242 19970122061710 text/html 15872HTTP/1.0 200 OKDate: Wed, 22 Jan 1997 06:17:10 GMTServer: Apache/1.1.1Content-type: text/htmlContent-length: 15700Last-modified: Tue, 22 Nov 1994 06:31:51 GMTExcerpt from PGP User's Guide -------------------------- PGP User's Guide Volume I: Essential Topics -------------------------- by Philip Zimmermann Revised 14 Jun 93 Synopsis: PGP uses public-key encryption to protect E-mail and datafiles. Communicate securely with people you've never met, with nosecure channels needed for prior exchange of keys. PGP is wellfeatured and fast, with sophisticated key management, digitalsignatures, data compression, and good ergonomic design. Software and documentation (c) Copyright 1990-1992 Philip Zimmermann. For information on PGP licensing, distribution, copyrights, patents,trademarks, liability limitations, and export controls, see the"Legal Issues" section in the "PGP User's Guide, Volume II: SpecialTopics". Quick Overview============= Pretty Good(tm) Privacy (PGP), from Phil's Pretty Good Software, is ahigh security cryptographic software application for MSDOS, Unix,VAX/VMS, and other computers. PGP allows people to exchange files ormessages with privacy, authentication, and convenience. Privacymeans that only those intended to receive a message can read it. Authentication means that messages that appear to be from aparticular person can only have originated from that person. Convenience means that privacy and authentication are providedwithout the hassles of managing keys associated with conventionalcryptographic software. No secure channels are needed to exchangekeys between users, which makes PGP much easier to use. This isbecause PGP is based on a powerful new technology called "public key"cryptography. PGP combines the convenience of the Rivest-Shamir-Adleman (RSA)public key cryptosystem with the speed of conventional cryptography,message digests for digital signatures, data compression beforeencryption, good ergonomic design, and sophisticated key management. And PGP performs the public-key functions faster than most othersoftware implementations. PGP is public key cryptography for themasses. PGP does not provide any built-in modem communications capability. You must use a separate software product for that. This document, "Volume I: Essential Topics", only explains theessential concepts for using PGP, and should be read by all PGPusers. "Volume II: Special Topics" covers the advanced features ofPGP and other special topics, and may be read by more serious PGPusers. Neither volume explains the underlying technology details ofcryptographic algorithms and data structures. Why Do You Need PGP?==================== It's personal. It's private. And it's no one's business but yours.You may be planning a political campaign, discussing your taxes, orhaving an illicit affair. Or you may be doing something that youfeel shouldn't be illegal, but is. Whatever it is, you don't wantyour private electronic mail (E-mail) or confidential documents readby anyone else. There's nothing wrong with asserting your privacy. Privacy is as apple-pie as the Constitution. Perhaps you think your E-mail is legitimate enough that encryption isunwarranted. If you really are a law-abiding citizen with nothing tohide, then why don't you always send your paper mail on postcards? Why not submit to drug testing on demand? Why require a warrant forpolice searches of your house? Are you trying to hide something? You must be a subversive or a drug dealer if you hide your mailinside envelopes. Or maybe a paranoid nut. Do law-abiding citizenshave any need to encrypt their E-mail? What if everyone believed that law-abiding citizens should usepostcards for their mail? If some brave soul tried to assert hisprivacy by using an envelope for his mail, it would draw suspicion. Perhaps the authorities would open his mail to see what he's hiding. Fortunately, we don't live in that kind of world, because everyoneprotects most of their mail with envelopes. So no one draws suspicionby asserting their privacy with an envelope. There's safety innumbers. Analogously, it would be nice if everyone routinely usedencryption for all their E-mail, innocent or not, so that no one drewsuspicion by asserting their E-mail privacy with encryption. Thinkof it as a form of solidarity. Today, if the Government wants to violate the privacy of ordinarycitizens, it has to expend a certain amount of expense and labor tointercept and steam open and read paper mail, and listen to andpossibly transcribe spoken telephone conversation. This kind oflabor-intensive monitoring is not practical on a large scale. Thisis only done in important cases when it seems worthwhile. More and more of our private communications are being routed throughelectronic channels. Electronic mail is gradually replacingconventional paper mail. E-mail messages are just too easy tointercept and scan for interesting keywords. This can be doneeasily, routinely, automatically, and undetectably on a grand scale. International cablegrams are already scanned this way on a largescale by the NSA. We are moving toward a future when the nation will be crisscrossedwith high capacity fiber optic data networks linking together all ourincreasingly ubiquitous personal computers. E-mail will be the normfor everyone, not the novelty it is today. The Government willprotect our E-mail with Government-designed encryption protocols. Probably most people will trust that. But perhaps some people willprefer their own protective measures. Senate Bill 266, a 1991 omnibus anti-crime bill, had an unsettlingmeasure buried in it. If this non-binding resolution had become reallaw, it would have forced manufacturers of secure communicationsequipment to insert special "trap doors" in their products, so thatthe Government can read anyone's encrypted messages. It reads: "Itis the sense of Congress that providers of electronic communicationsservices and manufacturers of electronic communications serviceequipment shall insure that communications systems permit theGovernment to obtain the plain text contents of voice, data, andother communications when appropriately authorized by law." Thismeasure was defeated after rigorous protest from civil libertariansand industry groups. In 1992, the FBI Digital Telephony wiretap proposal was introduced toCongress. It would require all manufacturers of communicationsequipment to build in special remote wiretap ports that would enablethe FBI to remotely wiretap all forms of electronic communicationfrom FBI offices. Although it never attracted any sponsors inCongress because of citizen opposition, it will be reintroduced in1993. Most alarming of all is the White House's bold new encryption policyinitiative, under development at NSA for four years, and unveiledApril 16th, 1993. The centerpiece of this initiative is aGovernment-built encryption device, called the "Clipper" chip,containing a new classified NSA encryption algorithm. The Governmentis encouraging private industry to design it into all their securecommunication products, like secure phones, secure FAX, etc. AT&T isnow putting the Clipper into all their secure voice products. Thecatch: At the time of manufacture, each Clipper chip will be loadedwith its own unique key, and the Government gets to keep a copy,placed in escrow. Not to worry, though-- the Government promisesthat they will use these keys to read your traffic only when dulyauthorized by law. Of course, to make Clipper completely effective,the next logical step would be to outlaw other forms of cryptography. If privacy is outlawed, only outlaws will have privacy. Intelligenceagencies have access to good cryptographic technology. So do the bigarms and drug traffickers. So do defense contractors, oil companies,and other corporate giants. But ordinary people and grassrootspolitical organizations mostly have not had access to affordable"military grade" public-key cryptographic technology. Until now. PGP empowers people to take their privacy into their own hands. There's a growing social need for it. That's why I wrote it. How it Works============ It would help if you were already familiar with the concept ofcryptography in general and public key cryptography in particular. Nonetheless, here are a few introductory remarks about public keycryptography. First, some elementary terminology. Suppose I want to send you amessage, but I don't want anyone but you to be able to read it. Ican "encrypt", or "encipher" the message, which means I scramble itup in a hopelessly complicated way, rendering it unreadable to anyoneexcept you, the intended recipient of the message. I supply acryptographic "key" to encrypt the message, and you have to use thesame key to decipher or "decrypt" it. At least that's how it worksin conventional "single-key" cryptosystems. In conventional cryptosystems, such as the US Federal Data EncryptionStandard (DES), a single key is used for both encryption anddecryption. This means that a key must be initially transmitted viasecure channels so that both parties can know it before encryptedmessages can be sent over insecure channels. This may beinconvenient. If you have a secure channel for exchanging keys, thenwhy do you need cryptography in the first place? In public key cryptosystems, everyone has two related complementarykeys, a publicly revealed key and a secret key. Each key unlocks thecode that the other key makes. Knowing the public key does not helpyou deduce the corresponding secret key. The public key can bepublished and widely disseminated across a communications network.This protocol provides privacy without the need for the same kind ofsecure channels that a conventional cryptosystem requires. Anyone can use a recipient's public key to encrypt a message to thatperson, and that recipient uses her own corresponding secret key todecrypt that message. No one but the recipient can decrypt it,because no one else has access to that secret key. Not even theperson who encrypted the message can decrypt it. Message authentication is also provided. The sender's own secret keycan be used to encrypt a message, thereby "signing" it. This createsa digital signature of a message, which the recipient (or anyoneelse) can check by using the sender's public key to decrypt it. Thisproves that the sender was the true originator of the message, andthat the message has not been subsequently altered by anyone else,because the sender alone possesses the secret key that made thatsignature. Forgery of a signed message is infeasible, and the sendercannot later disavow his signature. These two processes can be combined to provide both privacy andauthentication by first signing a message with your own secret key,then encrypting the signed message with the recipient's public key. The recipient reverses these steps by first decrypting the messagewith her own secret key, then checking the enclosed signature withyour public key. These steps are done automatically by therecipient's software. Because the public key encryption algorithm is much slower thanconventional single-key encryption, encryption is better accomplishedby using a high-quality fast conventional single-key encryptionalgorithm to encipher the message. This original unencipheredmessage is called "plaintext". In a process invisible to the user, atemporary random key, created just for this one "session", is used toconventionally encipher the plaintext file. Then the recipient'spublic key is used to encipher this temporary random conventionalkey. This public-key-enciphered conventional "session" key is sentalong with the enciphered text (called "ciphertext") to therecipient. The recipient uses her own secret key to recover thistemporary session key, and then uses that key to run the fastconventional single-key algorithm to decipher the large ciphertext message. Public keys are kept in individual "key certificates" that includethe key owner's user ID (which is that person's name), a timestamp ofwhen the key pair was generated, and the actual key material. Publickey certificates contain the public key material, while secret keycertificates contain the secret key material. Each secret key isalso encrypted with its own password, in case it gets stolen. A keyfile, or "key ring" contains one or more of these key certificates. Public key rings contain public key certificates, and secret keyrings contain secret key certificates. The keys are also internally referenced by a "key ID", which is an "abbreviation" of the public key (the least significant 64 bits of the large public key). When this key ID is displayed, only the lower24 bits are shown for further brevity. While many keys may share thesame user ID, for all practical purposes no two keys share the samekey ID. PGP uses "message digests" to form signatures. A message digest is a128-bit cryptographically strong one-way hash function of themessage. It is somewhat analogous to a "checksum" or CRC errorchecking code, in that it compactly "represents" the message and isused to detect changes in the message. Unlike a CRC, however, it iscomputationally infeasible for an attacker to devise a substitutemessage that would produce an identical message digest. The messagedigest gets encrypted by the secret key to form a signature. Documents are signed by prefixing them with signature certificates,which contain the key ID of the key that was used to sign it, asecret-key-signed message digest of the document, and a timestamp ofwhen the signature was made. The key ID is used by the receiver tolook up the sender's public key to check the signature. Thereceiver's software automatically looks up the sender's public keyand user ID in the receiver's public key ring. Encrypted files are prefixed by the key ID of the public key used toencrypt them. The receiver uses this key ID message prefix to lookup the secret key needed to decrypt the message. The receiver's software automatically looks up the necessary secret decryption key in the receiver's secret key ring. These two types of key rings are the principal method of storing andmanaging public and secret keys. Rather than keep individual keys inseparate key files, they are collected in key rings to facilitate theautomatic lookup of keys either by key ID or by user ID. Each userkeeps his own pair of key rings. An individual public key istemporarily kept in a separate file long enough to send to yourfriend who will then add it to her key ring. About the Author================ Philip Zimmermann is a software engineer consultant with 19 yearsexperience, specializing in embedded real-time systems, cryptography,authentication, and data communications. Experience includes designand implementation of authentication systems for financialinformation networks, network data security, key managementprotocols, embedded real-time multitasking executives, operatingsystems, and local area networks. Custom versions of cryptography and authentication products and public key implementations such as the NIST DSS are available fromZimmermann, as well as custom product development services. Hisconsulting firm's address is: Boulder Software Engineering3021 Eleventh StreetBoulder, Colorado 80304 USAPhone 303-541-0140 (voice or FAX) (10:00am - 7:00pm Mountain Time)Internet: prz@acm.org WT02-B12-36IA087-000625-B045-116http://res2.resnet.upenn.edu:80/cis590/pgp/ 130.91.195.242 19970122061825 text/html 764HTTP/1.0 200 OKDate: Wed, 22 Jan 1997 06:18:23 GMTServer: Apache/1.1.1Content-type: text/html Index of /cis590/pgp Index of /cis590/pgp  Name                   Last modified     Size  Description  Parent Directory       25-Sep-95 20:51      -   pgpdoc1.txt            22-Nov-94 01:26    73k   pgpdoc2.txt            22-Nov-94 01:26    98k   politic.txt            22-Nov-94 01:26    17k  WT02-B12-37IA087-000625-B045-140http://res2.resnet.upenn.edu:80/cis590/reading.067.html 130.91.195.242 19970122061837 text/html 5921HTTP/1.0 200 OKDate: Wed, 22 Jan 1997 06:18:38 GMTServer: Apache/1.1.1Content-type: text/htmlContent-length: 5750Last-modified: Tue, 22 Nov 1994 06:31:52 GMTAdmin. names escrow agents, no compromise on Clipper - 7 files EFF Press Release 04/04/94 * DISTRIBUTE WIDELY * At two briefings, Feb. 4, 1994, the Clinton Administration and variousagencies gave statements before a Congressional committee, and laterrepresentatives of civil liberties organizations, industry spokespersonsand privacy advocates. The Electronic Frontier Foundation's position,based on what we have seen and heard from the Administration today, isthat the White House is set on a course that pursues Cold War nationalsecurity and law enforcement interests to the detriment of individualprivacy and civil liberties. The news is grim. The Administration is: not backing down on Clipper not backing down on key escrow not backing down on selection of escrow agents already adamant on escrowed key access procedures not willing to elminate ITAR restrictions hiding behind exaggerated threats of "drug dealers" and "terrorists" The material released to the industry and advocacy version of the briefinghave been placed online at ftp.eff.org (long before their onlineavailability from goverment access sites, one might add). See below forspecific details. No information regarding the Congressional committee version of the briefinghas been announced. EFF Director Jerry Berman, who attended the privatesector meeting, reported the following: "The White House and other officials briefed industry on its Clipper chipand encryption review. While the review is not yet complete, they havereached several policy conclusions. First, Clipper will be proposed asa new Federal Information Processing Standard (FIPS) next Wednesday. [Feb.9] It will be "vountary" for government agencies and the private sectorto use. They are actively asking other vendors to jump in to make themarket a Clipper market. Export licensing processes will be speeded up butexport restrictions will not be lifted in the interests of nationalsecurity. The reason was stated bluntly at the briefing : to frustratecompetition with clipper by other powerful encryption schemes by makingthem difficult to market, and to "prevent" strong encryption from leavingthe country thus supposedly making the job of law enforcement andintelligence more difficult. Again in the interest of national security. Ofcourse, Clipper will be exportable but they would not comment on how othergovernments will view this. Treasury and NIST will be the escrow agentsand Justice asserted that there was no necessity for legislation toimplement the escrow procedures. "I asked if there would be a report to explain the rationale for choosingthese results - we have no explanation of the Administration's thinking, orany brief in support of the results. They replied that there would be noreport because they have been unable to write one, due to the complexity ofthe issue. "One Administation spokesperson said this was the Bosnia ofTelecommunications. I asked, if this was so, how, in the absense of somepolicy explanation, could we know if our policy here will be as successfulas our policy in Bosnia?" The announcements, authorization procedures for release of escrowed keys,and q-and-a documents from the private sector briefing are online at EFF. They are: "Statement of the [White House] Press Secretary" [White House]file://ftp.eff.org/pub/EFF/Policy/Crypto/wh_press_secy.statement "Statement of the Vice President" [very short - WH]file://ftp.eff.org/pub/EFF/Policy/Crypto/gore_crypto.statement "Attorney General Makes Key Escrow Encryption Announcements" [Dept. of Just.]file://ftp.eff.org/pub/EFF/Policy/Crypto/reno_key_escrow.statement "Authorization Procedures for Release pf Emcryption Key Components inConjunction with Intercepts Pursuant to Title III/State Statutes/FISA"[3 docs. in one file - DoJ]file://ftp.eff.org/pub/EFF/Policy/Crypto/doj_escrow_intercept.rules "Working Group on Data Security" [WH]file://ftp.eff.org/pub/EFF/Policy/Crypto/interagency_workgroup.announce "Statement of Dr. Martha Harris Dep. Asst. Secy. of State for Polit.-Mil.Affairs: Encryption - Export Control Reform" [Dept. of State]file://ftp.eff.org/pub/EFF/Policy/Crypto/harris_export.statement "Questions and Answers about the Clinton Administration's EncryptionPolicy" [WH]file://ftp.eff.org/pub/EFF/Policy/Crypto/wh_crypto.q-a These files are available via anonymous ftp, or via WWW at:http://www.eff.org/ in the "EFF ftp site" menu off the front page. Gopher access:gopher://gopher.eff.org/Look in "EFF Files"/"Papers and Testimony"/"Crypto" All 7 of these documents will be posted widely on the net immediatelyfollowing this notice. Contacts: Digital Privacy: Jerry Berman, Exec. Director <jberman@eff.org> Daniel J. Weitzner, Sr. Staff Counsel <djw@eff.org> Archives: Stanton McCandlish, Online Activist <mech@eff.org> General EFF Information: info@eff.org WT02-B12-38IA087-000625-B045-180http://res2.resnet.upenn.edu:80/cis590/reading.068.html 130.91.195.242 19970122061916 text/html 1074HTTP/1.0 200 OKDate: Wed, 22 Jan 1997 06:19:12 GMTServer: Apache/1.1.1Content-type: text/htmlContent-length: 904Last-modified: Tue, 22 Nov 1994 06:31:53 GMTClipper and balance As editor of Interesting People (boy I gave myself a title), I am happy topresent well thought out positions from all sides of the argument. Ibelieve this is a critical issue for the future of our country and wouldsincerely solicit views (even and especially ones I may not personallyagree with). By the way, my Computers, Ethics and Society course at Penn this term isusing the Clipper issue to explore the ethical, legal and economic aspectsof this one aspect of the impact of technology on our nation. We aremaintaining a Mosiac (WWW) set of all the literature we gather and papersthat will be writen. If you have anything that you would like to contributesend it to mengwong@sas.upenn.edu (Meng Weng Wong). If you would like topeek (it is already getting full), you might look at http://www.seas.upenn.edu/~mengwong/cis590/clipper.html) Dave WT02-B12-39IA087-000625-B045-220http://res2.resnet.upenn.edu:80/cis590/reading.069.html 130.91.195.242 19970122062030 text/html 13205HTTP/1.0 200 OKDate: Wed, 22 Jan 1997 06:20:29 GMTServer: Apache/1.1.1Content-type: text/htmlContent-length: 13033Last-modified: Tue, 22 Nov 1994 06:31:53 GMTFrom Brock N. Meeks R.I.P -- Privacy '94 copyright 1994CyberWireBrock N. Meeks Jacking in from a Non-Government Approved Encryption Port: Washington, DC -- The Clinton Administration today gang raped yourprivacy. The White House Friday announced its endorsement of a sweeping newsecurity and privacy initiative. Privacy, as we know it, willnever be the same. All the rules have changed. Forever. The catchis that the government gets to write all the rules; you get novote. None. Worse, you can't even read the fucking rule bookbecause it's classified. The initiative involves the creation of "new products to acceleratethe development and use of advanced and secure telecommunicationsnetworks and wireless telecommunications links," the White Housesaid. In English: Law enforcement and intelligence agencies nowhave an easy way to fuck with any and all forms of spoken orelectronically transmitted communications. The policy is voluntary, of course. You don't have to sign on toit. You don't have to use government approved encryption devices.But if you plan to do any business with the government, you'll haveto use them. And if the government gets its way, well, you'll endusing them whether you want to or not. You'll have no choice (areyou sensing a trend here?). All telephones, computers, faxmachines, modems, etc. will come "wiretap ready." It will be thede facto standard. If you don't use the government standard, you'll be brandingyourself a CryptoRebel. Big fucking deal? Maybe, maybe not. Butthink for a second. Perhaps some agency will be able to check your"crypto-approval rating." Perhaps those favorable bank loans,mortgage rates or low insurance premiums will only go to those withhigh crypto-approval ratings. But the White House is adamant about making sure you understandthis whole damn thing is voluntary. And don't let anything swayyou from believing that, not even the White House backgroundermaterials that say no U.S. citizen "as a matter of right, isentitled to an unbreakable commercial encryption product." Just use the "balanced" approach of the government system, where inthis case the "breakability" of the encryption belongs only withthem. Everything will work out fine. Just listen: "Encryption isa law and order issue since it can be use by criminals to thwartwiretaps and avoid detection and prosecution," said Vice PresidentGore. "Our policy is designed to provide better encryption toindividuals and businesses while ensuring that the needs of lawenforcement and national security are met." The Administration won't tell you exactly why they expect yousimply hand over all your privacy safeguards to them. "Listen, ifyou knew what we knew about criminal activity, this issue wouldn'teven be debated," said Mike Nelson with the Office of Science andTechnology Policy and co-chair of the Working Group on DataSecurity, a newly created interagency task force. Chicken or the Egg?================== The new policy was hatched in the super-secret recesses of theNational Security Agency (NSA). And while Clinton was still tryingto find the instruction manual for his White House telephonesystem, the NSA, FBI and other assorted agencies shoved their ideasonto the National Security Council table. Before theAdministration could blink, it found itself in the unenviableposition of having backed a severely flawed security policy thathas compromised the privacy of every U.S. citizen and drawn the ireof every civil liberties in the country. But the White House quickly put the breaks on, calling for a fullscale, government wide "review" of its security and privacypolicies. It gave privacy advocacy groups some breathing room.Surely the Administration, once it had a chance to actually studythis damn thing, would see it through it. But the White House punted. The review was a smoke screen.Instead, it provided momentum inside the Administration. It wasfrom this review, ordered last April, that this new initiativesprings. And when all was said and done, the White House screwed the pooch. Clipper Sails On================ The one trick pony here is the Clipper Chip, a device that can beinstalled in virtually any communications device. The chipscrambles all conversations. No one can crack the code, expect thegovernment, of course. The Feds hold all the keys. Rather, theyhold the only keys that count. Each Clipper chip is made with 3 unique keys. All three are neededto descramble the encrypted messages streaming through them. Butonly the government's keys matter. The key you get with yourClipper Chip is essentially the chip's social security number.You'll never actually see this key, have any idea what its numberis or get your hands on it. If you try to sneak a peak at it, thedamn thing self destructs. Honest. The other two keys will be held in electronic vaults; fraternaltwins, separated by mandate. Each of these keys will be held bygovernment agencies, called "escrow agents." One will be held bythe National Institute for Standards and Technology, the other bythe Automated Systems Division of the Dept. of Treasury. When a law enforcement agency, which could be your local sheriff'sdepartment, wants to wiretap a conversation that's been encryptedby Clipper they apply to each of the escrow agents. The agentssend their respective key, electronically, to a "black box"operated by the law enforcement agency. As encrypted conversationsstream into the box, they come out the back side in nice, neatsounding vowels and consonants, or in the case of electronic mail,in plain ol' ASCII. Yes, all law enforcement agencies need a court approved wiretapbefore they can pull this whole scheme off. This, theAdministration says, is where you're privacy is protected. "We'renot going to use Clipper to listen in on the American public," saidRaymond Kammer of NIST deputy director. It will only be used tocatch criminals. Honest. We Don't Need No Stinkin' Warrant================================= Maybe now would be a good time to mention the National SecurityAgency. You know these guys. Super-secret, spook agency. Theirmission? To monitor and intercept foreign communications. Did youcatch that word FOREIGN? I hope so, it's crucial. The NSA is only allowed to intercept foreign communications --spying on U.S. citizens is a crime. They can't even pry into aU.S. citizen's business a court ordered wiretap. A judge wouldnever allow it. Yet it was the NSA that cooked up this wholeClipper Chip scheme. Why you ask? Good question. But theAdministration refuses to discuss the issue. Here's another they can't answer. Suppose the NSA intercepts amessage from Iraq and finds it's Clipper encrypted (that damnlittle black box is specially made to sniff out the Clipper'salgorithm and descramble it's social security number). What doesthe NSA do with this encrypted Iraqi message? How does it decryptthe message? There's a classic Catch-22 running here. Agencies need the Clipper keys from the escrow agents to read themessage or listen in on the conversation. But to get the keys youneed proof that you have a warrant. The NSA is *never* issued awarrant. You see, the NSA doesn't need a warrant to spy on FOREIGNcommunications. So, this begs the $64,000 question is: How does the NSA get theescrow agents to give them the keys to decrypt the message if theycan't show a warrant? Answer: They don't have to show a warrant; they don't have tocause; they don't have to show spit. What's wrong with this picture? "We have appropriate procedures and safeguards built into thesystem for the NSA," Nelson said. "I can't tell you what thoseare, of course, that would divulging too much about the NSA'soperation." Fox Guarding the Chickens========================= There will be absolutely no abuse of the system. This is what theAdministration would like you to believe. They also would like youto believe that President's don't approve Watergate break-ins, thatarms are never traded for hostages, that the FBI never secretlyrecords civil rights leaders in the heat of infidelity and that FBIdirectors have never shown a proclivity for red sequined dressesand shiny high-heeled cruel shoes. Representatives from four government organizations stood before thepress and outlined all the careful thinking and rigorous safeguardsthat have gone into this system. There are at least 9 differentsteps that must be followed to get these Clipper keys transferredfrom the escrow agents to the agency authorized to do the wiretap. Fair enough, isn't it? Well, it would be except for the fact thatthe Justice Department intentionally wrote a giant fucking loop-hole into the law. Buried in the Justice Department briefing papers, outlining theauthorization procedures for release of the escrow keys, is thisgem: "These procedures do not create, and are not intended tocreate, any substantive rights for individuals intercepted throughelectronic surveillance, and noncompliance with these proceduresshall not provide the basis for any motion to suppress or otherobjection to the introduction of electronic surveillance evidencelawfully acquired." So, if somebody screws up, like for instance, asks for the keys tobe sent before they actually have a wiretap in hand, or has nowiretap authority at all! there is no recourse provision. Criminals As Dumb Shits======================= But what about that wily criminal element? Once they get wind ofthis, won't they seek out another type of encryption? The FBIdoesn't think so. In fact, the FBI thinks criminals are such dumbshits that they'll forget all about the fact that Clipper evenexists. "I predict that few criminals will remember years from now whatthey've read in the Wall Street Journal" about how these deviceswere installed in telephones, said FBI's James Kallestrom. (Ofcourse, if criminals are so stupid, why are they perusing the WallSt. Journal... maybe he really meant the New York Times...) So let's get this right. The FBI is sure that criminals will "justforget" that Clipper is installed in their phones and use themanyway. These are the criminals that also would be forgetting thattheir multi-million dollar drug deals, not to mention their ownsweet ass, could be in jeopardy every time they make a call. Yes,the government really thinks so. It's more likely that some bright, enterprising criminal mind willcreate a worldwide black market that deals in "non-ClipperInstalled" encryption devices. Damn, talk about an industry withsome growth potential. Getting To the Data Stream========================== The whole damn program goes into the crapper, however, if thegovernment can't get access to source, to the digital data stream,as it comes out of the telephone switch. In order to do this youhave to tap the digital conversation. That's right, you guessedit: Digital Wiretap Access. The FBI failed on its own last year to generate any support inCongress for this digital wiretap proposal. Hell, the FBIcouldn't even get a single member of Congress to introduce thething. So the FBI broke the chain of command: They got thePresident and Vice President to sign off on the idea. The Administration will soon announce its decision on how it willgive the FBI the right to easily wiretap even your unencryptedconversations. "Within a few months at most we should havesomething decided," said Barry Smith of the FBI's CongressionalAffairs office. The FBI's Kallestrom said it was "all but a donedeal." This isn't a question of whether or not the Administration willline up behind the FBI on this. It already has. It's only amatter of paperwork, and the nagging little issue of how to pay formaking the telephone companies comply with the new rules. Butthese are small details, compared to the heat the Administrationalready knows it'll take when they finally unwrap this puppy. Private No More=============== OSTP's Nelson quipped that these security and privacy issues arethe Cyberspace version of the Administration's muddied Bosniapolicy. Like Bosnia, the White House expects the American public to "trustus" on this issue. After all, the Administration says, they knowa hell of a lot more than we do about what kind criminal activityis really going down. Trusting these law enforcement and intelligence agencies is onething; tempting them by putting all-powerful tools right into theirhip pockets is something that should generate a hue and cry loudenough for all of Washington to hear. So, if you're really pissed off, just pick up the phone can callyour neighbor. Somebody in Washington is bound to hear it. Meeks out.... WT02-B12-40IA087-000625-B045-263http://res2.resnet.upenn.edu:80/cis590/reading.070.html 130.91.195.242 19970122062052 text/html 3983HTTP/1.0 200 OKDate: Wed, 22 Jan 1997 06:20:52 GMTServer: Apache/1.1.1Content-type: text/htmlContent-length: 3812Last-modified: Tue, 22 Nov 1994 06:31:54 GMTBackground on the Administation's encryption policy announcements Subject: for interesting peopleDate: Sat, 05 Feb 94 14:23:27 -0500From: Stephen Walker <steve@tis.com> Background on the Administation's encryption policy announcements On Friday Feb 4 the Clinton Administration held a press conferenceto announce a progress report on the interagency review of cryptography.Their review is not finished but the following was made public: - approval of the Escrow Encryption Standard and thus formalizationof the Clipper key escrow process. The EES (now FIPS 185) is the first "classified" Federal InformationProcessing Standard. The standard describes two classified "R21 InformalTechnical Reports" that "will be required to assure interoperabilityof EES devices." "Organizations holding an appropriate security clearanceand entering into a Memorandum of Agreement with the National SecurityAgency regarding implementation of the standard will be provided accessto the classified specifications. Inquires may be made regarding theTechnical Reports and this program to Director, National Security Agency,Fort George G. Meade, MD 20755-6000, ATTN: R21." This is the first time in the history of FIPS (dating back to 1965 or so)that clearances are required to implement a federal standard. This is adirect consequence of using a classifed algorithm and classified key escrowprocedure to protect unclassified information. The approval of the EES was made over the nearly unanimous objections(several hundred to two) received during the public comment period. Therationale for why the overwhelming public comments were overruled willmost likely not be made available since it is classified. It was announced that Clipper devices with key escrow will be ableto be exported. When asked about the international acceptability of key escrow, the commentwas made that "little progress has been made" in discussions with othergovernments that have taken place even "as little as three weeks ago". - procedures for export control of already exportablecryptographic products will be relaxed. However, there will be no change in what can and cannot be exported.If your product cannot be exported today, it will not be able to beexported tomorrow. Apparently the growing body of information concerning the foreignavailability of DES and related products and the ease with whichother countries allow the export of DES products has, thus far, had noinfluence on government policy makers. - details on key escrow agents (NIST and Treasury (it seemedimportant to someone to point out that neither of these were "lawenforcement" related agencies)) and key escrow procedures were announced. - establishment of an interagency working group on encryption andtelecommunication policy. - a decision not to proceed with the licensing of the DigitalSignature Algorithm to Public Key Partners, a proposal put forward lastJune which met with another overwhelming public (including foreigngovernments) condemnation. Apparently the fact that this exclusive licensing would be at considerablecost to the public is now viewed as not in the government's best interest. Unfortunately, little was said about what would happen to the DigitalSignature Standard. The government will proceed down three paths: - attempting to negotiate a deal with Public Key Partners, - resorting to "other legal" approaches, and/or - defining a new algorithm for the DSS. When asked if these alternatives would take a long time to resolve, theanswer was the government expects this matter to be resolved quickly. Nothing in all that was announced at the conference was other thanvoluntary for the general public. WT02-B12-41IA087-000625-B045-306http://res2.resnet.upenn.edu:80/cis590/reading.071.html 130.91.195.242 19970122062127 text/html 2217HTTP/1.0 200 OKDate: Wed, 22 Jan 1997 06:21:16 GMTServer: Apache/1.1.1Content-type: text/htmlContent-length: 2046Last-modified: Tue, 22 Nov 1994 06:31:55 GMTWash. Post article on Clipper 2/5/94 -- comment on Date: Sat, 05 Feb 94 12:54:02 EST From: Kevin Curran <CURRAN%JHUHYG.BITNET@JHUVM.HCF.JHU.EDU> Subject: Wash. Post article on Clipper 2/5/94 Please post to "interesting People" mailing list if you deem appropriate. David - I am reading today's page one story on the Washington Post byJohn Mintz & John Schwartz entitled 'Clinton Backs Security Agencieson Computer Eavesdropping'. Hopefully a full copy of this will make itto the interesting-people mailing list. Getting this on the front pageis a good start though. I think the only way Clinton would back downfrom this would be if there was an outcry from the public. But withmany people still not on the information highway yet and more concernand interest with ice-skating scandals, I'm afraid it's not on thefront burner yet. The public needs to be educated on this before it's toolate. Certainly one wouldn't let anyone search their home without probablecause and a warrant. Yet today much private data (eg credit histories,medical histories etc.) gets in the hands legally of people should haveno business with it and I fear this may increase in the future. It's veryfrightening but not as frightening as a populace that is uninformed. Nowto get back to the Post article. John - I'm wondering if you couldclarify something in the article. Let me quote a short paragraph: "Administration officials said that U.S. firms can buy powerful encryption equipment that does not contain the Clipper chip if they choose, but a White House statement said officials reserve the right to 'restrict access' to such technology in the future." Two key questions arise: Is there a date in the future after which all firms would bemandated to buy the Clipper technology? Would those firms who bought non-Clipper encryption devices beallowed to keep them or be forced retroactively to adapt toClipper? WT02-B12-42IA087-000625-B045-343http://res2.resnet.upenn.edu:80/cis590/reading.072.html 130.91.195.242 19970122062200 text/html 3634HTTP/1.0 200 OKDate: Wed, 22 Jan 1997 06:22:00 GMTServer: Apache/1.1.1Content-type: text/htmlContent-length: 3463Last-modified: Tue, 22 Nov 1994 06:31:56 GMT1994-02-03 Statement on Communications Act of 1994 Date: Thu, 3 Feb 1994 22:29-0500 From: The White House <75300.3115@compuserve.com> Subject: 1994-02-03 Statement on Communications Act of 1994 THE WHITE HOUSE Office of the Press Secretary For Immediate Release February 3, 1994 STATEMENT OF THE PRESS SECRETARY The introduction today of the "Communications Act of 1994" marksan important step toward fulfilling the President's goal ofcongressional action this year that ensures the creation of theNational Information Infrastructure. The Administration particularlycommends the leadership of Chairman Hollings, Senators Inouye, Danforthand Stevens as well as the bill's co- sponsors for their leadership inmoving this process forward. Since the President issued that challenge in his State of theUnion Address on January 25th, Congress has begun hearings onlegislation pending in the House of Representatives and todaylegislation has been introduced in the Senate. These actions demonstrate growing consensus and momentum behindthe goal that the President established and the principles earlierenunciated by the Vice President. As explained in the Vice President's January 11th address, theAdministration's vision of the National Information Infrastructure isdriven by five basic principles: to promote investment, to provide andprotect competition, to secure open access, to provide for universalservice, and to ensure that government regulation is itself flexibleand adaptable. Each of these principles is reflected in the provisions of the"Communications Act of 1994." Its first three titles directly addressthe need for universal service, telecommunications investment, andregulatory reform. Its provisions addressing the future activities ofRegional Bell Operating Companies and the ability of telephonecompanies to provide cable service represent an effort to achieve thedual goals of more competition and the protection of fair competition.And the mandate that telecommunications carriers providenondiscriminatory access and interconnection to their facilities servesto further the goal of open access for all companies providingtelecommunications and information services. The Administrationremains committed to ensuring the role of the Department of Justice inapproving the entry of the Regional Bell Operating Companies into longdistance. The Administration is particularly pleased that the Senate billechoes the challenge issued by the President and Vice President -- thatall classrooms, libraries, hospitals and clinics be connected to theNational Information Infrastructure. This bill heads in the right direction. As the legislativeprocess goes forward, the Administration looks forward to working withthe bill's sponsor and other members of the Senate on the final versionof Senate legislation. In discussions with members of the Senate andthe House of Representatives, the Administration will continue toemphasize the principles outlined in the Vice President's speech andthe specific proposals set forth in Administration white papers. The Administration looks forward to continuing its close work withCongress in the creation and enactment of comprehensive legislationthis year that will enable all Americans to enjoy the benefits of anadvanced information infrastructure. WT02-B12-43IA087-000625-B046-72http://res2.resnet.upenn.edu:80/cis590/reading.073.html 130.91.195.242 19970122062330 text/html 5558HTTP/1.0 200 OKDate: Wed, 22 Jan 1997 06:23:24 GMTServer: Apache/1.1.1Content-type: text/htmlContent-length: 5387Last-modified: Tue, 22 Nov 1994 06:31:57 GMTThe Electronic Frontier Foundation needs your help to ensure privacy rights! The Electronic Frontier Foundation needs your help to ensure privacy rights! * DISTRIBUTE WIDELY * Monday, February 7th, 1994 From: Jerry Berman, Executive Director of EFF jberman@eff.org Dear Friends on the Electronic Frontier, I'm writing a personal letter to you because the time has now come foraction. On Friday, February 4, 1994, the Administration announced that itplans to proceed on every front to make the Clipper Chip encryption schemea national standard, and to discourage the development and sale ofalternative powerful encryption technologies. If the government succeedsin this effort, the resulting blow to individual freedom and privacy couldbe immeasurable. As you know, over the last three years, we at EFF have worked to ensurefreedom and privacy on the Net. Now I'm writing to let you know aboutsomething *you* can do to support freedom and privacy. *Please take amoment to send e-mail to U.S. Rep. Maria Cantwell (cantwell@eff.org) toshow your support of H.R. 3627, her bill to liberalize export controls onencryption software.* I believe this bill is critical to empoweringordinary citizens to use strong encryption, as well as to ensuring thatthe U.S. software industry remains competitive in world markets. Here are some facts about the bill: Rep. Cantwell introduced H.R. 3627 in the House of Representatives onNovember 22, 1993. H.R. 3627 would amend the Export Control Act to moveauthority over the export of nonmilitary software with encryptioncapabilities from the Secretary of State (where the intelligence communitytraditionally has stalled such exports) to the Secretary of Commerce. Thebill would also invalidate the current license requirements fornonmilitary software containing encryption capablities, unless there issubstantial evidence that the software will be diverted, modified orre-exported to a military or terroristic end-use. If this bill is passed, it will greatly increase the availability ofsecure software for ordinary citizens. Currently, software developers donot include strong encryption capabilities in their products, because theState Department refuses to license for export any encryption technologythat the NSA can't decipher. Developing two products, one with less secureexportable encryption, would lead to costly duplication of effort, so evensoftware developed for sale in this country doesn't offer maximumsecurity. There is also a legitimate concern that software companies willsimply set up branches outside of this country to avoid the exportrestrictions, costing American jobs. The lack of widespread commercial encryption products means that it willbe very easy for the federal government to set its own standard--theClipper Chip standard. As you may know, the government's Clipper Chipinitiative is designed to set an encryption standard where the governmentholds the keys to our private conversations. Together with the DigitalTelephony bill, which is aimed at making our telephone and computernetworks "wiretap-friendly," the Clipper Chip marks a dramatic new efforton the part of the government to prevent us from being able to engage intruly private conversations. We've been fighting Clipper Chip and Digital Telephony in the policy arenaand will continue to do so. But there's another way to fight thoseinitiatives, and that's to make sure that powerful alternative encryptiontechnologies are in the hands of any citizen who wants to use them. Thegovernment hopes that, by pushing the Clipper Chip in every way short ofexplicitly banning alternative technologies, it can limit your choices forsecure communications. Here's what you can do: I urge you to write to Rep. Cantwell today at cantwell@eff.org. In theSubject header of your message, type "I support HR 3627." In the body ofyour message, express your reasons for supporting the bill. EFF willdeliver printouts of all letters to Rep. Cantwell. With a strong showingof support from the Net community, Rep. Cantwell can tell her colleagueson Capitol Hill that encryption is not only an industry concern, but alsoa grassroots issue. *Again: remember to put "I support HR 3627" in yourSubject header.* This is the first step in a larger campaign to counter the efforts ofthose who would restrict our ability to speak freely and with privacy.Please stay tuned--we'll continue to inform you of things you can do topromote the removal of restrictions on encryption. In the meantime, you can make your voice heard--it's as easy as e-mail.Write to cantwell@eff.org today. Sincerely, Jerry BermanExecutive Director, EFFjberman@eff.org P.S. If you want additional information about the Cantwell bill, sende-mail to cantwell-info@eff.org. To join EFF, write membership@eff.org.For introductory info about EFF, send any message to info@eff.org. The text of the Cantwell bill can be found on the Internet with the any ofthe following URLs (Universal Resource Locaters): ftp://ftp.eff.org/pub/Policy/Legislation/cantwell.billhttp://www.eff.org/ftp/EFF/Policy/Legislation/cantwell.billgopher://gopher.eff.org/00/EFF/legislation/cantwell.bill It will be available on AOL (keyword EFF) and CIS (go EFFSIG) soon. WT02-B12-44IA087-000625-B046-113http://res2.resnet.upenn.edu:80/cis590/reading.074.html 130.91.195.242 19970122062422 text/html 3195HTTP/1.0 200 OKDate: Wed, 22 Jan 1997 06:24:20 GMTServer: Apache/1.1.1Content-type: text/htmlContent-length: 3024Last-modified: Tue, 22 Nov 1994 06:31:58 GMTJacking in from the Congressional Port "Brock N. Meeks" <brock@well.sf.ca.us> Washington, DC -- White House's slippery plan to salt informationhighway with its home-grown encryption technology has irked atleast two members of Congress, prompting a call for congressionalhearings. Senator Patrick Leahy (D-Vt.), chairman of the Technology and LawSubcommittee said he would likely hold hearings "on the seriousissues raised" by Administration's announcement that it wouldurge private sector to voluntarily adopt its Clipper Chiptechnology. "Basically, what this means is that the UnitedStates Government will hold the two keys to unlock any privatecommunication coded with this program," Leahy said. Citizens andpotential foreign customers aren't likely to see Clipper "as thesolution to privacy and security concerns," he said. White House plan was called "disappointing," by Rep. Don Edwards(D-Cal.). "I was hoping for a more realistic policy from theAdministration," said Edwards, a former FBI agent. "Competitorsall over the world can sell the strongest encryption technology,but U.S. companies cannot," he said. Leahy waded in on Administration and law enforcement claims thatClipper would help thwart terrorist and criminal activity, sayingit was "obvious" these groups would shun Clipper enabled devices."Why would any sophisticated criminal or terrorist decide to useClipper Chip to keep their communications secret when this is theone encryption method to which the government holds the keys?" heasked. Despite Leahy's misgivings, the Administration and lawenforcement agencies continue to bank on the success of Clipperbecause most criminals are "just dumb," the FBI has statedrepeatedly. The Administration's decision to keep the handcuffs on exportcontrols of privately developed encryption schemes also worriedthe congressmen. Leahy called it "a misstep... Why would anyforeign government want to buy American software ortelecommunications equipment containing Clipper Chip when theU.S. government has the keys to eavesdrop on any privatecommunications?" Edwards said the new policy "won't stop terrorists and drugtraffickers from acquiring encryption technology," adding hehoped President Clinton would "look at this policy again." The government shouldn't be in the business of mandatingparticular technologies, Leahy said. "Whatever confidence Imight have that the U.S. government will limit its use of thedecoding keys to specific and justifiable law enforcementobjectives, I doubt my confidence will be universally shared," hesaid. Meeks out... Well, almost... Leahy's office said he *wants* to hear from thepublic on the matter of holding hearings. Any and all commentson the viability of the program, any concerns the public has,should be sent to Leahy immediately, a staffer said. Leahy canbe reached at: Committee on the Judiciary, Washington, DC 20510;his phone number is 202-224-3406. WT02-B12-45IA087-000625-B046-165http://res2.resnet.upenn.edu:80/cis590/reading.075.html 130.91.195.242 19970122062536 text/html 1406HTTP/1.0 200 OKDate: Wed, 22 Jan 1997 06:25:30 GMTServer: Apache/1.1.1Content-type: text/htmlContent-length: 1235Last-modified: Tue, 22 Nov 1994 06:31:59 GMT"so how long before the other shoe drops?" Law professor Dan Burk of George Macon U. contributes this to the cyberiamailing list: I guess that I'll need to review DOJ's mumbo-jumbo more carefully, butI was under the impression that the feds would supposedly obtain theencryption keys from the escrow agents *after* they had a warrant inhand (thus satisfying Trotter's "neutral magistrate" requirement -- intheory). Even assuming that the plan calls for judicial review sufficient tomeet separation of powers/4th amendment requirements, it is just asdisturbing as ever: 1) The escrow "agents" are executive branch federal agencies with noincentive to consider the interests of the accused or even to seriouslyreview whether a warrant has properly issued, and, 2) DOJ's disclaimer that the escrow plan creates no substantive rightstrongly suggests that they fully expect the plan will be misused/abused. 3) The administration doth protest too much that adherence to the escrowstandard is "voluntary." It does the law enforcement agencies no goodto have this standard unless other encryption methods are unavailable --so how long before the other shoe drops? Dandburk@gmuvax.gmu.edu WT02-B12-46IA087-000625-B046-206http://res2.resnet.upenn.edu:80/cis590/reading.076.html 130.91.195.242 19970122062559 text/html 965HTTP/1.0 200 OKDate: Wed, 22 Jan 1997 06:26:01 GMTServer: Apache/1.1.1Content-type: text/htmlContent-length: 795Last-modified: Tue, 22 Nov 1994 06:31:59 GMTresponse to Mike Nelson Posted-Date: Tue, 8 Feb 1994 12:18:44 -0500 Date: Tue, 8 Feb 1994 09:14:48 -0800 (PST) From: John Schwartz <jswatz@well.sf.ca.us> Mike Nelson claims to be mystified at the Washington Post'sstatement that the White House has retained the right to restrictencryption technology. That statement comes from the White House's ownbackground papers distributed at the NIST announcement. The statement,delivered in question-and answer form, asked whether the administrationwould restrict access to encryption technology if it could not get whatit needed from the just-announced Clipper plan. The answer was that theseare fundamental issues and are still under consideration--not a "no"answer. I hope this clears up the misunderstanding.WT02-B12-47IA087-000625-B046-246http://res2.resnet.upenn.edu:80/cis590/reading.077.html 130.91.195.242 19970122062625 text/html 18647HTTP/1.0 200 OKDate: Wed, 22 Jan 1997 06:26:25 GMTServer: Apache/1.1.1Content-type: text/htmlContent-length: 18475Last-modified: Tue, 22 Nov 1994 06:32:00 GMTtext of info file on Cantwell bill (from EFF) [ I apologize to the non US readers of interesting_people for thse strictlyinternal US mailings, but you might be interested in the battle beingjoined in the USA. .. djf] [ for those in the USA feel free to express your opinions, what ever theymay be, to cantwell@eff.org .. djf] From: ssteele@eff.org (Shari Steele) Following are Representative Maria Cantwell's remarks to the House ofRepresentatives when she introduced H.R. 3627, Legislation to Amend theExport Administration Act of 1979. Her synopsis of the bill appears at theend. These remarks appeared in the Congressional Record on November 24,1993, at Volume 139, Page 3110. Please write to Rep. Cantwell today at cantwell@eff.org letting her knowyou support her bill. In the Subject header of your message, type "Isupport HR 3627." In the body of your message, express your reasons forsupporting the bill. EFF will deliver printouts of all letters to Rep.Cantwell. With a strong showing of support from the Net community, Rep.Cantwell can tell her colleagues on Capitol Hill that encryption is notonly an industry concern, but also a grassroots issue. *Again: remember toput "I support HR 3627" in your Subject header.* The text of the Cantwell bill can be found with the any of the followingURLs (Universal Resource Locaters): ftp://ftp.eff.org/pub/Policy/Legislation/cantwell.billhttp://www.eff.org/ftp/EFF/Policy/Legislation/cantwell.billgopher://gopher.eff.org/00/EFF/legislation/cantwell.bill ********************************************************************** Mr. Speaker, I am today introducing legislation to amend the ExportAdministration Act of 1979 to liberalize export controls on software withencryption capabilities. A vital American industry is directly threatened by unilateral U.S.Government export controls which prevent our companies from meetingworldwide user demand for software that includes encryption capabilities toprotect computer data against unauthorized disclosure, theft, oralteration. The legislation I am introducing today is needed to ensure thatAmerican companies do not lose critical international markets to foreigncompetitors that operate without significant export restrictions. Withoutthis legislation, American software companies, some of America's stareconomic performers, have estimated they stand to lose between $6 and $9billion in revenue each year. American hardware companies are alreadylosing hundreds of millions of dollars in lost computer system salesbecause increasingly sales are dependent on the ability of a U.S. firm tooffer encryption as a feature of an integrated customer solution involvinghardware, software, and services. The United States' export control system is broken. It was designedas a tool of the cold-war, to help fight against enemies that no longerexist. The myriad of Federal agencies responsible for controlling the flowof exports from our country must have a new charter, recognizing today'srealities. Next year, the House Foreign Affairs Subcommittee of EconomicPolicy, Trade and the Environment, of which I am a member, will be markingup legislation to overhaul the Export Administration Act. It is my hopethat the legislation I introduce today will be included in the final ExportAdministration Act rewrite. This legislation takes some important steps to resolve a seriousproblem facing some of our most dynamic industries. It would give theSecretary of Commerce exclusive authority over dual use informationsecurity programs and products, eliminates the requirement for exportlicenses for generally available software with encryption capabilities, andrequires the Secretary to grant such validated licenses for exports ofother software with encryption capabilities to any country to which wealready approve exports for foreign financial institutions. The importance of this legislation cannot be overstated. America'scomputer software and hardware companies, including such well-knowncompanies as Apple, DEC, Hewlett-Packard, IBM, Lotus, Microsoft, Novell,and WordPerfect, have been among the country's most internationallycompetitive firms earning more than one-half of their revenues fromexports. The success of American software and hardware companies overseas isparticularly dramatic and the importance of foreign markets is growing.Currently, American software companies hold a 75 percent worldwide marketshare and many derive over 50 percent of their revenues from foreign sales.American computer hardware manufacturers earn more than 60 percent of theirrevenues from exports. As my colleagues are well-aware, we are participants in a newinformation age that is quickly transforming local and nationalmarketplaces and creating new international marketplaces where nonepreviously existed. President Clinton and Vice President Gore have bothspent considerable time explaining their vision of the National InformationInfrastructure that is essential to our continued economic growth. Part of that infrastructure is already in place. Internationalbusiness transactions that just a few years ago took days or weeks ormonths to complete can now be accomplished in minutes. Driving this marketplace transformation is the personal computer.And, at the heart of every personal computer is computer software. Even themost computer illiterate of us recognize that during the past decade,computer prices have dropped dramatically while computer capabilities haveincreased exponentially. That combination has made it possible to exchangeinformation and conduct business at a scale that was considered sciencefiction only a few years ago. Indeed, we all now rely on computer networks to conduct businessand exchange information. Whether it be the electronic mail or "e-mail"system that we all now use in our congressional offices or the automatedteller system relied on to conduct our personal financial affairs, we relyon computer networks of information. In the future, individuals will use information technologies toconduct virtually any of the routine transactions that they do today inperson, over the telephone, and through paper files. From personalcomputers at home, in schools, and in public libraries, they will accessbooks, magazine articles, videos, and multimedia resources on any topicthey want. People will use computer networks to locate and accessinformation about virtually any subject imaginable, such as background onthe candidates in local political races, information on job opportunitiesin distant cities, the weather in the city or country they will be visitingon their vacation, and the highlights of specific sports events. Consumers will use their computers and smart televisions to shopand pay for everything from clothing and household goods to airlinetickets, insurance, and all types of on-line services. Electronic recordsof the items they purchase and their credit histories will be easy tocompile and maintain. Individuals will access home health programs from their personalcomputers for instant advice on medical questions, including mental healthproblems, information about the symptoms of AIDS, and a variety of personalconcerns that they would not want other family members, or their neighborsand employers to know about. They will renew their prescriptions and obtaincopies of their lab results electronically. The U.S. economy is becoming increasingly reliant on thisinformation network. While we may not often think about these networks,they now affect every facet of our professional, business, and personallives. They are present when we make an airline reservation; when we use acredit card to make a purchase; or when we visit a doctor who relies on acomputer network to store our medical information or to assist in making adiagnosis. These networks contain information concerning every facet of ourlives. For businesses, the reliance on information security is evengreater. While businesses rely on the same commercial use networks thatindividual consumers use, in addition, businesses are now transmittinginformation across national and international borders with the same easethat the information was once transmitted between floors of the same officebuilding. While all of this information exchange brings with it increasedefficiencies and lower operating costs, it has also brought with it theneed to protect the information from improper use and tampering. Information security is quickly becoming a top priority for businesses thatrely on computer networks to conduct business. According to a recent surveyof Fortune 500 companies conducted for the Business Software Alliance, 90percent of the participants said that information security was important totheir operations. Indeed, almost half of the Fortune 500 companies surveyedrecently stated that data encryption was important to protect theirinformation. One third of those companies said they look for encryptioncapabilities when buying software. The challenge for information security can be met by America'scomputer companies. American companies are deeply involved in efforts toensure that the information transmitted on computer networks is secure.Numerous companies have developed and are developing software products withencryption capabilities that can ensure that transmitted information isreceived only by the intended user and that it is received in an unalteredform. Those encryption capabilities are based on mathematical formulas orlogarithms of such a size that makes it almost impossible to corrupt datasources or intercept information being transmitted. I wish I could stand here today and tell my colleagues that U.S.export control laws were working and encryption technology was onlyavailable to American software companies. However, this is not the case. Sophisticated encryption technologyhas been available as a published public standard for over a decade andmany private sources, both domestic and foreign, have developed encryptiontechnology that they are marketing to customers today. It is an industrywhere commercial competition is fierce and success will go to the swift. Software is being developed and manufactured with encryptioncapabilities for the simple reason that software customers are demandingit. Computer users recognize the vulnerability of our information systemsto corruption and improper use and are insisting on protection. Thatprotection will be purchased or obtained from American companies or fromforeign software companies. The choice is not whether the protection willbe obtained, but from which company. Incredible as it may seem to most of my colleagues, the ExecutiveBranch has seen fit to regulate exports of American computer software withencryption capabilities -- that is, the same software that is availableacross the counter at your local Egghead or Computerland software store --munitions and thereby substantially prohibit its export to foreigncustomers. This policy, which has all the practical effect of shutting thebarn door after the horses have left in preventing access to software withencryption capabilities, does have the actual detrimental effect ofseriously endangering sales of both generally available American softwareand American computer systems. This is because increasingly sales are dependent on the ability ofa U.S. firm to offer encryption as a feature of an integrated customersolution involving hardware, software and services. Indeed, software can be exported abroad by the simplest measuresand our intelligence gathering agencies have no hope of ever preventing it.Unlike most munitions that are on the prohibited export list, generallyavailable software with encryption capabilities can be purchased withoutany record by anyone from thousands of commercial retail outlets, orordered from hundreds of commercial mail order houses, or obtained for freefrom computer bulletin boards or networks. Once obtained, it can beexported on a single indistinguishable floppy disk in the coat pocket ofany traveler or in any business envelope mailed abroad. Moreover, both generally available and customized software can beexported without anyone ever actually leaving the United States. All thatis necessary are two computers with modems, one located in the UnitedStates and one located abroad. A simple international phone call and a fewminutes is all that it takes to export any software program. Once a software program with encryption capabilities is in aforeign country, any computer can act as a duplicating machine, producingas many perfect copies of the software as needed. The end result is thatthe software is widely available to foreign users. All this was demonstrated at a hearing held on October 12 byChairman Gejdenson's Economic Policy Trade and Environment Subcommittee ofthe Foreign Affairs Committee. Furthermore, while current Executive Branch policy regulates theexport of American manufactured software with encryption capabilities, itis obviously powerless to prevent the development and manufacture of suchsoftware by foreign competitors. Not surprisingly, that is exactly what ishappening. We heard testimony at the subcommittee's hearing that over 200foreign hardware, software and combination products for text, file, anddata encryption are available from 20 foreign countries. As a result,foreign customers, that have, in the past, spent their software dollars onAmerican-made software, are now being forced, by American policy, to buyforeign software -- and in some cases, entire foreign computer systems. Thereal impact of these policies is that customers and revenue are being lostwith little hope of regaining them, once lost. All precipitated by awell-intentioned, but completely misguided and inappropriate policy. There were efforts, in the last Congress to correct this policy. Inresponse, the Bush Administration did, in fact, marginally improve itsexport licensing process with regard to mass market software with limitedencryption capabilities. However, those changes are simply insufficient toeliminate the damage being done to American software companies. My legislation is strongly supported by the Business SoftwareAlliance. The Business Software Alliance represents the leading Americansoftware businesses, including Aldus, Apple Computer, Autodesk, BorlandInternational, Computer Associates, GO Corp., Lotus Development, Microsoft,Novell, and WordPerfect. In addition, Adobe Systems, Central Point, SantaCruz Operation, and Symantec are members of BSA's European operation.Together, BSA members represent 70 percent of PC software sales. The legislation is also supported by the Industry Coalition onTechnology Transfer, an umbrella group representing 10 industry groupsincluding the Aerospace Industries Association, American ElectronicAssociation, Electronics Industry Association, and Computer and BusinessEquipment Manufacturing Association. All these companies are at the forefront of the softwarerevolution. Their software, developed for commercial markets, is availablethroughout the world and is at the core of the information revolution. Theyrepresent the finest of America's future in the international marketplace,and the industry has repeatedly been recognized as crucial to America'stechnological leadership in the 21st century. My legislation is straightforward. It would allow Americancompanies to sell the commercial software they develop in the United Statesto their overseas customers including our European allies -- something thatis very difficult if not impossible under present policies. I urge my colleagues to support this legislation and ask unanimousconsent that the text of the bill and a section-by-section explanation beprinted at this point. ************************************************************************ Section-By-Section Analysis of Report Control Liberalization forInformation Security Programs and Products Section 1 Section 1 amends the Export Administration Act by adding a newsubsection that specifically addresses exports of computer hardware,software and technology for information security including encryption. Thenew subsection has three basic provisions. First, it gives the Secretary of Commerce exclusive authority overthe export of such programs and products except those which arespecifically designed for military use, including command, control andintelligence applications or for deciphering encrypted information. Second, the government is generally prohibited from requiring avalidated export license for the export of generally available software(e.g., mass market commercial or public domain software) or computerhardware simply because it incorporates such software. Importantly, however, the Secretary will be able to continuecontrols on countries of terrorists concern (like Libya, Syria, and Iran)or other embargoed countries (like Cuba and North Korea) pursuant to theTrading With The Enemy Act or the International Emergency Economic PowersAct (except for instances where IEEPA is employed to extend EAA-basedcontrols when the EAA is not in force). Third, the Secretary is required to grant validated licenses forexports of software to commercial users in any country to which exports ofsuch software has been approved for use by foreign financial institutions.Importantly, the Secretary is not required to grant such export approvalsif there is substantial evidence that the software will be diverted ormodified for military or terrorists' end-use or re-exported withoutrequisite U.S. authorization. Section 2 Section 2 provides definitions necessary for the properimplementation of the substantive provisions. For example, generallyavailable software is offered for sale or licensed to the public withoutrestriction and available through standard commercial channels ofdistribution, is sold as is without further customization, and is designedso as to be installed by the purchaser without additional assistance fromthe publisher. Computer hardware and computing devices are also defined. WT02-B12-48IA087-000625-B046-298http://res2.resnet.upenn.edu:80/cis590/reading.078.html 130.91.195.242 19970122062657 text/html 2656HTTP/1.0 200 OKDate: Wed, 22 Jan 1997 06:26:58 GMTServer: Apache/1.1.1Content-type: text/htmlContent-length: 2485Last-modified: Tue, 22 Nov 1994 06:32:01 GMTClipper discussion (sub anonymously by an IPer Dave: IT WOULD BE BEST TO POST THE FOLLOWING ANONYMOUSLY -- IF YOU POST IT. ====================== In a summary of last Friday's briefings on KEE policy decisions, SteveWalker made the following observation: "- details on key escrow agents (NIST and Treasury (it seemed important to someone to point out that neither of these were "law enforcement" related agencies)) and key escrow procedures were announced." I believe that his summary may have been circulated by you and it wascertainly elsewhere on the net; I suppose that his parentheticalcomment is attributed to some government person. Some clarification is warranted. It's hard to believe that the government would have made such astatement about "law-enforcement related". According to myCongressional directory, BATF, the Secret Service, and the U.S.Customs Service are all components of the Department of Treasury.Each of them certainly has enforcement authority, carries weapons, andgenerally behaves like any other government entity that is commonlyconsidered to be law enforcement. Each of them is charged withenforcing a certain set of laws, many of which involve criminal oranti-social actions. The most that can be said is that these three arenot components of the Department of Justice. One can cop out and assert that "law enforcement related" was intendedto mean enforcement of the laws with which the FBI and state/localpolice departments of various kinds are concerned -- the things whichinvolve the Department of Justice and the attention of the criminalcourt system. But in the strict construction of the phrase, it seems to me that theDepartment of Treasury must be considered suspect as an objectivedisinterested escrow agent. Any one of the 3 components noted abovecould easily be interested in wire tap activity -- which would seem tobe the proper way to measure appropriateness of an escrow agent. Infact, Customs is involved as a part of the drug-control community, andthe drug situation has been used as one of the arguments for recentencryption policy decisions. NIST is clean and without enforcement authority, and there is nocomponent of Commerce that would appear to have enforcementresponsibility that would reasonably expect to require wire tapsupport. The above are not matters of opinion; they simply reflect what thefacts are. WT02-B12-49IA087-000625-B046-341http://res2.resnet.upenn.edu:80/cis590/reading.079.html 130.91.195.242 19970122062744 text/html 907HTTP/1.0 200 OKDate: Wed, 22 Jan 1997 06:27:35 GMTServer: Apache/1.1.1Content-type: text/htmlContent-length: 737Last-modified: Tue, 22 Nov 1994 06:32:02 GMTCORRECTION on Clipper and Wash Post Posted-Date: Tue, 8 Feb 1994 15:22:22 -0500Date: Tue, 8 Feb 1994 12:15:00 -0800 (PST)From: John Schwartz <jswatz@well.sf.ca.us>Subject: CORRECTIONTo: David Farber <farber@central.cis.upenn.edu>MIME-Version: 1.0 A White House briefing paper quoted in the Feb. 5 Washington Postarticle about the new Clipper announcement was actually a Q and Aoriginally released April 16, 1993 and included in the packet ofinformation provided by the administration for last week's announcement.The administration did not announce on Feb. 4th that it retained the rightto restrict alternate encryption plans for domestic use. A clarificationwill run in tomorrow's Washington Post. WT02-B12-50IA087-000625-B046-385http://res2.resnet.upenn.edu:80/cis590/reading.080.html 130.91.195.242 19970122062805 text/html 3680HTTP/1.0 200 OKDate: Wed, 22 Jan 1997 06:28:05 GMTServer: Apache/1.1.1Content-type: text/htmlContent-length: 3509Last-modified: Tue, 22 Nov 1994 06:32:03 GMT"Misunderstanding" a CERT advisory -- Europe reports Date: Mon, 7 Feb 1994 16:37:14 +0100From: Klaus Brunnstein <brunnstein@rz.informatik.uni-hamburg.d400.de>Subject: "Misunderstanding" a CERT advisory Waves went high in some German media on Friday, Feb.5 1994, when news fromPhiladelphia (via CMU-SEI's press release) and Washington's Post was mediatedby some European news agencies. Germany's 2nd TV channel (ZDF) informed thesurprised public that *hackers had succeeded to invade a secure network whichhad been installed in times of Cold War to protect US Armed Forces even inthe case of a Nuclear War*. As several 10,000 passwords had been hacked, nowmore than 20 million users have to change their password. Regional and privateTV and radio stations followed on Saturday, though only few newspapers tookthis up on Monday. Nothing of this (mis)information was in the CERT advisory distributed onFebrary 3, where users of some UNIX systems (esp. SunOS with /dev/nit) wereinformed that it might be wise to take precautionary action against a potentialsniffer attack. Now, 3 days later, responsible journalists inform us thatthere were *2 agency reports*, one delivered by German press agency (dpa)which was rather serious and non-speculative, and another one from AgencyFrance Press (AFP) which ZDF based it's report upon (as it was the more"interesting one :-). Here is this in-famous text (translation by messenger): "Washington, February 5 (AFP) - Computer pirates have cracked the largest computer network in the world. Totally 20 million users on 'Internet' should receive new passwords, told the emergency committee installed by US ministry of defence. Internet is used by universities, government agencies, enterprises and private persons. The network was established in times of the Cold War to serve US Armed Forces also in case of Atomic War as 'invulnerable' information network. The hackers, so far unidenti- fied, succeeded according to the emergency committee to read data from ten thousands of systems on 'Internet'. They succeeded by using a program named 'Trojan Horse' which allows legal access to Internet central com- puter but then does not go any further." Apart from the many wrong or misunderstood facts in this news, the reaction ofsome experts was interesting. German Information Agency (GISA) said: "Oldstuff, no reason panic!" Another expert said: "CERT is in actual fight formoney from US administration, they needed some public attention!" Generalcomments were: "Blind actionism of US' CERT!" Somehow, the media uproar reminds of the Michelangelo case where cautiouswarnings of experts (infection at most small percentage of PCs) were publiclyraised *up to 50 mio infected PC systems* by badly informed journalists.No expert can ever exclude that her/his warnings are always correctly under-stood, but in this case, the serious question is: With so many unknownparameters (how many different sniffer trojans existed? How many nodes wereaffected? For what purposes were the sniffers used? etc): why issued CERT/CCa press release (which it very rarely did so far), in addition to its advisory? Unfortunately, this unjustified media hysteria will fall back, as in previouscases, on those who work hard for improving security and safety of systemsand networks:-) This is why the background must be carefully analysed. Klaus Brunnstein (Feb.7,1994) WT02-B12-51IA087-000625-B047-22http://res2.resnet.upenn.edu:80/cis590/reading.081.html 130.91.195.242 19970122062850 text/html 1421HTTP/1.0 200 OKDate: Wed, 22 Jan 1997 06:28:52 GMTServer: Apache/1.1.1Content-type: text/htmlContent-length: 1250Last-modified: Tue, 22 Nov 1994 06:32:04 GMTRe: CORRECTION on Clipper and Wash Post John Schwartz writes: > A White House briefing paper quoted in the Feb. 5 Washington Post> article about the new Clipper announcement was actually a Q and A> originally released April 16, 1993 and included in the packet of> information provided by the administration for last week's announcement.> The administration did not announce on Feb. 4th that it retained the right> to restrict alternate encryption plans for domestic use. A clarification> will run in tomorrow's Washington Post. That's true, but the Administration also did not retract its commentfrom the April 16 Q-and-A. Let's be clear about this. The Administration said on Friday thatit was not making Clipper mandatory. But the Administration has alsosaid that it does not believe that citizens have the right tounbreakable encryption "as a matter of right." Nothing said onFriday retracted the prior comment. Remember, there's a difference between: "The Administration did not say on Friday that it might consider banningalternative encryption technologies" and "The Administration will not consider banning alternative encryptiontechnologies." --Mike WT02-B12-52IA087-000625-B047-55http://res2.resnet.upenn.edu:80/cis590/reading.082.html 130.91.195.242 19970122062914 text/html 2458HTTP/1.0 200 OKDate: Wed, 22 Jan 1997 06:29:16 GMTServer: Apache/1.1.1Content-type: text/htmlContent-length: 2287Last-modified: Tue, 22 Nov 1994 06:32:04 GMTNational Cryptology Museum Date: Thu, 3 Feb 94 14:08:06 -0500From: hunter@work.nlm.nih.gov (Larry Hunter)Subject: National Cryptology Museum Following up on Jeremy Epstein's note in RISKS 15.41, I went to visit theNational Cryptology Museum, and can recommend it. It's open 9am-3pm weekdaysand by appointment. It's basically one large room, with several interestingdisplays; my favorite was 7 volumes from the NSA rare book collection,including the oldest published work on cryptology, Johannes Trithemius'"Polygraphiae," first published in 1517. They also had a Pace-10 analogcomputer, and IBM Harvest and a Cray XMP-24 on display. There were nicehistorical displays on Yarley & the Black Chamber, US Civil War crypto and aUS Revolutionary War era crypto device (the M-94) that may have been designedby Thomas Jefferson. The largest display was dedicated to Enigma and thedevice for cracking it, Bombe. There is a working Enigma that visitors canuse! There are a few displays that are more current: pictures of the NSAbuildings and director and a description of NSA's Special Processing Lab (SPL)which does special purpose chip fabrication. There was the expected KGBstuff, and a quote from George Washington about the importance of "keeping thewhole matter secret." The curator, Jack Ingrams, was friendly and eager to answer (some) questions.He said that since the Washington Post article, traffic had been about 25-30people a day, and that they will be on TV this week, which he expects tofurther increase the number of visitors. He was curious about the RISKSposting and internet, so if anybody who sees this talks to him while visiting,mention the net. He also said that they will be opening the unclassifiedportion of their crypto library to scholars sometime in the summer. Thehandout on the museum also says that the FOIA reading room shares space withthe library. Obligatory RISK-y note: Ingrams mentioned that the museum opened to NSApersonnel in October, and to the general public around Christmas time. Aquick glance through the guest sign-in book shows that the fourth visitor tothe museum, on October 29, was one Duane Whitlock, who listed his employer asC&P Telephone, our local baby bell. hmmm. WT02-B12-53IA087-000625-B047-95http://res2.resnet.upenn.edu:80/cis590/reading.083.html 130.91.195.242 19970122062927 text/html 10696HTTP/1.0 200 OKDate: Wed, 22 Jan 1997 06:29:28 GMTServer: Apache/1.1.1Content-type: text/htmlContent-length: 10524Last-modified: Tue, 22 Nov 1994 06:32:05 GMT Clipper chip support [ Sam describes himself as: >My concern is with the socially transformative power of civic nets.>I have spend my adult life building and supporting progressive>organizations involved in political and economic activities. I am>also extremely interested in advanced technology and have been a>principal in several small computer companies.>>I am currently an independent consultant in the areas of>information systems and wide area computer networks. I write>articles for several publications on these subjects. He is also a founder of the Toronto CA FreeNet There is much in this article I disagree with but as they say .... ... djf] Date: Tue, 08 Feb 94 14:14:25 ESTFrom: Sam Sternberg <SAMSAM@vm1.yorku.ca> The CLIPPER CHIP CONTROVERSY The Clinton Adminstration - bowing to pressure from theIntelligence Community - has decided to go ahead with the clipperchip proposal. BACKGROUND ON THE CLIPPER CHIP PROPOSAL AND ITS BENEFITS This proposal is best understood in the context of the history ofthe western intelligence community. The ability to secretly intercept the communications of others hasbeen vital to covert action since the earliest days ofinternational telecommunications. When the first transatlanticcable was laid between Britain and the U.S. in 1927; its operationswhere monitored by secret agreement between both countries.Britain would capture and analyze all calls comming from the U.S.and the Americans would do the same with british traffic. Relevantmaterial would be sent back to each other. This allowed bothcountries to honestly proclaim they were not spying on their owncitizens, while benefiting from the fact that someone else was. By the end of the second world war; a war that the allies wonprimarily because of stategic advantage gained from superiortelecommunication interception; the english speaking powers agreedto create a multinational agency to capture all the information inthe world. Every newspaper, radio braodcast, t.v. transmission, andinternational telegraph or phone call was to be captured andrecorded and stored for possible future analysis. That agreement is still in place. The publications of the FBIS [Foriegn Broadcast Information Service ] are an example of thepublicly disclosed results of the joint monitoring program. Today, Canada intercepts private communication in the U.S. and viceversa. This is not illegal. Each country's laws forbid it frominvading the privacy of its own citizens. These same lawsintentionally provide no such protection for the communications ofother nations. The Internet began as a service of the U.S. military. It isimpossible to believe that national security considerations werenot incorporated into its design. To this day the highest leveltechnical meetings on Internet design in the U.S. can only beattended by individuals with security clearances. The Internet is above all an international network. Messages travelaround the globe in fractions of a second. From an intelligenceprespective this amounts to providing an unwanted window on theU.S. to the rest of the world. A disloyal government employee couldencode a document - and send it over the internet to anyone in theworld. An illegally distributed document, once securely encoded maybe captured, but unless it is crackable, the government would behard put to determine the nature of the damage done to its securityinterests, because it could not determine what document it had inits possession. The recent decision of the Department of Defenceto end Internet access for most of its employees is grounded inthese considerations. Similar considerations arise for companies that depend on technicalsecrets for their market advantage, or that wish to be certain thattheir strategies can not be discovered by competitors. Ordinary citizens also value privacy. Of course - the internet isn't the only problem technology. Digitalcellular phones will soon be voice activated and may weigh lessthan an ounce. The same disloyal government employee will then beable to capture and encode a document. Then, with the aid of acellular modem, broadcast it to any point on the globe. A good situation for a national intelligence service is one inwhich your own communications are untapable, while everyone elsesare easily accessed. The ideal situation exists when everyonebelieves that their own systems are secure - when they are in factnot secure. The clipper chip proposal - if universally - adopted would appearto provide the U.S. government with a nearly ideal solution to acrisis that has arisen in connection to the Internet. The crisis arises from the fact that cheap secure encryptionsoftware and now hardware has become globally available for thefirst time; from Albania to Zaire everyone who owns a computer canguarantee their own privacy. In essence - the cat is already outof the bag and a desperate effort is underway to stuff it back in. Accepting that a genuine problem exists. Is the Clipper chipproposal a reasonable solution. If it is not a reasonable solution,are there other - better approaches. Or, will one have to acceptthe fact that the nature of the struggle for advantage thrutechnical espionage has changed. WHAT ARE THE POTENTIAL BENEFITS AND WHO ARE THE LIKELYBENEFICIARIES The Clipper Chip proposal is an excellent solution if you are aforeign company or nation interested in obtaining competitiveeconomic advantage over the United States. I expect that foreigngovernments will begin lobbying immediately for adoption of theproposal in the U.S. Here is why. It will not prevent them from using effective encryption outsideof the U.S. The United states represents only about 18% of the global marketplace but it currently dominates in several hardware and softwarecataegories. These include supercomputers, network software and hardware,desktop software, cpu chips, most catagories of business softwarefor all classes of machines. With adoption of these proposals - each of these categories willbecome easier to gain market share in outside of the U.S.Intel and Microsoft and Novell along with IBM, Thinking Machinesand Wais should all see significant declines in their market share. Network Service providers like AT&T or Sprint should be easy todefeat as they try to sell services in external markets. If similar legislation is also passed in the area of cellularcommunications, we can expect to see a dramatic decline in themarket share for Motorola products as well. In the future as research on encryption techniques comes to astandstill in the U.S. Foreign firms will be able to developoptimized encryption standards that will meet the demands for theemerging Multimedia market. Multimedia vendors seeking productprotection need efficient encryption standards to allow protectionof property rights. Encryption standards that slow downtransmission or minimize the effectiveness of compressiontechniques will help quarantee the success of foriegn firms. SHOULD FORIEGN FIRMS REALLY SPEND MONEY ON LOBBYING. Yes, despite the past history of success by the intelligencecommunity in crippling U.S. competitiveness in overseas markets inareas like desktop computing and database software, and despitethat community's success in making U.S. companies the finalentrants in the Vietnames market and the China market; you can notcount on the continuing willingness of the American people toaccept these impediments. In addition U.S. passage of this legislation may actual improve thecompetitive advantage of a well prepared nation or corporate group.U.S. history is repleat with examples of trusted individuals whohave used intelligence information for private gain or sold it forother reasons. When men like former the multimillionaire Director of the CIA,William Casey, had to be stopped from using intelligenceinformation for personal gain by Congress; there are probably fewserious limits the corruptablity of intelligence community staff.And the clipper chip proposal is based upon trusting the keys tochip's security system in the hands of low paid bureaucrats. Menwho may include among their ranks individuals like the WalkerFamily who sold satelite intelligence secrets to the Russians forpeanuts. The real danger here is that the U.S. might actually begin work onimproved encryption standards for incorporation in U.S. madeproducts. Such activity would create market advantage for Americancompanies. ISN'T IT A DANGER TO OTHER COUNTRIES AND COMPANIES IF ENCRYPTIONTHAT IS NOT BREAKABLE IS IN WIDE USE? Not really. The Soviet Union and Isreal both managed to coexistwith the United States even though the U.S. was incapable ofbreaking their codes. Both countries successfully employed spiesand informants to obtain material and information that wasotherwise protected from decypherment. Both countries sharedintelligence information obtained from the U.S. so this raises thepossibility that foriegn firms could unite in obtaining economicadvantage over the US. Because plans must be turned into action - existing nationaltechnical means are sufficient to guarantee the physical securityof the U.S. AREN'T THERE OTHER REAL BENEFITS TO THE US FROM THE ADOPTION OFSUCH SYSTEMS? Well, if the U.S. government adopted the clipper chip standard forall its internal communication. It would be able to gain somecontrol of untrustworthy employees who wished to use technicalmeans in subverting the US. People like Jonathan Pollard who simplyphysically removed documents from their safe storage sites, wouldof course be unaffected. Similarly the Walker family was exposedonly because of a family feud. WHAT ABOUT ORGANIZED CRIME ETC. The US government's inability to prevent the ongoing success oforganized crime despite the availability of wire taps andinformants is a testimony to the intelligence of these criminalorganizations. Implementation of the clipper chip proposals willnot result in any change in their successful strategies foravoiding monitoring. ISN'T THERE ANYONE WHO WILL DEFINITELY BENEFIT FROM THIS? Yes, some company will get the contract for these chips. Sam Sternberg <samsam@vm1.yorku.ca> WT02-B12-54IA087-000625-B047-156http://res2.resnet.upenn.edu:80/cis590/reading.084.html 130.91.195.242 19970122063019 text/html 3181HTTP/1.0 200 OKDate: Wed, 22 Jan 1997 06:30:18 GMTServer: Apache/1.1.1Content-type: text/htmlContent-length: 3010Last-modified: Tue, 22 Nov 1994 06:32:07 GMT"I support HR3627" -- privacy in communications Date: Wed, 9 Feb 94 07:37 ESTFrom: "Robert G. Moskowitz" <0003858921@mcimail.com>To: cantwell <cantwell@eff.org>To: US president <president@whitehouse.gov>To: US vice-president <vice-president@whitehouse.gov>Subject: I support HR3627 It seems to me that privacy in communications requires three things: - Authentication/non-reputiation- Guarantied data content- Encryption of data Authentication/non-reputiation is not only a security item, i.e. am Icommunicating with the person I want to, but also a legal issue. If someonesays that they will do something in a non-reputiable message and doesn't,they later cannot deny that they made the statement as it is non-reputiable. The data content must be guarantied, as not only might it be maliciouslycorrupted, but computer programs that forward data have been known to dothings wrong, and communication links have been known to alter a byte ortwo. Data encryption allows for private communications over public servers. The Clipper chip only addresses the last item. And then only over aprivate, point-to-point link. The Clipper chip on a third party provider'scommunication link is no assurance that one of the data forwarding systemson the data path has not been comprimised and my data is still being'watched'. There is an INTERNATIONAL, GATT based standard for EMail that addressesthis. It is called X.509. X.509 combines Public Key cryptography andmessage hashing to meet all three requirements. According to many peoplethat know the legal side better than me, X.509 has been agreed to by the USgovernment at a treaty level and thus needs to be supported and allowed bythe US government. Thus the US government cannot take a unilateral positionof saying that the Clipper Chip technology is the only communicationssecurity the public needs. It is also incumbant on the US government to encourage its citizens toproduce the best X.509 products possible to maintain a competitive edge inthe messaging software arena. Thus a bill like HR3627 is a key bill. I know that there are limitations and implementation issues to X.509. AlsoX.509 does not well address real time and interactive communications. Thereare other efforts in various standard bodies that are addressing this;Privacy Enhance Mail for INTERNET 822 mail, Kerberos (tm) security for theDistributed Computing Environment to name two. The US government needs tonuture technologies like these; they meet critical needs of corporate usersof data communications. And again Clipper chip technology does nothing forthem. To this end, I ask the US government to pass HR3627 and to scale back theClipper Chip push. The Clipper chip should be relegated to voice and faxcommunication at best. There are better, more functional technologies fordata communications. Robert G Moskowitz15210 SutherlandOak Park, MI 48237 WT02-B12-55IA087-000625-B047-195http://res2.resnet.upenn.edu:80/cis590/reading.085.html 130.91.195.242 19970122063034 text/html 6095HTTP/1.0 200 OKDate: Wed, 22 Jan 1997 06:30:36 GMTServer: Apache/1.1.1Content-type: text/htmlContent-length: 5924Last-modified: Tue, 22 Nov 1994 06:32:07 GMTLife In Cyberspace COMPUTERS IN THE ^90s Computer Whizzes Go to the Mat NEWSDAY PUBLICATION DATE Tuesday. February 8, 1994EDITION ALL EDITIONSSECTION DISCOVERYPAGE 71HEADLINE Life In Cyberspace COMPUTERS IN THE ^90s Computer Whizzes Go to the MatBYLINE Joshua QuittnerLENGTH 78 Lines ON FRIDAY, WHEN the Electronic Frontier Foundation declared war on the Clinton Administration, the atrium of the Citicorp Building in midtown Manhattan was thick with brooding, alienated teenagers. The atrium is like that on the first Friday of every month. The hackers cluster around tables, peer at wired gadgets, trade computer printouts and read back issues of 2600 Magazine, the Hackers Quarterly, which sponsors these monthly get-togethers and gives the digital underground a fine excuse to get out of the house and meet face-to-face. Curiously, few people were talking about the latest panic to sweep the Internet: Tens of thousands of passwords and accounts had supposedly been captured by unknown hackers, according to an advisory piped out across the Net. The advisory came from the Computer Emergency Response Team, the federally funded security patrol of the global Internet. How this number - tens of thousands of accounts - was calculated is unclear. CERT doesn't disclose specific break-in reports, doesn't say who the victims were, doesn't say what, if any, damage resulted or when any of this occurred. It merely sounds the general alarm. You can believe CERT's numbers, or not. The people in this atrium did not, knowing all too well how hacking the Internet has been a more or less constant diversion over the years. And John Perry Barlow, does not. Barlow, who was here for his first 2600 meeting, is a lyricist for the Grateful Dead and a former Wyoming rancher turned Chelsea resident. Most important, he's a cofounder of the Electronic Frontier Foundation, an organization that aims to protect the civil liberties of the citizens of cyberspace. The group has become a powerful lobbying force in Washington, helping set the agenda for national communications policy. To Barlow, the Internet break-ins are merely diverting the public's attention from something far more threatening to cyberspace: the Clipper chip. The Clipper is used to scramble conversations over phone lines and computer networks. By declaring it the standard, the government is ensuring that the Clipper will be built into every phone and computer since any company seeking to do business with the government must use Clipper-enhanced equipment. What has riled the EFF and a number of other civil liberties groups, as well as a coalition of large computer and telecommunications companies, is this: The chip has a "backdoor" that would allow law-enforcement agencies, with the proper court warrants, to unscramble conversations and eavesdrop. The government has argued it needs such access to thwart drug dealers and terrorists. To protect against abuse, a "key" will be needed to unscramble a conversation; the key, stored as two individual strings of numbers, will be held by separate agencies of the Commerce and Treasury Departments. But a number of businesses, including IBM and Microsoft, have opposed the chip because they say it will inhibit global trade - foreign governments will assume that the chip's backdoor will be routinely used for espionage. And that same backdoor could make it easier for the government to monitor its citizens than ever before, say the EFF and others. Here's why: The chip will become entrenched in the information highway, the coming network of telephone, cable wireless networks, Barlow said. Most people believe that that highway will move communication - video, voice, text - in uniform bursts of zeros and ones called packets. One feature of packet networks is they can typically be monitored, by a network administrator, from any computer on the network. That's what happened last week on the Internet, the best example of a packet network, when intruders used "network sniffing" software to capture passwords. And that's why privacy - unbreakable encryption - is so important on packet networks, experts say. But the Clipper chip introduces encryption with a known weakness: the backdoor. Currently, if a police agency wants to eavesdrop, say, on a Brooklyn resident, it must get a court order. Then it must go to a New York Telephone office in midtown Manhattan, where a wiretap is installed. But on the information highway of the future, theoretically, that same police agency may be able to eavesdrop from its own office. Or from an officer's home. Or from anywhere - without the watchful eyes of an outside corporation. And that's why the EFF has decided to fight, said Barlow. The Washington, D.C.-based organization has been working closely with top technology officials in the administration on designing a blueprint for the National Information Infrastructure, the official name for the information highway. Now EFF and another organization, Computer Professionals for Social Responsibility, hope to launch the biggest letter-writing assault the government ever saw, using the Internet, a key portion of that highway. The estimated 15 million network users will be asked to sign a form letter and e-mail it to EFF headquarters, where it will be printed out and delivered to the White House. "We're going to the mattresses on this," Barlow said. **END OF STORY REACHED**-- josh quittner vox: 516-843-2806 fax: 516-843-2873 quit@newsday.com WT02-B12-56IA087-000625-B047-241http://res2.resnet.upenn.edu:80/cis590/reading.086.html 130.91.195.242 19970122063056 text/html 8602HTTP/1.0 200 OKDate: Wed, 22 Jan 1997 06:30:54 GMTServer: Apache/1.1.1Content-type: text/htmlContent-length: 8431Last-modified: Tue, 22 Nov 1994 06:32:08 GMT1994-02-07 United States FY95 Budget in Electronic Format THE BUDGET OF THE UNITED STATES NOW IN ELECTRONIC FORMAT Background The U.S. Department of Commerce in cooperation with the Office ofManagement and Budget(OMB) will produce the Budget of the UnitedStates Government, Fiscal Year 1995 in electronic format usingcompact disc-read only memory (CD-ROM) and on-line computerdelivery methods. This marks the first time the entire budgethas been available to the public in electronic format. Budgetanalysts, public policy researchers, state and local governments,libraries, and other members of the public will find theelectronic version to be a useful addition and versatilealternative to the printed version of the budget. Users will beable to display exact images of the printed budget, search forthe occurrence of keywords within the text, and copy or printdesired portions of the text for further reference or use. And,the same documents will be accessible on personal computersrunning three popular operating systems -- MS-DOS, Windows, andApple Macintosh -- thereby making this information available tothe vast majority of personal computer users. Tentative talks on producing an electronic version of the federalbudget were first conducted between technical staff at OMB andCommerce's Office of Business Analysis (OBA) in December, 1993.Several factors made this effort feasible. First, commercialsoftware products became available in 1993 that facilitate theelectronic transfer or delivery of finished documents. Creatorsof highly formatted documents originally intended for printdistribution could now distribute electronic copies of the samedocuments with the original print format characters intact.Recipients of the electronic documents could see exact replicasof the original formatted text on their computers without theneed to own a copy of the software that originally created thedocument. These programs greatly facilitate the creation ofelectronic catalogs, books, and other large informationcollections where formatted text is important. Second, OMB uses electronic text composition software thatcreates PostScript formatted output that is used by theGovernment Printing Office to produce the printed version of thebudget. One portable document delivery software product , AdobeAcrobat uses PostScript formatted documents as the input tocreate Portable Document Format (PDF) files, which may be read bylow-cost readers also distributed by Adobe. Given that theoriginal budget documents are already in PostScript format, it isa relatively simple matter to convert them to PDF format anddistribute them in electronic form. Third, the proper mix of skills and services existed on theCommerce/OMB team to bring this project to completion in a verytight time frame; this project was conceived, implemented, anddelivered in 50 days. OMB prepared the budget in the properformat and acquired and learned to use the Acrobat softwarenecessary to create the PDF files. OBA had significantexperience in producing CD-ROM titles and offering informationthrough other electronic distribution channels such as dial-upbulletin boards and the Internet, had staff in place to producethe budget CD-ROM quickly, was prepared to offer telephoneordering to ensure prompt delivery to the public, and couldprovide customer support. Finally, the new spirit of the federal government encouragesagencies to take advantage of electronic tools to broaden accessto federal information. New innovative methods to delivergovernment services to the citizen at low cost both to thegovernment and the recipient are actively encouraged. TheCommerce Department is taking a lead role in this endeavor. Inshort, the technical and organizational chemistry was just rightto ensure success of this project. Electronic Versions of the Budget CD-ROM The CD-ROM versions of the Budget of the United StatesGovernment, Fiscal Year 1995 will be available to the public atthe same time the printed budget is submitted to the Congress byPresident Clinton. The CD-ROM will contain exact page-imagereplicas of the same documents submitted to Congress. Theseinclude: o Budget of the United States Government, Fiscal Year 1995o Budget of the United States Government, Fiscal Year 1995, Analytical Perspectiveso Budget of the United States Government, Fiscal Year 1995, Historical Tableso Budget System and Concepts of the United States Government The Budget CD-ROM will be available for order from the Departmentof Commerce after official release for $30.00, $24 less than thecomparable printed volumes. Discs will be available for pickup,by first class mail, and via overnight delivery ($10 additional.)The CD-ROM will include the budget documents as well as copies ofthe Adobe Acrobat Reader for MS-DOS and Windows operatingsystems. A set of diskettes containing the Acrobat Reader willbe supplied to users of Macintosh computers. A supplemental volume, the Budget of the United StatesGovernment, Fiscal Year 1995, Appendix contains the detailedbudget submissions for each agency. It will be transmitted toCongress later in February and will not appear on the Budget CD-ROM. However, the complete Budget including the Appendix willappear on the February 1994 issue of Commerce's NationalEconomic, Social, and Environmental Data Bank (NESE-DB) CD-ROMwhich will be available in late February. In addition to theBudget, NESE-DB will contain PDF images of current InternalRevenue Service tax forms which may be reproduced exactly as theoriginal printed forms and over 100,000 documents containing acore set of economic, social and environmental data. Informationon the NESE-DB covers issues of widespread public interest suchas Vice President Gore's National Performance Review and theAdministration's proposed Health Care Reform legislation. o NESE-DB is published quarterly in the months of February, May, August, and November. Single issues are available for $95, an annual subscription costs $360. Purchasers of the original Budget CD-ROM will be given full credit for their original order and may obtain the February issue of NESE-DB for the discounted price of $65. Customers must mention they purchased the Budget CD-ROM when ordering the NESE-DB to obtain the discount. NESE-DB is also available for free public access in 960 federaldepository libraries located throughout the Nation. Dial-up Bulletin Board ASCII versions of the Budget documents will be available on theCommerce Department's Economic Bulletin Board (EBB) shortly afterofficial release to the public. PDF and ASCII versions of theBudget Appendix will be added to the bulletin board when they arereleased by OMB. There will be no charge for obtaining Budgetdocuments via the Economic Bulletin Board. The EBB may beaccessed using a personal computer and modem by calling: 2400 BPS : 1-202-482-3870 (N81) 9600 BPS: 1-202-482-2167 (N81) Users accessing the PDF versions of the Budget via the EBB mustsupply their own copy of software capable of reading PDF files. Internet Free access to the Budget documents in PDF and ASCII forms willalso be available via the Internet. The Internet version of theEBB may be accessed by using the command telnet ebb.stat-usa These files will also be available for gopher access by issuingthe command. gopher gopher.esa.doc.gov As in the case of the EBB users accessing the PDF versions of theBudget via the Internet must supply their own copy of softwarecapable of reading PDF files. How to contact us: To order Budget and NESE-DB CD-ROMs:1-800-STAT-USA (1-800-782-8872) For technical assistance:1-202-482-1986 Fax orders:1-202-482-2164 Electronic mail:tac@esa.doc.gov or write to: Office of Business Analysis Room H4885 U.S. Department of Commerce Washington, DC 20230 Technical contacts Ken Rogers (202) 482-0434 Paul Christy (202) 482-0123 Adobe, PostScript, and Acrobat are registered trademarks of AdobeSystems, Incorporated.Apple and Macintosh are registered trademarks of Apple Computer,IncorporatedWindows and MS-DOS are trademarks of Microsoft Corporation. WT02-B12-57IA087-000625-B047-289http://res2.resnet.upenn.edu:80/cis590/reading.087.html 130.91.195.242 19970122063119 text/html 986HTTP/1.0 200 OKDate: Wed, 22 Jan 1997 06:31:21 GMTServer: Apache/1.1.1Content-type: text/htmlContent-length: 816Last-modified: Tue, 22 Nov 1994 06:32:09 GMTSpeaker for 17 feb ATTENDANCE MANDITORY (if weather allows) "The Information Infrastructure: NewChallenges to Privacy Protection' Privacy protection may be the single greatestchallenge facing the developers of the nationalinformation infrastructure. New technologiesand new business practices raise difficult andfar-reaching questions about identity, anonymityand personal freedom in the information age. Policymakers must soon define the the privacy rules forthe information highways. Marc Rotenberg is the director of ComputerProfessionals for Social Responsibility (CPSR),a public interest organization. He frequentlytestifies in Congress on issues involvingtechnology and civil liberties, and has servedon national and international panels concernedwith privacy protection. WT02-B12-58IA087-000625-B047-340http://res2.resnet.upenn.edu:80/cis590/reading.088.html 130.91.195.242 19970122063252 text/html 5073HTTP/1.0 200 OKDate: Wed, 22 Jan 1997 06:32:52 GMTServer: Apache/1.1.1Content-type: text/htmlContent-length: 4902Last-modified: Tue, 22 Nov 1994 06:32:10 GMTRe: How much privacy? [ I think this illuminates the issues very well ... djf] From: Mike Godwin <mnemonic@eff.org>To: cyberia-l@birds.wm.eduDate: Wed, 9 Feb 1994 11:28:57 -0500 (EST)Cc: farber@central.cis.upenn.edu (David Farber) Trotter writes: > The government's argument, I take it, is that the benefit is> law enforcement. That strikes me as at least as great a benefit> as minimum wage laws; perhaps more, since it protects everybody> (at least in theory), whereas min wage laws primarily benefit> their recipients. Maybe EPA regs are the better analogy:> everybody gets reduced pollution; with Clipper, everybody gets> reduced criminal activity. Is that not a reasonable trade-off? The problem is that the government refuses to be forthcoming as to whatkind of trade-off we're talking about. There are supposedly fewer than1000 state and federal wiretaps per year. Yet we are being asked toreconstruct the phone system and to risk billions of dollars in tradelosses when there has never been shown to be any crime associated withuncrackable encryption whatsoever. Moreover, there are fundamental political issues at stake. This countrywas founded on a principle of restraints on government. A system in whichthe privacy of our communications is contingent on the good faith of thegovernment, which holds all the encryption keys, flies in the face of whatwe have been taught to believe about the structure of government and theimportance of individual liberty. In short, the government fails to make its case in two separateways--pragmatically and philosophically. > In reply to the latter issue, I don't think the government> cares whether an accountant in India can password protect a> spreadsheet. I would guess that even Clipper or DES or whatver> would be more than enough protection for such a person. I think> the government cares that it be able to detect foreign> intelligence that is relevant to US security or interests. I am> not sure where I come out on the question, but at the very> least it seems to me that the government is reasonable in this> desire. Yet there are some premises here that need to be questioned. Do we reallysuppose that "foreign intelligence" is dependent on the American softwareindustry to develop its encryption tools? Diffie-Helman public-keyencryption and DES are already available worldwide, yetMicrosoft can't export software that contains either form of encryption. No, the real issue is that, to the extent that a mass market arises forencryption products, it makes the NSA's job more difficult, and it mayat some future time make some investigations more difficult as well. When asked to quantify the problem, the government invariably begs off.Government spokespeople say "Well, how would you feel if there were amurder-kidnapping that we couldn't solve because of encryption?" To whichmy answer is, "Well, I'd feel about the same way that I'd feel if therewere a murder-kidnapping that couldn't be solved because of the privilegeagainst self-incrimination." Which is to say, I understand that limits on government power entaila loss in efficiency of law-enforcement investigations andintelligence-agency operations. Nevertheless, there is a fundamentalchoice we have to make about what kind of society we want to live in.Open societies, and societies that allow individual privacy, are*less safe*. But we have been taught to value liberty more highlythan safety, and I think that's a lesson well-learned. What's more, we need to be able to rational risk assessment, and that'ssomething that the government resists. The government subscribes tothe reasoning of Pascal's Wager. Pascal, you may recall, argued that therational man is a Christian, even if the chances that Christianity is trueare small. His reasoning is quasi-mathematical--even if the chances ofChristianity's truth are small, the consequences of choosing not tobe a Christian are (if that choice is incorrect) infinitely terrible.Eternal torment, demons, flames, the whole works. This is precisely the same way that the government talks about nuclearterrorism and murder-kidnappings. When asked what the probability isof a) a nuclear terrorist, who b) decides to use encryption, and c)manages otherwise to thwart counterterrorist efforts, they'll answer"What does it matter what the probability is? Even one case is toomuch to risk!" But we can't live in a society that defines its approach to civil libertiesin terms of infinitely bad but low-probability events. Open societiesare risky. Individual freedom and privacy are risky. If we are to make amature commitment to an open society, we have to acknowledge those risksup front, and reaffirm our willingness to endure them. --Mike WT02-B12-59IA087-000625-B047-384http://res2.resnet.upenn.edu:80/cis590/reading.089.html 130.91.195.242 19970122063310 text/html 4037HTTP/1.0 200 OKDate: Wed, 22 Jan 1997 06:33:12 GMTServer: Apache/1.1.1Content-type: text/htmlContent-length: 3866Last-modified: Tue, 22 Nov 1994 06:32:11 GMTReps. Markey and Fields attack Emmanuel Goldstein The latest issue of CuD has a transcript from a House Subcommittee onTelecommunications and Finance hearing from last June. Here are someexcerpts. Mr. MARKEY. Thank you, Mr. Guidry, very much. We will take questions now from the subcommittee members. Let me begin, Mr. Delaney. I would like you and Mr. Goldsteinto engage in a conversation, if we could. This is Mr. Goldstein'smagazine, "The Hacker Quarterly: 2600," and for $4 we could go outto Tower Records here in the District of Columbia and purchasethis. It has information in it that, from my perspective, is verytroubling in terms of people's cellular phone numbers andinformation on how to crack through into people's privateinformation. Now you have got some problems with "The Hacker Quarterly,"Mr. Delaney. Mr. DELANEY. Yes, sir. Mr. MARKEY. And your problem is, among other things, thatteenagers can get access to this and go joy riding into people'sprivate records. ... Mr. MARKEY. Well, I don't know. You are being a little bitdisingenuous here, Mr. Goldstein. Here, on page 17 of your springedition of 1993, "How to build a pay TV descrambler." Now that isillegal. Mr. GOLDSTEIN. Not building. Building one is not illegal. Mr. MARKEY. Oh, using one is illegal? Mr. GOLDSTEIN. Exactly. Mr. MARKEY. I see. So showing a teenager, or anyone, how tobuild a pay TV descrambler is not illegal. But what would they dothen, use it as an example of their technological prowess that theyknow how to build one? Would there not be a temptation to use it,Mr. Goldstein? ... Mr. GOLDSTEIN. Most likely, yes. But the thing is, we don'tbelieve that because something could be used in a bad way, that isa reason to stifle the knowledge that goes into it. Mr. MARKEY. That is the only way this could be used. Is therea good way in which a pay TV descrambler could be used that is alegal way? Mr. GOLDSTEIN. Certainly, to understand how the technologyworks in the first place, to design a way of defeating such devicesin the future or to build other electronic devices based on thattechnology. Mr. MARKEY. I appreciate that, but it doesn't seem to me thatmost of the subscribers to "2600" magazine -- [interruption - damn, I*really* want to know what he was going to say - shari] ... MARKEY. ...Similarly here, we assume that there is a certain percentageof pathologically damaged people out there. The cerebral mechanismdoesn't quite work in parallel with the rest of society. We have topass laws to protect the rest of us against them. We will call themcriminal hackers. What do we do to deal with them is the questionthat we are going to be confronted with in the course of ourhearings? Let me recognize the gentleman from Texas, Mr. Fields. Mr. FIELDS. Thank you, Mr. Chairman. Just for my own edification, Mr. Goldstein, you appear to beintelligent; you have your magazine, so obviously you areentrepreneurial. For me personally, I would like to know, why don'tyou channel the curiosity that you talk about into something thatis positive for society? And, I'm going to have to say to you, Idon't think it is positive when you invade someone else's privacy. Mr. GOLDSTEIN. I agree. ... Mr. FIELDS. Mr. Guidry, one last question. Is it the SecretService that is at the forefront of Federal activity? Mr. GUIDRY. Yes, sir, it is. Mr. FIELDS. Do they have the resources to adequately deal withthis problem? Mr. GUIDRY. No, sir. The problem is growing so rapidly thatthey are undermanned in this area but have asked for additionalmanpower. Mr. FIELDS. Is this a priority for the Secret Service? Mr. GUIDRY. Yes, sir, it is. You may want to read more.Shari WT02-B12-60IA087-000625-B047-425http://res2.resnet.upenn.edu:80/cis590/reading.090.html 130.91.195.242 19970122063331 text/html 9285HTTP/1.0 200 OKDate: Wed, 22 Jan 1997 06:33:31 GMTServer: Apache/1.1.1Content-type: text/htmlContent-length: 9114Last-modified: Tue, 22 Nov 1994 06:32:12 GMTDorothy Denning answers Campaign and Petition Against Clipper Date: Wed, 09 Feb 1994 17:23:28 -0500 (EST)From: denning@cs.cosc.georgetown.edu (Dorothy Denning)Subject: Re: Campaign and Petition Against Clipper CPSR has announced a petition campaign to oppose the Clipper initiative. Iwould like to caution people about signing the petition. The issues areextremely complex and difficult. The Clipper initiative is the result ofconsiderable deliberation by many intelligent people who appreciate andunderstand the concerns that have been expressed and who worked hard toaccommodate the conflicting interests. The decisions that have been made werenot made lightly. I would like to respond to some of the statements that CPSR has madeabout Clipper in their campaign and petition letters: The Clipper proposal, developed in secret by the National Security Agency, is a technical standard that will make it easier for government agents to wiretap the emerging data highway. The standard (FIPS 185) is not a standard for the Internet or any other highspeed computer network. It is for the telephone system. Quoting from FIPS185: "Data for purposes of this standard includes voice, facsimile andcomputer information communicated in a telephone system. A telephone systemfor purposes of this standard is limited to a system which is circuit switchedand operating at data rates of standard commercial modems over analog voicecircuits or which uses basic-rate ISDN or a similar grade wireless service." The standard will not make it any easier to tap phones, let alonecomputer networks. All it will do is make it technically possible todecrypt communications that are encrypted with the standard, assumingthe communications are not superencrypted with something else. Lawenforcers still need to get a court order just to intercept thecommunications in the first place, and advances in technology have madeinterception itself more difficult. The standard will make it muchharder for anyone to conduct illegal taps, including the government. The purpose of the standard is to provide a very strong encryption algorithm -something much stronger than DES - and to do so in a way that does not thwartlaw enforcement and national security objectives. Keys are escrowed so thatif someone uses this technology, they cannot use it against nationalinterests. Industry groups, professional associations and civil liberties organizations have expressed almost unanimous opposition to the plan since it was first proposed in April 1993. "The public does not like Clipper and will not accept it ..." The private sector and the public have expressed nearly unanimous opposition to Clipper. As near as I know, neither CPSR nor any other group has conducted anysystematic poll of industry, professional societies, or the public. Whilemany people have voiced opposition, there are many more organizations andpeople who have been silent on this issue. The ACM is in the process ofconducting a study on encryption. CPSR is a member of the study group, as amI. Steve Kent is chair. Our goal is a report that will articulate theissues, not a public statement either for or against. The InternationalAssociation for Cryptologic Research has not to my knowledge made any officialstatement about Clipper. The Administration ignored the overwhelming opposition of the general public. When the Commerce Department solicited public comments on the proposal last fall, hundreds of people opposed the plan while only a few expressed support. Hundreds of people is hardly overwhelming in a population of 250 million,especially when most of the letters were the same and came in through the netfollowing a sample letter that was sent out. The technical standard is subject to misuse and compromise. It would provide government agents with copies of the keys that protect electronic communications. "It is a nightmare for computer security." I have been one of the reviewers of the standard. We have completed ourreview of the encryption algorithm, SKIPJACK, and concluded it was verystrong. While we have not completed our review of the key escrow system, fromwhat I have seen so far, I anticipate that it will provide an extremely highlevel of security for the escrowed keys. The underlying technology was developed in secret by the NSA, an intelligence agency responsible for electronic eavesdropping, not privacy protection. Congressional investigations in the 1970s disclosed widespread NSA abuses, including the illegal interception of millions of cables sent by American citizens. NSA is also responsible for the development of cryptographic codes to protectthe nation's most sensitive classified information. They have an excellenttrack record in conducting this mission. I do not believe that ourrequirements for protecting private information are greater than those forprotecting classified information. I do not know the facts of the 1970sincident that is referred to here, but it sounds like it occurred beforepassage of the 1978 Foreign Intelligence Surveillance Act. This act requiresintelligence agencies to get a court order in order to interceptcommunications of American citizens. I am not aware of any recent evidencethat the NSA is engaging in illegal intercepts of Americans. Computer security experts question the integrity of the technology. Clipper was developed in secret and its specifications are classified. The 5 of us who reviewed the algorithm unanimously agreed that it was verystrong. We will publish a final report when we complete or full evaluation.Nothing can be concluded from a statement questioning the technology bysomeone who has not seen it regardless of whether that person is an expert insecurity. NSA overstepped its legal authority in developing the standard. A 1987 law explicitly limits the intelligence agency's power to set standards for the nation's communications network. The 1987 Computer Security Act states that NIST "shall draw on the technicaladvice and assistance (including work products) of the National SecurityAgency." There is no evidence to support law enforcement's claims that new technologies are hampering criminal investigations. CPSR recently forced the release of FBI documents that show no such problems. CPSR obtained some documents from a few FBI field offices. Those officesreported no problems. CPSR did not get reports from all field offices and didnot get reports from local law enforcement agencies. I can tell you that itis a fact that new communications technologies, including encryption, havehampered criminal investigations. I personally commend law enforcement fortrying to get out in front of this problem. If the plan goes forward, commercial firms that hope to develop new products will face extensive government obstacles. Cryptographers who wish to develop new privacy enhancing technologies will be discouraged. The standard is voluntary -- even for the government. Mr. Rotenberg said "We want the public to understand the full implications of this plan. Today it is only a few experts and industry groups that understand the proposal. I support this objective. Unfortunately, it is not possible for most of us tobe fully informed of the national security implications of uncontrolledencryption. For very legitimate reasons, these cannot be fully discussed anddebated in a public forum. It is even difficult to talk about the fullimplications of encryption on law enforcement. This is why it is importantthat the President and Vice-President be fully informed on all the issues, andfor the decisions to be made at that level. The Feb. 4 decision was madefollowing an inter-agency policy review, headed by the National SecurityCouncil, that examined these issues using considerable input from industry,CPSR, EFF, and individuals as well as from law enforcement and intelligenceagencies. In the absence of understanding the national security issues, Ibelieve we need to exercise some caution in believing that we can understandthe full implications of encryption on society. As part of the Feb. 4 announcement, the Administration announced theestablishment of an Interagency Working Group on Encryption andTelecommunications, chaired by the White House Office of Science andTechnology Policy and National Security Council, with representatives fromCommerce, Justice, State, Treasury, FBI, NSA, OMB, and the National EconomicCouncil. The group is to work with industry and public interest groups todevelop new encryption technologies and to review and refine encryptionpolicy. The NRC's Computer Science and Telecommunications Board will also beconducting a study of encryption policy. These comments may be distributed. Dorothy Denning, Georgetown University WT02-B12-61IA087-000625-B048-44http://res2.resnet.upenn.edu:80/cis590/reading.091.html 130.91.195.242 19970122063348 text/html 3249HTTP/1.0 200 OKDate: Wed, 22 Jan 1997 06:33:50 GMTServer: Apache/1.1.1Content-type: text/htmlContent-length: 3078Last-modified: Tue, 22 Nov 1994 06:32:13 GMTEncrypting filesystem for DOS/Windows available [ an example of externally available systems .. djf] From: pgut1@cs.aukuni.ac.nzSubject: Encrypting filesystem for DOS/Windows availableDate: 10 Feb 1994 11:58:55 GMTOrganization: University of Auckland I have just released the latest beta of SFS, my secure filesystem for DOS andWindows (and a few operating systems too eventually, if I get the time). It'savailable as: ftp.informatik.uni-hamburg.de:/pub/virus/incoming/sfs_97.zip and is about 190K as is, or 510K decompressed. You can't see the incomingdirectory contents on this site, so just cd to /pub/virus/incoming and getsfs97.zip, even if it looks as if there's nothing there. This is still a beta release (thus the obscure distribution method), it isSTRONGLY RECOMMENDED that you read the file readme.1st included in thedistribution before doing anything else. Hopefully this will be the final betabefore the actual release. SFS has the following features: - The current implementation runs as a standard DOS device driver, and therefore works with plain old DOS as well as other software such as Windows, QEMM, Share, disk cacheing software, and so on. - Up to five encrypted volumes can be accessed at any one time, chosen from a selection of as many volumes as there is storage for. - Volumes can be quickly unmounted with a user-defined hotkey, or automatically unmounted after a certain amount of time. They can also be converted back to unencrypted volumes or have their contents destroyed if required. - The encryption algorithms used have been selected to be free from any patent restrictions, and the software itself is not covered by US export restrictions as it was developed entirely outside the US (although once a copy is sent into the US it can't be re-exported). - SFS complies with a number of national and international data encryption standards, among them ANSI X3.106, Federal Information Processing Standard (FIPS) 180, Australian Standard 2805.5.2, ISO 10116:1991 and ISO 10126-2:1991, and is on nodding terms with a several other relevant standards. - The documentation includes fairly in-depth analyses of various security aspects of the software, as well as complete design and programming details necessary to both create SFS-compatible software and to verify the algorithms used in SFS. - Reasonable throughput. One beta-tester has reported a throughput of 170 K/s for the basic version and 185 K/s for the 486+ version on his 486 system when copying a file with the DOS copy command from one location on an SFS volume to another (I get about 90 K/s on my vanilla 386 box). Peter.-- pgut1@cs.aukuni.ac.nz||p_gutmann@cs.aukuni.ac.nz||gutmann_p@kosmos.wcc.govt.nzpeterg@kcbbs.gen.nz||peter@nacjack.gen.nz||peter@phlarnschlorpht.nacjack.gen.nz (In order of preference - one of 'em's bound to work) -- C++ will do for C what Algol 68 did for Algol -- WT02-B12-62IA087-000631-B017-213http://res2.resnet.upenn.edu:80/cis590/reading.092.html 130.91.195.242 19970122063413 text/html 21770HTTP/1.0 200 OKDate: Wed, 22 Jan 1997 06:34:12 GMTServer: Apache/1.1.1Content-type: text/htmlContent-length: 21598Last-modified: Tue, 22 Nov 1994 06:32:14 GMTpart 1 of copy of risks pertaining to Clipper RISKS-LIST: RISKS-FORUM Digest Thursday 10 February 1994 Volume 15 : Issue 50 FORUM ON RISKS TO THE PUBLIC IN COMPUTERS AND RELATED SYSTEMS ACM Committee on Computers and Public Policy, Peter G. Neumann, moderator ** See recent issues for information on RISKS, omitted from this **** issue. OR, CONTACT RISKS-REQUEST@csl.sri.com for information. ** Contents:Re: Dorothy Denning's contribution to RISKS-15.48 on EES/Clipper/etc.(Barbara Simons, Marc Rotenberg, George T. Talbot, Lance J. Hoffman,Fredrick B. Cohen, A. Padgett Peterson, Geoff Kuenning) Date: Thu, 10 Feb 94 13:48:52 PSTFrom: "Barbara Simons" <simons@vnet.IBM.COM>Subject: Re: Campaign and Petition Against Clipper (Denning, RISKS-15.48) In RISKS-15.48, 9 Feb 1994, Dorothy Denning states: >As near as I know, neither CPSR nor any other group has conducted any>systematic poll of industry, professional societies, or the public. While>many people have voiced opposition, there are many more organizations and>people who have been silent on this issue. The ACM is in the process of>conducting a study on encryption. CPSR is a member of the study group, as am>I. Steve Kent is chair. Our goal is a report that will articulate the>issues, not a public statement either for or against. The International>Association for Cryptologic Research has not to my knowledge made any official>statement about Clipper. I am chair of USACM, which is the new U.S. Public Policy Committee of ACM.A few months ago we asked Steve Kent to chair a panel that would studyencryption policy in the U.S. and produce a report for ACM. As Dorothymentions, she is on the panel, together with several other illustriousindividuals, including the esteemed moderator of RISKS. I have included thelist of panelists at the end of this note. CPSR is no more a member of thepanel than are the National Security Agency or the Department of Justice.The panel does have members who are affiliated with all three organizations. I am certain that Dorothy did not intend to give the impression that theACM panel has decided that ACM will not have a public position on Clipper.However, since her email might have been misinterpreted by some readers,I want to clarify that, while ACM has not taken a position on Clipper,there has not been any decision made within ACM of which I am aware thatprevents ACM from taking a position at some future time. In addition,it is my understanding that there has been no final determination made bythe panel of precisely what the report will or will not contain. Barbara Simons, Chair USACM The members of the ACM encryption policy panel are: Dr. Clint Brooks, National Security Agency Scott Charney, Department of Justice Dr. Dorothy Denning, Georgetown University Dr. Whitfield Diffie, Sun Microsystems Inc. Dr. Anthony Lauck, Digital Equipment Corporation Douglas Miller, Software Publishers Association Dr. Peter Neumann, SRI International Dave Sobel, Computer Professionals for Social Responsibility Chair: Dr. Stephen Kent, Bolt Beranek & Newman Staff: Dr. Susan Landau, University of Massachusetts Date: Thu, 10 Feb 1994 16:07:13 ESTFrom: Marc Rotenberg <Marc_Rotenberg@washofc.cpsr.org>Subject: Re: CPSR Clipper Campaign Dorothy Denning has raised important questions about the Clipper proposal. Asshe says "the issues are extremely complex and difficult." Below I've triedto answer the points she has raised. I apologize in advance to RISKS readerswho know all of this. Please read her comments and my response. Speak with others interested in theClipper proposal. If on balance, after reviewing the arguments, you decideClipper is a mistake then you should express your opposition by sending amessage to: CLIPPER.PETITION@CPSR.ORG with the words "I oppose Clipper" in the subject header. If you have already signed the petition, ask a friendor colleague to sign. Your help is needed. Marc Rotenberg, director, CPSR Washington office >> The Clipper proposal, developed in secret by the>> National Security Agency, is a technical standard>> that will make it easier for government agents to>> wiretap the emerging data highway. > The standard (FIPS 185) is not a standard for the> Internet or any other high speed computer network. It> is for the telephone system. The letter to the President makes clear that we are concerned about "Clipperand associated standards" which include the Capstone EES configuration fordata transmission. It is clearly the intent of the EES proposal to cover both voice and datatransmissions. > The standard will not make it any easier to tap phones,> let alone computer networks. All it will do is make it> technically possible to decrypt communications that are> encrypted with the standard, assuming the communications> are not superencrypted with something else. This is a little bit like saying that leaving a master key for every house onyour block with the police will not make it easier for the police to openlocked doors. We may disagree about whether this is a good idea, but let's be clear aboutthe intent of the proposal. > The purpose of the standard is to provide a very strong> encryption algorithm - something much stronger than DES> - and to do so in a way that does not thwart law> enforcement and national security objectives. Keys are> escrowed so that if someone uses this technology, they> cannot use it against national interests. The NSA is responsible for foreign signal interception. It has no legalauthority to conduct wire surveillance. What are the NSA's "nationalsecurity" interests in domestic wire surveillance? >> Industry groups, professional associations and>> civil liberties organizations have expressed almost>> unanimous opposition to the plan since it was first>> proposed in April 1993. >> The private sector and the public have expressed>> nearly unanimous opposition to Clipper. > As near as I know, neither CPSR nor any other group has> conducted any systematic poll of industry, professional> societies, or the public. To the best of my knowledge, there has never been a proposed technicalstandard that generated more opposition. Firms across the telecommunicationsand computer industry oppose Clipper. Computer security people andcryptographers oppose Clipper. Privacy experts oppose Clipper. >> The Administration ignored the overwhelming>> opposition of the general public. When the Commerce>> Department solicited public comments on the>> proposal last fall, hundreds of people opposed the> plan while only a few expressed support. > Hundreds of people is hardly overwhelming in a> population of 250 million, especially when most of the> letters were the same and came in through the net> following a sample letter that was sent out. I would encourage Dorothy, or anyone else, to take a poll of anyrepresentative user group -- RISKS readers perhaps -- if there is any doubtabout how the public feels about the proposal. >> The technical standard is subject to misuse and>> compromise. It would provide government agents with>> copies of the keys that protect electronic>> communications. "It is a nightmare for computer>> security." > I have been one of the reviewers of the standard. We> have completed our review of the encryption algorithm,> SKIPJACK, and concluded it was very strong. While we> have not completed our review of the key escrow system,> from what I have seen so far, I anticipate that it will> provide an extremely high level of security for the> escrowed keys. Dorothy endorsed the proposal before she joined the "review" team. The groupthat she refers to, a White House task force, has an interesting history. Themajority of cryptographers asked to participate declined. >> The underlying technology was developed in secret>> by the NSA, an intelligence agency responsible for>> electronic eavesdropping, not privacy protection.>> Congressional investigations in the 1970s disclosed>> widespread NSA abuses, including the illegal>> interception of millions of cables sent by American>> citizens. > NSA is also responsible for the development of> cryptographic codes to protect the nation's most> sensitive classified information. They have an> excellent track record in conducting this mission. Senator Frank Church, who conducted the most extensive hearings ever held onthe National Security Agency, said that the NSA's intelligence gatheringcapabilities were important for the security of the United States. He alsosaid that the massive eavesdropping capability created "A tremendous potentialfor abuse." If ever turned against the communications system of the UnitedStates: no American would have any privacy left . . . there would be no place to hide. We must see to it that this agency and all agencies that possess this technology operate within the law and under proper supervision, so that we never cross over that abyss. That is an abyss from which there is no return. " (NBC Meet the Press, 1975) >> Computer security experts question the integrity of>> the technology. Clipper was developed in secret and>> its specifications are classified. > The 5 of us who reviewed the algorithm unanimously> agreed that it was very strong. We will publish a final> report when we complete or full evaluation. Nothing can> be concluded from a statement questioning the technology> by someone who has not seen it regardless of whether> that person is an expert in security. The original CPSR letter to the President, asking for the withdrawal ofClipper, was signed by Hellman, Rivest, Diffie, Merkle, and others. Many moreexperts are adding their names daily to the CPSR petition. >> NSA overstepped its legal authority in developing>> the standard. A 1987 law explicitly limits the>> intelligence agency's power to set standards for>> the nation's communications network. > The 1987 Computer Security Act states that NIST "shall> draw on the technical advice and assistance (including> work products) of the National Security Agency." The original replacement for DES, proposed by the Department of Commerce in1989, would have had these characteristics: -- public, unclassified-- implementable in both hardware or software-- usable by federal Agencies and U.S. based multi-national corporation-- a level of security sufficient for the protection of unclassified, sensitive information and commercial propriety and/or valuable information. The final proposal, developed with the "technical assistance" of the NSA, hasthese characteristics. -- The Clipper algorithm Skipjack is classified-- Public access to the reasons underlying the proposal is restricted-- Skipjack can be implemented only in tamper-proof hardware-- It will not be used by multi-national corporations-- The security of the configuration remains unproven. The Computer Security Act was passed precisely because the NSA triedpreviously to grab civilian computer security turf. The law was specificallyintended to control the type of abuse that results from secretstandard-setting arrangements. If there any doubt among RISKS readers about the illegal activities of the NSAin the development of the EES, please consult the minutes of the NSA/NISTTechnical Working Group (TWG) that produced the standard. The minutes shouldbe available from the National Security Agency Public Information Office.That phone number is 301/688-6524. >> There is no evidence to support law enforcement's>> claims that new technologies are hampering criminal>> investigations. CPSR recently forced the release of>> FBI documents that show no such problems. > CPSR obtained some documents from a few FBI field> offices. Those offices reported no problems. CPSR did> not get reports from all field offices and did not get> reports from local law enforcement agencies. I can tell> you that it is a fact that new communications> technologies, including encryption, have hampered> criminal investigations. The statement is illogical. There is still no evidence to support the FBI'sclaims. The FBI made certain claims that cryptography was impeding criminalinvestigation conducted by wiretap. CPSR investigated the FBI's claims byfiling a Freedom of Information Act suit to obtain the relevant documents.The documents provided to us by the Department of Justice revealed that noneof the FBI field officers had encountered any obstacles. The Department ofJustice has just informed us that they provided to us all relevant documentsconcerning the Clipper proposal. There is one reported case where cryptography made it difficult for lawenforcement to obtain evidence. That case concerned reading the contents of afile on a hard disk after it was seized. If this is the problem that the Clipper proposal is intended to solve, thenthe key escrow scheme must be extended to every single encrypted file -- notjust encrypted communications -- everywhere in the world. Every encrypted file. Everywhere. >> If the plan goes forward, commercial firms that>> hope to develop new products will face extensive>> government obstacles. Cryptographers who wish to>> develop new privacy enhancing technologies will be>> discouraged. > The standard is voluntary -- even for the government. An FBI legislative proposal now under consideration at the White House wouldmandate a Clipper-like scheme. That proposal is backed by fines up to $10,000per day and jail time. That's not voluntary. >> Mr. Rotenberg said "We want the public to>> understand the full implications of this plan.>> Today it is only a few experts and industry groups>> that understand the proposal. > I support this objective. Unfortunately, it is not> possible for most of us to be fully informed of the> national security implications of uncontrolled> encryption. For very legitimate reasons, these cannot> be fully discussed and debated in a public forum. This assertion has never been supported by evidence. It has been used simplyto stifle criticism. > The Feb. 4 decision was made> following an inter-agency policy review, headed by the> National Security Council, that examined these issues> using considerable input from industry, CPSR, EFF, and> individuals as well as from law enforcement and> intell CPSR did not participate in the inter-agency policy review. Our position fromthe very beginning is that these decisions must be made openly. > In the absence of understanding> the national security issues, I believe we need to> exercise some caution in believing that we can> understand the full implications of encryption on> society. This premise, if accepted, would mean that people in the United States wouldhave no right to express political views when the government claimed "nationalsecurity." Certainly, there are matters of national security that must beprotected, but when an agency with expertise in wire surveillance develops asecret standard for eavesdropping and tells those who raise questions thatthere are matters of national security that they would not understand, thereis good reason for concern. If you believe that Clipper is a mistake, please express your views by sendingemail with the words "I oppose Clipper" in the subject header toCLIPPER.PETITION@CPSR.ORG. [In the following messages, I have pruned back radically on the included repetitions of Dorothy's original message. I hope I have not lost any threads... Refer back to RISKS-15.48 if you are in doubt. PGN] Date: Wed, 9 Feb 94 22:16:51 ESTFrom: ugtalbot@king.mcs.drexel.edu (George T. "14K F/D" Talbot)Subject: Re: Campaign and Petition Against Clipper I would like to comment upon a few points raised by Dr. Denning: >The decisions that have been made were not made lightly. While I appreciate the sentiments expressed by Dr. Denning here, I'msure that those who oppose the Clipper initiative are also intelligent andhave also worked very hard to make their concerns known. I have studied thisissue actively and I assure you that I did not sign the petition "lightly". >The standard (FIPS 185) is not a standard for the Internet or any other high>speed computer network. While the Clipper initiative only covers the phone system, the entire proposal(Clipper and Capstone and the key escrow system) will touch the high-speednetworks and should be taken as a whole. >...assuming>the communications are not superencrypted with something else. Law>enforcers still need to get a court order just to intercept the>communications in the first place... There are two points to address here. First, it is currently very difficultto produce and export cryptographic software of any significant strength dueto export controls. A private entity which has the resources to produce astrong cryptographic solution will have to invest a great deal to produce suchsoftware. The current export controls would make it impossible for such anentity to compete on the world market, thus limiting profit, possibly to thepoint of non-profitability. This makes superencryption pretty unlikely, andthis is one of the purposes of the current export controls on encryption.Also at issue is whether the government will outlaw non-Clipper/Capstone/KeyEscrow encryption entirely. Second, law enforcement needs to get a court order to intercept phonecommunications. I know of no such need to get a court order to interceptcommunications on a high speed network w.r.t. Capstone. The currentadministration proposal does not require a court order to get the escrowedkeys themselves. > The Administration ignored the overwhelming opposition of the> general public. When the Commerce Department solicited public> comments on the proposal last fall, hundreds of people opposed the> plan while only a few expressed support.>>Hundreds of people is hardly overwhelming in a population of 250 million,>especially when most of the letters were the same and came in through the net>following a sample letter that was sent out. Currently the community which is informed on this issue is rather small. Itis unclear whether that population of 250 million would support the initiativeif they were fully informed. Assuming the people which responded to theCommerce Department solicitation is representative of the public at large,it is clear that this is not a popular initiative outside of government/law enforcement/national security circles. >I have been one of the reviewers of the standard. We have completed our>review of the encryption algorithm, SKIPJACK, and concluded it was very>strong. While we have not completed our review of the key escrow system, from>what I have seen so far, I anticipate that it will provide an extremely high>level of security for the escrowed keys. I'm sure that the committee which reviewed the algorithm made as accuratean assessment of the algorithm they could in the limited time they were given.What the NSA refuses to answer on this point is whether it, or the rest of thenational security community will use the escrow system. If the [nationalsecurity] community does not sign up [for the key escrow system], then theescrow system will be effectively compromised. >...I am not aware of any recent evidence>that the NSA is engaging in illegal intercepts of Americans... >From what I understand, the Act was passed in response to the incident in the1970s. Just because one doesn't have evidence doesn't mean that abuses don'texist, and one can't make basic policy decisions based upon that. Whenconsidering important policy like this, one has to actively consider the risksof abuse. >... >From what current reports show, NSA pushed the proposal through NIST, and itwas NSA, not NIST, which was the true author and sponsor of the initiative.They were operating on a "gray area" where because they were the only sourcefor the standard considered, they effectively set the standard withoutexplicitly violating the law. >... I can tell you that it>is a fact that new communications technologies, including encryption, have>hampered criminal investigations. I personally commend law enforcement for>trying to get out in front of this problem. Dr. Denning, would you, as a service to RISKS readers, disclose your evidence WT02-B12-63IA087-000631-B017-249http://res2.resnet.upenn.edu:80/cis590/reading.093.html 130.91.195.242 19970122063454 text/html 21988HTTP/1.0 200 OKDate: Wed, 22 Jan 1997 06:34:36 GMTServer: Apache/1.1.1Content-type: text/htmlContent-length: 21816Last-modified: Tue, 22 Nov 1994 06:32:15 GMTpart 2 of copy of risks pertaining to Clipper Posted-Date: Thu, 10 Feb 1994 19:07:15 -0500Path:netnews.upenn.edu!dsinc!spool.mu.edu!howland.reston.ans.net!agate!ucbvax!CSL.SRI.COM!risksFrom: risks@csl.sri.com (RISKS Forum)Newsgroups: comp.risksSubject: RISKS DIGEST 15.50Date: 10 Feb 94 22:58:55 GMTSender: daemon@ucbvax.berkeley.eduReply-To: risks@csl.sri.comDistribution: worldOrganization: The InternetLines: 865Approved: risks@csl.sri.comApparently-To: farber@pcpond.cis.upenn.edu of how encryption has hampered criminal investigations? And how often? Andwhat kind of investigations were hampered? >... In the absence of understanding the national security issues, I>believe we need to exercise some caution in believing that we can understand>the full implications of encryption on society. I disagree and Dr. Denning contradicts herself. If the decision is made atthose levels, the public will not be informed. This policy is too importantto relegate to a back room. George T. Talbot Date: Thu, 10 Feb 1994 08:28:46 -0500 (EST)From: "Lance J. Hoffman" <hoffman@seas.gwu.edu>Subject: Clipper standard came close to being not only for phones Dorothy Denning wrote in RISKS Forum: > The [Clipper] standard (FIPS 185) is not a standard for the Internet or any> other high speed computer network. It is for the telephone system. Quoting> from FIPS 185: "Data for purposes of this standard includes voice, facsimile It apparently came close to covering everything. I have heard from severalpeople at NIST describing the general unhappiness there about the EES. Onewrote to me: > Three weeks ago, Ray Kammer {the deputy director} and Mike Rubin {the> general counsel} here told people to rewrite the FIPS 185 {the EES}, which> was in draft form, so that the standard applied to all electronic> communications, including those not covered under the then current language.> They refused, even walked out of the meeting, saying that it just could not> be done. Ray Kammer backed down, and the FIPS went out w/o the> all-inclusive language. {remarks in curly brackets added by L Hoffman for explanation} In any case, that point may be somewhat moot because Capstone applies to data! Date: Thu, 10 Feb 94 06:11:05 PSTFrom: Fredrick B. Cohen <fc@Jupiter.SAIC.Com>Subject: Re: Denning's thoughts on the Clipper Chip >The standard (FIPS 185) is not a standard for the Internet or any other high>speed computer network. ... The language sounds to me like it covers ISDN which is rapidly becoming thestandard for non-local networking, all switched circuits, which will sooninclude most cable systems, and standard commercial modems carry the vastmajority of all current computer communications. What do you think thesuperhighway is going to be made of? We have AT+T trying for the twisted pairas the standard, and the cable companies going for a cable version, and somechasing optical, but it is all circuit switched at one point or another. > ... The standard will make it much>harder for anyone to conduct illegal taps, including the government. For someone who lived through Watergate and Irangate and all the othergates, I am amazed that you can still take this position. It only meansthat the class of people who will be able to get the information will berestricted to the richer and more powerful. Anyone familiar with thetelephone system today knows that to tap a line requires only that the FBItell the telephone company the phone number. The rest happens in a matterof seconds. With clipper, it will be the same way. > ... Keys are escrowed so that if someone uses this technology, they cannot> use it against national interests. How much do these escrow agents get paid, and how well are their familiesprotected? How many guards watch them continuously? Who are we kidding?US Nuclear codes were leaked to the Soviets at the height of the cold war.Do you really think that we will protect these escrow agents any better? >As near as I know, neither CPSR nor any other group has conducted any>systematic poll ... I know for a fact that most of the major telecommunications providers areworried that Clipper will be made the standard. The reason is that they needbetter protection and they have to be able to do more things more flexiblythan Clipper allows. They also don't want to have to pay the company whomakes clipper a fortune to use a technology they don't want to use. >Hundreds of people is hardly overwhelming in a population of 250 million ... Do you claim to believe that the great silent majority is in favor of Clipper?Actually, hundreds of people who opposed it against only a few who supportedit would tend to indicate that 245 Million oppose it and 5 million are infavor. Not that this was a statistically valid sample. After all, the peoplewho oppose it are probably more knowledgeable than the general public. >... concluded it was very strong. ... In the light of 5,000 years of cryptographic history where experts claimedthat systems were very strong only to find them broken soon after, I find ithard to trust the hand picked committee of 5 so-called experts who are givenmoney and time to pass judgement on a technology that is so weak that they areafraid to expose it to the light of day. If it is so strong, why not let therest of the world review it? The German experts said the same thing aboutEnigma, and lots of US experts said the same thing about <name withheld> fornational security reasons. The infoscape is littered with failedcryptosystems and failed experts wo trusted them. >... I do not believe that our requirements for protecting private>information are greater than those for protecting classified information.>... I am not aware of any recent evidence that the NSA is engaging in>illegal intercepts of Americans. It is hard to believe that such a well known expert is that naive. It is theblind belief in government that allows it to get away with so much. We needmore questioning, not less. We need affirmative facts that show they arenot doing this before we will believe it. Just because they haven't beencaught, doesn't mean they are innocent. >The 5 of us who reviewed the algorithm unanimously agreed that it was very>strong. We will publish a final report when we complete or full evaluation.>Nothing can be concluded from a statement questioning the technology by>someone who has not seen it regardless of whether that person is an expert in>security. I disagree strongly with this assertion. The mere fact that 5 experts agreethat a technology is strong gives me no confidence whatsoever. If it is sostrong, what's the big secret? If it's so strong, why does it have to beprotected by a special hardware mechanism? If it is so strong, why not tellall of us so we can start to develop similar systems of our own? How can youclaim it is so strong when you are afraid to even tell us how it works?History has shown that secret systems such as these are not strong. Theevidence I use to condemn is 5,000 years of history. Your evidence is 5people in a room saying it's strong. Which should we give more weight to? >... I can tell you that it>is a fact that new communications technologies, including encryption, have>hampered criminal investigations. ... If technology hampers criminal investigations, why not eliminate cars exceptfor police. Then we could catch a lot more criminals. This is a stupidargument. Let's get better police and better tools for them to use, and nottry to weaken the very fabric of our information society instead. > Mr. Rotenberg said "We want the public to understand the full> implications of this plan. Today it is only a few experts and> industry groups that understand the proposal.>>I support this objective. Unfortunately, it is not possible for most of us to>be fully informed of the national security implications of uncontrolled>encryption. For very legitimate reasons, these cannot be fully discussed and>debated in a public forum. It is even difficult to talk about the full>implications of encryption on law enforcement. This is the argument of dictators, not democracies. If it cannot be openedto public scrutiny, it does not belong here. The implications of controlledencryption are the ones you are afraid of airing. But I am not. Controlledencryption is just another way for those with power to tighten their grip.What is so frightening to you about encryption that you can't even discussit? Is it that people will have privacy from their own government? Is it thatwe will be able to assure integrity in communications? Giving power to thepublic is not something to be feared. It is something to be sought out andencouraged. >This is why it is important>that the President and Vice-President be fully informed on all the issues, and>for the decisions to be made at that level. ...>In the absence of understanding the national security issues, I>believe we need to exercise some caution in believing that we can understand>the full implications of encryption on society. Why is it that you think you understand more about the implications ofcryptography on national security than the rest of us? This elitist crap hasgot to end. It is bad for our country to have elitists who believe they knowmore than the rest of us dictating how we will live our lives. It is bad forour country that the esteemed members of this forum do not have access to yourrational in order to openly discuss your points of view. It is bad for ourcountry that professors at universities tell their students and the public notto think about the issues, but to trust that the professors know best. If youwant to serve the national interest, get the debate out in the open! > ... In one recent NRC study, the committee rightly pointed out that we need moreopen research in this field. Perhaps Professor Denning would like to followthe recommendations of that report and open up to us. Fred Cohen - independent researcher Date: Thu, 10 Feb 94 09:11:08 -0500From: padgett@tccslr.dnet.mmc.com (A. Padgett Peterson)Subject: Clipper Chip Politics At first I was astounded by the hysteria over the Clipper chip but have cometo the conclusion that it is really a matter of Politics and Money - technicalworth has nothing to do with it. Have just finished reading the Cantwell Bill text on export controls and havecome to a similar conclusion. Lots of good sounding words modified by vagueexclusions. (Could not tell if PGP was permitted since all the user has to dois install or excluded since each user must generate a unique key). Clearly, if I were to design a custom mechanism for a client and the clienthad the only copies in existence, the old rules would apply & if the clientwere "offshore" I would be in violation. According to the EFF, Mrs. Denning and I must be the only people publicly onthe net who are in favor of Clipper/Capstone as a cheap means for very simplelimited protection. It will fill the great void that exists between that which*should* be protected and that which *is* being protected. In the last few months, virtually every RFP I have seen deals with protectionof "Sensitive but Unclassified" information. Presently, this is done withSTU-IIIs and DES. Clunky. Ex$pen$ive. Requires effort to initiate. Government agencies faced with field offices, telecommuting, andelectronic filing desperately need something that is1) Cheap2) Easy to use3) Blessed by the Government4) Sufficient to deter hackers and reporters - not because they are personally concerned about disclosure but becausepublic law 93-579 (Privacy Act) and public law 100-235 (Computer Security Act)says they *will*. And for these uses Clipper/Capstone is *good enough* (C). People bemoan the fact that the government is creating a self-indulgentmonopoly, but I have not seen anyone else rushing to fill the gap (three yearsago I outlined both in magazines and at conferences a very simple means foraccess tokens/smart cards such as those from Enigma-Logic, Racal, andSecure-ID to be used to securely encrypt remote dial-up sessions. No one wasinterested. I have not seen ads for the Beaver BCC-007 encrypted laptopcomputer lately either. To me the whole key escrow procedure is a legal sop, I fully expect certaingovernment agencies to be able to break any transmission within seconds giventhe right equipment and all of the keys (not necessarily who has which, just*all* of them), but I do not really care since anything that needs moreprotection will just receive stronger encryption before C/C ever sees it. Thereal value is for authentication and protection from volume analysis. (Today,it is easy to tell which of my missives are protected and which are not. Howmuch and where can be valuable information even without reading the contents.With C/C you will have to decode everything to find out which is important andwhich is a take-away order). The NSA/FBI meeting at Bellcore included an assertion that a "NationalLaboratory" would be required to reverse engineer the chip. Does anyone thinkthat it would not be easier/cheaper to simply buy someone on the inside ?"Security by Obscurity" may be effective for short durations and limited valueobjectives but we are talking strategic value here. Thus in my opinion, the whole broohah is a smoke-screen. C/C is going tohappen, it will do what it is supposed to, it will become a standard since itis going to be cheap and enough, and some organizations are going to makebillions of dollars off it - that is just the American Way. I still want some to play with. Padgett Date: Thu, 10 Feb 94 13:48:28 -0800From: geoff@FICUS.CS.UCLA.EDU (Geoff Kuenning)Subject: Re: Campaign and Petition Against Clipper In RISKS-15.48, Dorothy Denning combines some good points with some verypaternalistic and unsupportable claims. I will primarily address the latter. >... The Clipper initiative is the result of>considerable deliberation by many intelligent people who appreciate and>understand the concerns that have been expressed and who worked hard to>accommodate the conflicting interests. The decisions that have been made were>not made lightly. In other words, despite the fact that many intelligent and well-informedpeople *oppose* Clipper, "we know best, so stop complaining." The fact thatthe decision was made by well-intentioned people does not make it correct. >The standard (FIPS 185) is not a standard for the Internet or any other high>speed computer network. It is for the telephone system. In the first place, many people access the Internet via various forms oftelephone lines. If they are encrypted, it will be easier to tap them if theyuse Clipper. In the second place, the Administration has been quite up-frontabout its desire to force key-escrow encryption into nearly every encryptionapplication. So while Ms. Denning is technically correct in her narrowreading of the document, CPSR is equally correct in raising an alarm about thelarger issue of high-speed networks. >As near as I know, neither CPSR nor any other group has conducted any>systematic poll ... Ah, the old "silent majority" argument. I thought that went out when Nixonresigned. The truth is that, among the tiny fraction of the public which has expressedan opinion, there *has* been overwhelming public opposition. Very few peoplehave written the Government to say, "my, what a wonderful idea!" Organizations like TV networks have a multiplier rule they apply to letters,where they figure that every letter received represents N people who felt thesame way, but didn't take the time to write. To suggest that only one'sopposition took the time to write, and that everyone else is in agreement, isat best disingenuous and at worst intellectually dishonest. > The ACM is in the process of>conducting a study on encryption. CPSR is a member of the study group, as am>I. Steve Kent is chair. Our goal is a report that will articulate the>issues, not a public statement either for or against. In other words, having attempted to discredit what little data we *do* have,Ms. Denning is stating that there are no plans to conduct a scientific studyof public opinion. Perhaps the ACM or the CPSR should fund Roper or Gallup toinvestigate a few questions, approved by both Ms. Denning and a CPSRrepresentative as being unbiased? > The International Association for Cryptologic Research has not to my> knowledge made any official statement about Clipper. I don't see what relevance this has to anything. One organization ofcryptologists has remained silent. So what? > Hundreds of people is hardly overwhelming in a population of 250 million,> especially when most of the letters were the same and came in through the net> following a sample letter that was sent out. The first part of this statement is patently false; the same argumentcould be applied to any Harris poll. The second part, about "formletter" distortions in public issues, is relevant and important. Allthe more reason to do a more scientific survey. > ... I do not know the facts of the 1970s> incident that is referred to here, but it sounds like it occurred before> passage of the 1978 Foreign Intelligence Surveillance Act. This act requires> intelligence agencies to get a court order in order to intercept> communications of American citizens. The 1978 act was passed in response to the abuses of the early 70's. Itshould not have been necessary, since the NSA was prohibited from domesticspying even before that, but the NSA figured that since the cables involvedwere international communications, it was OK to eavesdrop on them. This is arather classic case illustrating the way the NSA used the loosest possibleinterpretation of restrictions, rather than actively trying to respect theprivacy of law-abiding citizens. > I am not aware of any recent evidence> that the NSA is engaging in illegal intercepts of Americans. Once burned, twice cautious. Ms. Denning, think of the egg you'll have onyour face if the NSA gets caught misbehaving a few years from now.Personally, I don't see why I should trust any person or agency that is sosecretive. > The 1987 Computer Security Act states that NIST "shall draw on the technical> advice and assistance (including work products) of the National Security> Agency." The question is of who was in control. There is a world of difference betweendrawing on "advice and assistance," and stepping out of the picture to letsomeone else do the job. I believe that the latter is what CPSR is worriedabout. > ... I can tell you that it> is a fact that new communications technologies, including encryption, have> hampered criminal investigations. Without data or references, how are we to believe this? CPSR carried out, atgreat difficulty, some preliminary research. There is no indication that theyselected that data, and I hope that Ms. Denning is not suggesting this.Again, we have an attempt to invoke the "silent majority" argument to claimthat the sampled data is invalid. Only this time Ms. Denning doesn't evenoffer anything to back up her counterclaim. In the first place, let's have some facts here. What criminalinvestigations have been hampered by new technologies? How many? In the second place, a pervasive thread in Ms. Denning's thinking seems to bethat there is no room for a tradeoff between law enforcement and freedom. Letme point out that crime would drop tremendously if the police were allowed tosearch anyone's home at random, without warning, and to confiscate anythingthey chose. But I don't think I'd want to live in such a society. Similarly,I'm perfectly willing to let a few criminal investigations be "hampered" oreven fail, if it means I can use strong encryption without fear ofeavesdropping or prosecution. > The standard is voluntary -- even for the government. That's not what I remember. I seem to recall that the original announcementsaid that the standard would be applicable to all government agencies. Isthere a citation to support the claim that it's voluntary within thegovernment? As to outside the government, yes, it's voluntary. For now. But there arealready major pressures being applied to make sure that this "voluntary"standard is the only practical choice. For example, Clipper will be mucheasier to export than RSA, Idea, or even the venerable Enigma. Governmentdollars are being used to make sure that the Clipper chip is available andcheap, undercutting the possibility of fair free-market competition. Andhints have been dropped that any future encryption made available to thepublic will also require a key escrow scheme. Geoff Kuenning geoff@ficus.cs.ucla.edu geoff@ITcorp.com A huge vote of thanks to all the police, fire, medical, water, power, and gasworkers who have worked 12-hour shifts to help us out after the quake. End of RISKS-FORUM Digest 15.50************************ WT02-B12-64IA087-000631-B017-295http://res2.resnet.upenn.edu:80/cis590/reading.094.html 130.91.195.242 19970122063517 text/html 4271HTTP/1.0 200 OKDate: Wed, 22 Jan 1997 06:35:18 GMTServer: Apache/1.1.1Content-type: text/htmlContent-length: 4100Last-modified: Tue, 22 Nov 1994 06:32:16 GMTJohn Sculley vs. West Publishing on Free Information Access (Notes from NII Advisory Committee Part 2) Date: Thu, 10 Feb 1994 20:39:17 -0600From: djw@eff.org (Daniel J. Weitzner) Scenes from the National Information Infrastructure Advisory Committee... The following is relatively accurate reconstruction of an exchange betweenJohn Sculley and Vance Operman (president of West Publishing) on thesubject of free information access for schools and libraries. Sculley andOperman were joined by VP Gore a bit later. Sculley: I want us to think seriously about assuring that schools andlibraries can have free access to information resources. Not just thetransport, but the content as well. Certainly this has a cost attached toit, but it would be an invaluable investment in our nation's future. Operman: John, you couldn't mean that. If information is free than it'sworth nothing.... I would be horror-stricken if the result of thiscommittee was a consensus that all library resources were available forfree anywhere around the NII. That would put an end to the US informationindustry. [Some time passes, VP Gore arrives to make some brief comments, and theraises the subject of free access to the NII for schools, libraries andclinics.] Sculley [in response to Gore]: We don't the high price of information to bea barrier for classroom and library access. We have to talk about morethan just putting wires in schools and libraries. Gore: We should talk about free connect time as well for classrooms. Iknow that this has a cost, but it's so important that I'm not prepared totalk it off the table just yet. It would be a very important investment. Operman: Well I'll give you an example of a way that market forces all bythemselves have provided free access, without any government involvment.Both West and Mead provide law students free access to their legalinformation services, at very high cost to the companies. That's millionsof dollars of subsidy right there, resulting from competitive market forcesalone. Gore: Well, Vance, professional schools are different from elementaryschools. (Operman interrupts: "law schools aren't much different fromelementary schools) It makes some sense to have a loss leader there tobuild a market for your services amoung law school graduates. Operman: Well, certain well known computer companies [he turns to Sculley]have been known to put a lot of computers in classrooms for similarreasons. Gore: I really don't think that we're talking about the same market. Oneis computers and the other is information services. Unless you believethat Nintendo will come up with some kind of Euclidean geometry game thatthey would give a way for free. But until you see this happening, we stillhave to ensure free access for schools. Bob Johnson (CEO Black Entertainment Television): There are also somemarkets, regions, that no one competes for. These communities needinformation access, too. [I'm not representing this as a word-for-word transcript, but it's a prettycareful paraphrase of the main points made with a fair amount of directquotation.] **************************************************************************Relying on the government to protect your privacy is like asking a peepingtom to install your window blinds. - John Perry Barlow, EFF co-founder The Electronic Frontier Foundation is working to protect your privacy. Tohelp stop Clipper and eliminate export controls on cryptography, support abill introduced in the House of Representatives, HR 3627. To support thebill, send email to <cantwell@eff.org>. ......................................................................Daniel J. Weitzner, Senior Staff Counsel <djw@eff.org>Electronic Frontier Foundation 202-347-5400 (v)1001 G St, NW Suite 950 East 202-393-5509 (f)Washington, DC 20001 *** Join EFF!!! Send mail to membership@eff.org for information *** WT02-B12-65IA087-000631-B017-333http://res2.resnet.upenn.edu:80/cis590/reading.095.html 130.91.195.242 19970122063533 text/html 5128HTTP/1.0 200 OKDate: Wed, 22 Jan 1997 06:35:34 GMTServer: Apache/1.1.1Content-type: text/htmlContent-length: 4957Last-modified: Tue, 22 Nov 1994 06:32:17 GMTa very thoughtful message re Clipper [a bit of bracketing done by me .. djf] Date: Thu, 10 Feb 1994 18:54:26 -0500From: crawford@cs.ucdavis.edu (Rick Crawford)To: Multiple recipients of list <cni-modernization@cni.orgX-Comment: CNI Modernization of Scholarly Publication WG ---------- original ------------------ From: Jerry Berman, Executive Director of EFF jberman@eff.org This is the first step in a larger campaign to counter the efforts of those who would restrict our ability to speak freely and with privacy. Please stay tuned--we'll continue to inform you of things you can do to promote the removal of restrictions on encryption. .......------------ a comment from a Charles Pearce -------------------------- I hope this larger campaign and this mini one both fail. What you're talking about is experting the license for anyone (terrorists, foreign governments, mafia, etc.) to encrypt whatever data they choose. This would essentially prevent the U. S. government from collecting intelligence on these groups. A standard encryption method would let the government agencies concerned with these things do the jobs that Congress has mandated them to do and we taxpayers support. If you're not engaged in anything illegal or otherwise pose a threat to national security, then don't worry...no one wants to read your mail. Paranoids have always worried about Big Brother. Charles Pearce <pearce@ksuvm.ksu.edu ---------------- the comment to Pearce' email by Rick Crawford ------------- Those who know even a smidgen of U.S. history know that "terrorists"such as the Rev. Martin Luther King, Jr. were illegally wiretappedby our law-abiding intelligence agencies. The communications integrityof law-abiding U.S. citizens was even more flagrantly violated by theFBI's COINTELPRO operations that lasted (at least) into the 1980s. Will Clipper protect us from criminals? In an unprecedented July 1993 public appearance before the ComputerSystem Security and Privacy Advisory Board in Washington, Dr. ClintBrooks, the Assistant Director of the NSA, readily admitted that theClipper system is *not* intended to catch any criminals. Obviously, hesaid, those who have something to hide will avoid inviting governmentwiretaps by using the system. Ray Kammer, the Acting Director of NIST(ostensibly the lead agency for Clipper), was more blunt: "It's obvious that anyone who uses Clipper for the conduct of organized crime is dumb." Suppose --- contrary to all historical evidence --- the public truststhat no intelligence agency will mount an organized campaign of generalsurveillance. If government-accessible cryptography is widely used, isthere a potential for rogue elements in government intelligence agenciesto abuse the public trust? The same week that Dr. Brooks testified, theU.S. House Judiciary Committee held hearings on abuse by police of theFBI's National Crime Information Center (NCIC --- a computerized databaseof criminals and suspects). In one instance, a former police officeraccessed the NCIC without authorization to track down and murder one ofhis former girlfriends. In another case, a woman finagled access to theNCIC to check the records of prospective clients for her drug-dealingboyfriend, so they could avoid undercover operatives. It is widelyassumed that the broad collaboration between police agencies and privatesecurity forces means that much of the NCIC data has already beencompromised, and is now duplicated in numerous private databases. Will Clipper protect us from malicious foreign governments? Anyone familiar with the encryption issue knows that you can alreadybuy triple-DES crypto gear on the streets of Moscow. The genuineterrorists had this capability long ago. Encryption was *not*invented in the U.S., and even our rogue intelligence agencieshave never been able to prevent foreign govts from using it. Clipper technology carries a similar risk to that of atomic power:It must be safeguarded from misuse for generations. Just as stockpiledplutonium represents concentrated military power, and thus must beguarded in perpetuity, so centralized mass-surveillance technologyoffers concentrated social power, and presents a long-lived irresistibletemptation --- perhaps a "fatal attraction". Why must U.S.A. stand for "Universal Surveillance for All"? -rick \ \ \ \ \ \ \ \ _ _ _ / / / / / / / /"They that can give up essential liberty to obtain a little temporary safety deserve neither liberty nor safety." - Ben Franklin, ~1784"THIS EMAIL HAS BEEN MONITORED BY THE STATE TO PROTECT INDIVIDUAL LIBERTY." _ _ _ _ _ _ - Big Brother, ~1984 / / / / / / / / \ \ \ \ \ \ \ \ WT02-B12-66IA087-000631-B018-26http://res2.resnet.upenn.edu:80/cis590/reading.096.html 130.91.195.242 19970122063603 text/html 2296HTTP/1.0 200 OKDate: Wed, 22 Jan 1997 06:35:58 GMTServer: Apache/1.1.1Content-type: text/htmlContent-length: 2125Last-modified: Tue, 22 Nov 1994 06:32:18 GMTQUESTIONS from Rusty Schweickart to D. Denning re her Clipper letter of 10 Feb Date: Thu, 10 Feb 1994 21:31:36 -0800From: Rusty Schweickart <rs@well.sf.ca.us>To: denning@cs.cosc.georgetown.eduSubject: QUESTIONSCc: farber@central.cis.upenn.edu, jberman@eff.org, rs@well.sf.ca.us Dear Ms. Denning: 10 February 1994/21:20 In the second to last paragraph of your letter re cautioningpeople against signing the CPSR petition against Clipper yousaid... .... (via Dave Farber/EFF)>Date: Wed, 09 Feb 1994 17:23:28 -0500 (EST)>From: denning@cs.cosc.georgetown.edu (Dorothy Denning)>Subject: Re: Campaign and Petition Against Clipper>>...>... In the absence of understanding the national security issues, I>believe we need to exercise some caution in believing that we can>understand the full implications of encryption on society. I am no stranger to national security issues, and I have nodoubts of your convictions or the integrity of your work on theClipper Chip. But I am at a complete loss to understand orsympathize with a statement which in essence asks the citizenryto forsake its fundamental constitutional right to privacy onthe basis that the government knows best what is good for thepeople, albeit it isn't at liberty to explain why in detail. The logic put forward on the necessity for wiretaps (dulyapproved) is so fallacious as to seem ludicrous. Drug cartels,terrorists, malicious foreign agents and other real threats arethe last to rely on the Clipper for secure communications whenthere are alternative strong encryption systems readilyavailable. Who then will the NSA and others eavesdrop on? Dumbcriminals and those with nothing to hide? How can my government, and you by association, ask me and othercitizens to abdicate our responsibility to protect ourconstitutional right to privacy when no rational argument has beenpresented to justify this erosion of liberty? I welcome an answer, and I respect your inability to answer allthe mail you are receiving on this matter. Rusty Schweickart WT02-B12-67IA087-000631-B018-63http://res2.resnet.upenn.edu:80/cis590/reading.097.html 130.91.195.242 19970122063625 text/html 8117HTTP/1.0 200 OKDate: Wed, 22 Jan 1997 06:36:27 GMTServer: Apache/1.1.1Content-type: text/htmlContent-length: 7946Last-modified: Tue, 22 Nov 1994 06:32:19 GMTFBI Wiretap Cost Date: Fri, 11 Feb 1994 12:39:21 -0800From: "Brock N. Meeks" <brock@well.sf.ca.us>To: farber@central.cis.upenn.edu //CyberWire Dispatch/Copyright (c) 1994// Jacking in from the Financial Port: Washington, DC -- The White House is jumping into the lion's den. The Administration is backing a controversial FBI plan that wouldmandate the installation of wiretap "trap doors" on all types ofcommunications, government sources said. But the decision tosupport the so-called "Digital Telephony Bill" is based, in largepart, on severely flawed data. A confidential FBI cost analysis document, a copy of which wasobtained by Dispatch, estimates it would take some $300 million toimplement the mandatory wiretap access scheme. But government andindustry sources say that the actual cost of implementation couldquickly escalate to more than $1 billion. Reason: The FBI's owncost analysis doesn't consider the price of mandatory compliancefor computer networks, cable TV operations, digital cellularsystems, or emerging personal communications systems. A key factor in the debate holding up the announcement of WhiteHouse backed digital wiretap legislation is who will eventually besaddled with the bill. It might help if the FBI could come up withsome reliable figures, but even their own classified documentsacknowledge that they don't have a clue: "The cost to thetelecommunications industry of complying with the provisions andrequirements of the legislation is not susceptible the precisemeasurement." Software Solutions================== The FBI's answer to the digital wiretap problem lies in developinga software program that could be loaded into a telephone switch.But the cost for developing this software is "difficult to estimateabsent specific feasibility studies," FBI documents say. It isknown that at least four different versions of the program wouldhave be written to cover the installed base of telephone switchesin the U.S. What the FBI's cost estimate doesn't mention is the price formaintaining the software. Currently the Baby Bells and majorindependent telephone companies spend more than $1 billion in newswitch and application upgrade software, according to the NationalAssociation of Regulatory Utility Commissioners. Now, you tell me,who's going to pony up the bucks to revise the wiretap software tomake sure it's compatible with each new calling feature andmodification to switch software? Quality control and the integrity of the nation's telephone networkisn't something the phone companies are willing to fuck with.Software is a big, big deal. Switch manufacturers remember all toowell getting reamed by House Telecommunications SubcommitteeChairman Ed Markey (D-Mass.) during intense congressional hearingsin 1990 to explain why half of the East Coast lost dial tone whenswitches toppled like dominoes. The cause, it was later admitted,was a "3 Bit Bug" software coding error. The switch's softwarerevision hadn't undergone rigorous enough testing before beinginstalled in the local network. So, who picks up the check? The FBI first wanted you to pay forall this work. That's right, through higher local telephone rates.That idea drew such withering fire from consumer groups andindustry that the FBI deleted that language from its original bill.But the question remains: Who the hell is going to pay? The FBI says it can short hop all this grief: "Industry may, aftercomparing the necessary attributes of electronic surveillance withavailable or planned network/system analysis and maintenance tools,formulate solutions for embedded and emerging systems that wouldrequire a much less extensive level of efforts, and a commensuratereduction of costs." In other words, the FBI thinks switch manufacturers will simplystart making their switches "wiretap ready" as they come off thedamn assembly line. Neat trick if you can pull it off. Bury thecost in the R&D budget, hide it in the retail cost of the switchand BINGO, the phone companies get to depreciate the cost over 20years and the ratepayer (that's you) has no idea that they end uppaying to make some cop's life easier. Data Diving=========== When it comes to eavesdropping on someone's Prodigy or CompuServeor Internet session, the FBI again has a simple solution: Turn thesystem administrator into an ad hoc FBI agent. You think I'mjoking? Check out this statement, again from the confidential FBIreport: "Enhanced audit functions could be included in futureoperating system revisions or through after-marketdiagnostics/audit software packages. (The Norton Network WiretapUtilities, no doubt.) The implementation of this capability wouldbe, in essence, a no cost educational process for the system'soperator or administrator." (But will they be able to sleep atnight?) Cable TV systems get hammered, too. With cable companies gettinginto the telephone business, the FBI wants to be sure they arerequired to make their networks wiretap ready. Because "a certainnumber" of wiretaps "would be expected to occur within suchsystems," the FBI said. The FBI cost documents don't even proffera guess at what it would cost to front load cable networks withwiretap software. Instead, the FBI says that if these cablesystems use the switches of the Baby Bells, well, everything isJake. Why? Because the local telephone companies would havealready installed the damn software long ago. What happens if cable companies want to build their own independenttelephone networks? Not to worry, the FBI says, "it would becontemplated that [cable companies] would 'engineer in' criminallaw enforcement's needs in the design stages of development." Andonce that occurs, "the costs associated with compliance would beminimal," the FBI says. The same logic applies to emerging PCS systems. The "most costefficient solution" for potential PCS companies is to design andplan for mandatory wiretap access capability "during thedevelopment and pre-production phase" of their networks, the FBIsaid. Are you getting this? If the FBI gets its way, the entire NEXTGENERATION of communications networks -- from your hand held "callanywhere phone," to your digital personal assistant, like Apple'sNewton -- will come PRE-INSTALLED with wiretap capability. And thecost will be buried, yet again, the design phase. Nice touch. Oh yeah, then there are those pesky PBXs, the ones owned bybusinesses, schools, churches, libraries, non-profit organizations.According to the FCC there are up to 400,000 of these buggershanging around, of which 70% are analog breathing technologicalbeasts. Analog technology is doable for the FBI; it's the digitalshit they can't handle. The FBI says that to replace a PBX that gives them grief would costan average of $70,000, in 1992 dollars. So, being the nice guysthey are, the FBI would allow the Justice Department to grant awaiver to these PBX owners so they could save up enough money tobuy a wiretap equipped PBX. Digital Wiretaps, Making the Nation Safe======================================== The FBI thinks all this is worth it, apparently at any cost.Failing to do so would cause "enormous economic harm" due to crime,which it estimates is in the multibillion range, the FBI says.Still not convinced? Well, to hell with the cost, the damntelecommunications industry is obligated to do all this, accordingto FBI logic. "It is worth noting... that the telecommunications industryhistorically has been required to respond to public safety needsboth at the state and Federal levels," the FBI says. "We view thelegislative proposal as being consistent with the need to ensurethe public's safety through the effective enforcement of the law." Meeks out... WT02-B12-68IA087-000631-B018-102http://res2.resnet.upenn.edu:80/cis590/reading.098.html 130.91.195.242 19970122063645 text/html 3663HTTP/1.0 200 OKDate: Wed, 22 Jan 1997 06:36:46 GMTServer: Apache/1.1.1Content-type: text/htmlContent-length: 3492Last-modified: Tue, 22 Nov 1994 06:32:20 GMT T H E I N T E R N E T L E T T E R on Clipper and Gore Permission granted to repost the following in its entirety. Jayne Levin Net Week Inc.Editor 220 National Press BuildingThe Internet Letter Washington, D.C. 20045 USA+1 202 638 6020 Fax: +1 202 638 6019Internet: helen@access.digex.net T H E I N T E R N E T L E T T E R *******NEWS FLASH******* Vice President Says Clipper Chip Controls InadequateGore Indicates Administration's Position Is 'Not Locked in Stone' By Jayne Levin(c) 1994 WASHINGTON, Feb. 11--Vice President Gore said controlsrecently adopted by the Clinton administration that authorizetwo government agencies to safeguard the electronic "keys" in anencoding device called the "Clipper Chip" are inadequate. Under the Clipper plan, the keys would be stored at theTreasury Department and the National Institute of Standards andTechnology (NIST), which is part of the Commerce Department.Both Treasury and Commerce are from the same branch ofgovernment, the executive branch. "When I saw that I said, 'Wow. Wow. That is not right,' andI raised hell about that," Gore said in an interview Thursday. Having the key holders from the same branch of governmentraises concern because there is no system of checks andbalances, Gore said. "That's going to be changed," he said.Clipper gives law-enforcement agencies a key to eavesdrop ontelephone and computer communications under a court order. The selection of NIST and Treasury "was spun out of theprocess at the low level and was not vetted at the top," Goresaid. Gore's comments were made after appearing before the firstmeeting of a private sector advisory panel on the development ofa "national information infrastructure" in Washington, D.C. The administration announced Feb. 4 that it intends to pushahead with the voluntary Clipper Chip encryption scheme, despitevehement opposition from computer companies and watchdog groups,such as the Electronic Frontier Foundation (EFF) and theComputer Professionals for Social Responsibility. But Gore indicated Thursday that the administration'sposition is "not locked in stone." "Our determination to solve the problem is locked in stone,and our determination to proceed with this in the absence of abetter solution is locked in stone," he said "...the burden ison those who say there is a better solution because no solutionfor the national security dimension of the problemis unacceptable to us." Mitch Kapor, EFF chairman and a member of the advisorycommittee, said he was "encouraged" by the vice president'sremarks. "This was a signal to me that [the administration] is veryready and willing to look at alternatives...both to theadministrative procedures and the technology." Computer manufacturers, telecommunications companies andcivil rights groups argue that Clipper would undermineindividuals' right to privacy and cripple U.S. exports ofcomputer products. "If I'm going to conduct business...engage in confidentialconversations...send money and credit card numbers over thisinfrastructure, I want some guarantee that my communications areprivate and that some rogue law enforcement officer can't goand compromise my information," said Esther Dyson, president ofEDventure Holdings Inc. and a panel member. * WT02-B12-69IA087-000631-B018-144http://res2.resnet.upenn.edu:80/cis590/reading.099.html 130.91.195.242 19970122063728 text/html 2035HTTP/1.0 200 OKDate: Wed, 22 Jan 1997 06:37:29 GMTServer: Apache/1.1.1Content-type: text/htmlContent-length: 1864Last-modified: Tue, 22 Nov 1994 06:32:21 GMTRe: CORRECTION on Clipper and Wash Post Date: Fri, 11 Feb 1994 10:25:54 -0800 (PST)From: Mike Nelson <mnelson@ostp.eop.gov>Subject: Re: CORRECTION on Clipper and Wash PostTo: Mike Godwin <mnemonic@eff.org>Cc: interesting-people mailing list <interesting-people@eff.org>, Yes we did! The background material stated explicitly that "theAdministration has no intention of changing current policies" that allowany American to use any encryption device. (Unfortunately, since wecannot predict the outcome of future elections, we cannot predict whatmight happen in the future.) On Tue, 8 Feb 1994, Mike Godwin wrote: John Schwartz writes: > A White House briefing paper quoted in the Feb. 5 Washington Post> article about the new Clipper announcement was actually a Q and A> originally released April 16, 1993 and included in the packet of> information provided by the administration for last week's announcement.> The administration did not announce on Feb. 4th that it retained the right> to restrict alternate encryption plans for domestic use. A clarification> will run in tomorrow's Washington Post. That's true, but the Administration also did not retract its commentfrom the April 16 Q-and-A. Let's be clear about this. The Administration said on Friday thatit was not making Clipper mandatory. But the Administration has alsosaid that it does not believe that citizens have the right tounbreakable encryption "as a matter of right." Nothing said onFriday retracted the prior comment. Remember, there's a difference between: "The Administration did not say on Friday that it might consider banningalternative encryption technologies" and "The Administration will not consider banning alternative encryptiontechnologies." --Mike WT02-B12-70IA087-000631-B018-179http://res2.resnet.upenn.edu:80/cis590/reading.100.html 130.91.195.242 19970122063745 text/html 3817HTTP/1.0 200 OKDate: Wed, 22 Jan 1997 06:37:47 GMTServer: Apache/1.1.1Content-type: text/htmlContent-length: 3646Last-modified: Tue, 22 Nov 1994 06:32:22 GMTWhite Pages Service offered/Aldea communications I'm writing for more information about the enclosed posting, which raisedall sort of privacy-related issues that I plan to discuss in class (whichis why I've copied my "Taming the Electronic Frontier" class on thisreply). Who is Aldea Communications? How will this information be used? The factthat your announcement left these questions vague is a red flag, withsinister connotations that you might wish to immediately correct. Unless,of course, these connotations are correct. Are you the good guys, out to do the internet a favor by helping other goodguys stay in touch? Your name could easily be interpreted to mean a marketresearch firm out to line your pockets by building a database of good guysfor the bad guys to send junk mail to. Which are you? How will this information be used? Brad The Bewildered >Posted-Date: Sat, 12 Feb 1994 11:39:24 -0500>X-Sender: farber@linc.cis.upenn.edu>Mime-Version: 1.0>Date: Sat, 12 Feb 1994 11:39:30 -0500>From: farber@central.cis.upenn.edu (David Farber)>Subject: White Pages Service offered/Aldea communications>Precedence: list>To: interesting-people@eff.org (interesting-people mailing list)>>Posted-Date: Sat, 12 Feb 1994 11:26:42 -0500>To: internauts:;@isoc.org>Subject: White Pages Service offered/Aldea communications>Date: Sat, 12 Feb 94 10:39:06 -0500>Sender: isoc-sender@isoc.org>From: "Vinton G. Cerf" <vcerf@CNRI.Reston.VA.US>>>Folks,>>I always think twice about sending thing to the Internauts>list but white pages is such a critical need, I thought you>would forgive me this exception.>>Vint>------- Forwarded Message>>From: Susan Estrada <sestrada@aldea.com>>Subject: NetPages .. Feel Free to Forward as Appropriate>>Aldea Communications wants to help people find each other on the Internet,>so the concept of NetPages(tm) was developed. NetPages is an Internet>email address directory based on the "phone book" concept with white and>yellow pages. It will be published twice a year, with the first edition>coming out in March, 1994. The first edition will be distributed in>hard-copy at UNIFORUM and electronically for downloading on the Internet.>>You may make a white pages listing free of charge. All information is>optional. Your listing will be sent to you prior to the compilation of the>directory for verification. Yellow pages listings are available in the>NetPages for those of you with more information to deliver. Contact us for>pricing.>>If you have any questions or comments, write to netpages@aldea.com or call>1-800-TO ALDEA (619-943-0101). All listees will be notified of the>electronic Internet "pickup" spot in March.>>**********************************************************>To add your name to the directory simply return this completed template to>netpages@aldea.com. We need your entry by February 21 to meet the printing>deadline.>>Your name:>>Your email address:>>Business or personal account:>>Company name:>>Your title:>>City:>>State, Country:>>Aldea Communications, Inc.>info@aldea.com>1-800-To-Aldea>1-619-943-0101>NetPages (tm) - The Internet Directory>>>>------- End of Forwarded Message>>>>> --Brad Cox; George Mason Program on Social and Organizational LearningFairfax VA; bcox@gmu.edu; 703 968 8229 voice 968 8798 fax WT02-B12-71IA087-000631-B018-216http://res2.resnet.upenn.edu:80/cis590/reading.101.html 130.91.195.242 19970122063803 text/html 2174HTTP/1.0 200 OKDate: Wed, 22 Jan 1997 06:38:04 GMTServer: Apache/1.1.1Content-type: text/htmlContent-length: 2003Last-modified: Tue, 22 Nov 1994 06:32:23 GMTRe: CORRECTION on Clipper and Wash Post reply from From: Mike Godwin <mnemonic>To: mnelson@ostp.eop.gov (Mike Nelson)Date: Sun, 13 Feb 1994 02:08:31 -0500 (EST)Cc: interesting-people@eff.org, mnelson@ostp.eop.gov Mike Nelson writes: > Yes we did! The background material stated explicitly that "the> Administration has no intention of changing current policies" that allow> any American to use any encryption device. Indeed it does, but that's not the point of my comment. > (Unfortunately, since we> cannot predict the outcome of future elections, we cannot predict what> might happen in the future.) You also can't predict whether, prior to future elections, your minds willchange. I know from talking personally to high-level representatives of the lawenforcement community that allowing anyone to have alternative unbreakableencryption is a sore point. Your current comments leave you wiggle room on this point. You can alwayssay "We said we had no intention of banning alternatives, but that wasbefore Crisis X occurred." What you don't do is *commit* to always allowingalternatives. And what you do is attempt to create an economic environmentin which alternatives are suppressed by economic forces. And you've put this policy in place without explaining your reasons. I note that you do not respond to my other point: > On Tue, 8 Feb 1994, Mike Godwin wrote:> >> > Let's be clear about this. The Administration said on Friday that> > it was not making Clipper mandatory. But the Administration has also> > said that it does not believe that citizens have the right to> > unbreakable encryption "as a matter of right." Nothing said on> > Friday retracted the prior comment. Nor have you answered the questions I posed earlier. For example,isn't it true that the Administration is hoping to suppress themarket for encryption alternatives? --Mike WT02-B12-72IA087-000631-B018-249http://res2.resnet.upenn.edu:80/cis590/reading.102.html 130.91.195.242 19970122063823 text/html 3983HTTP/1.0 200 OKDate: Wed, 22 Jan 1997 06:38:20 GMTServer: Apache/1.1.1Content-type: text/htmlContent-length: 3812Last-modified: Tue, 22 Nov 1994 06:32:24 GMTVice President Gore Questions Key Escrow Policy Date: Sun, 13 Feb 1994 15:24:34 -0600To: farber@central.cis.upenn.eduFrom: djw@eff.org (Daniel J. Weitzner) Dave, this is what I sent Mike. Mike Nelson (White House OSTP) wrote re: my report on VP Gore's Clipper remarks: Correction: Gore said the Clipper proposal can be improved. (We all know that!) Hedidn't indicate he was walking away from the idea or that he wasreconsidering decisions he and other top officials made less than 10 daysago. My response: It seems to me that a plan which is designed to protect personal privacyand business security should be carefully de-bugged BEFORE being offered tothe public as a viable solution. The Vice President made a number of remarks to Mitch, Esther & myself whichindicated that he thought there were serious problems with the currentplan, most notably that the wrong escrow agents had been chosen. Hesuggested that some part of the judicial branch might be a more appropriatevenue. Inasmuch as the indentity of the key holder determines the degree ofprivacy protection in the system as a whole, a less than ideal choice thereis a material flaw in the whole system. BTW - an independent reporter who heard the converstation in its entirety(and probably has it on tape), confirmed our understanding of the VicePresident's remarks. An excerpt from her story is appended to the end ofthis message. ================================== Vice President Says Clipper Chip Controls InadequateGore Indicates Administration's Position Is 'Not Locked in Stone' By Jayne Levin(c) 1994 WASHINGTON, Feb. 11--Vice President Gore said controlsrecently adopted by the Clinton administration that authorizetwo government agencies to safeguard the electronic "keys" in anencoding device called the "Clipper Chip" are inadequate. Under the Clipper plan, the keys would be stored at theTreasury Department and the National Institute of Standards andTechnology (NIST), which is part of the Commerce Department.Both Treasury and Commerce are from the same branch ofgovernment, the executive branch. "When I saw that I said, 'Wow. Wow. That is not right,' andI raised hell about that," Gore said in an interview Thursday. Having the key holders from the same branch of governmentraises concern because there is no system of checks andbalances, Gore said. "That's going to be changed," he said.Clipper gives law-enforcement agencies a key to eavesdrop ontelephone and computer communications under a court order. The selection of NIST and Treasury "was spun out of theprocess at the low level and was not vetted at the top," Goresaid. Gore's comments were made after appearing before the firstmeeting of a private sector advisory panel on the development ofa "national information infrastructure" in Washington, D.C. **************************************************************************Relying on the government to protect your privacy is like asking a peepingtom to install your window blinds. - John Perry Barlow, EFF co-founder The Electronic Frontier Foundation is working to protect your privacy. Tohelp stop Clipper and eliminate export controls on cryptography, support abill introduced in the House of Representatives, HR 3627. To support thebill, send email to <cantwell@eff.org>. ......................................................................Daniel J. Weitzner, Senior Staff Counsel <djw@eff.org>Electronic Frontier Foundation 202-347-5400 (v)1001 G St, NW Suite 950 East 202-393-5509 (f)Washington, DC 20001 *** Join EFF!!! Send mail to membership@eff.org for information *** WT02-B12-73IA087-000631-B019-32http://res2.resnet.upenn.edu:80/cis590/reading.103.html 130.91.195.242 19970122063847 text/html 25736HTTP/1.0 200 OKDate: Wed, 22 Jan 1997 06:38:46 GMTServer: Apache/1.1.1Content-type: text/htmlContent-length: 25564Last-modified: Tue, 22 Nov 1994 06:32:25 GMTThe Five Great Inventions of Twentieth Century Cryptography From: WHMurray@DOCKMASTER.NCSC.MIL The Five Great Inventions of Twentieth Century Cryptography William Hugh MurrayPreface [This talk was presented as the keynote address at the 1994 RSA SecurityConference, Redwood City, CA] Foreword Two years ago I opened the first of these conferences. Jim Bidzos invited me to "kick it off;" nothing so formal as a "keynote."While I wore this same suit, I just sort of got up here to shoot thebreeze with a few of my friends and colleagues. No notes, just sort of"off-the-cuff." He did not even tell me how long I could talk. As far as Iknow there were no reporters present; nothing that I said got me introuble. After the morning session was over, Jim hosted a lunch for some of thespeakers and panelists. Whit Diffie sat beside me, with his notes, andbegan to quiz me on my sources and authorities for my comments. He eventold me that some of my best stories were apocryphal (though he concededme the points that I made with them). Well, I see the same friends, but there are far more colleagues. Theprogram is more formal, Diffie still has his pad and pencil, the press ishere, my remarks are styled as a "keynote," they are sufficiently arguablethat I need to choose my words very carefully, and I have a fixed time toend. Prudence suggests that I use notes. Introduction Cryptography, the art of secret communication, is almost as old aswriting. Indeed, it has been suggested that, at least for a while, writingitself was a relative secret. Certainly it was esoteric and its use wasreserved to an initiated elite. Cryptography and recording and communicating technologies have played leapfrog through the pages of history. It is my thesis that both have changedso radically during the nineteenth and twentieth centuries as toconstitute a new era. On the recording and communicating side we have photography, telegraphy,telephony, radio, phonography, cinema, television, andtelecommunications.hy, telephony, radio, cinema, television, and thecomputer. Collectively, and even individually, these technologiesconstitute a dramatic change in our ability to make a mark across time andspace. We have seen a similar advance in our ability to conceal those records andmessages from all but a chosen few. Modern cryptography has its origins between the two great wars of thetwentieth century. .It was driven as much by the use of radio on thebattlefield as by any other single influence, but there are an infinitenumber of important recording and communicating applications that simplycannot be done in clear text. While more sparingly used and less well known, the advances incryptography have been no less dramatic than those in recording andcommunications. I propose to consider five inventions of the twentieth century that havedefined modern cryptography and that set it apart from ancient ortraditional cryptography. The impact of these technologies has been to simplify the use of codes,reduce their cost, and increase by orders of magnitude the cost to acryptanalyst of recovering information protected by the codes. What constitutes an invention or sets it apart from other inventions issomewhat arbitrary. Some of the inventions that I propose to discuss couldbe considered as a group of other inventions; the members of the groupmight or might not be significant by themselves. I have limited myself to a discussion of inventions rather thanaccomplishments, and to cryptography rather than to cryptanalysis. Many of the accomplishments of the century have been in cryptanalysis andmay have been greater than the inventions in cryptography. However,greatness is in the eye of the beholder. Certainly all the inventions havenot been limited to cryptography. For example, if cryptanalysts did not invent the modern computer, theycertainly gave it a major boost. They have lived to see the advantage thatit provides shift, with its scale, from them to the cryptographer.Automated Encoding and Decoding Modern cryptography begins in 1917 with the invention by Gilbert S.Vernam, an employee of the American Telephone & Telegraph Company, of theVernam System. Vernam used two paper tape readers, one for the message and the other forthe key. He added the two (bit-wise and modulo 2) to produce theciphertext. Moreover, he used the standard information technology of his day toautomate the encoding and decoding of information. Modern cryptography is automatic. Translation from plaintext to ciphertextand back again is performed automatically, that is by a machine orautomaton. While there may be a separate step, the conversion from one code to theother is done by a machine rather than by a person. Today that conversion can be done by almost any single user computer. Withappropriate controls and for some applications it can be done in amulti-user computer. Before computers, this encoding was done in special purpose machines. TheEnigma and Purple machines were both early and famous examples of suchmachines. The requirement to manually convert from natural language to secret codeshas always been a limitation. It tended to limit both the amount oftraffic encrypted and the complexity of the encoding schemes used. Therefore, encryption machines of any kind increase the complexity andeffectiveness of the codes available. At one level, the modern computer can be viewed as a general purpose codeconversion machine. That is, it converts information called input into anew representation called output. The relationship between the input and the output can be simple orcomplex, obvious or obscure, public or secret, and reversible orirreversible. If the conversion is complex, obscure, secret, and reversible, then thecomputer can be viewed as an encryption machine. But for want of a small amount of readily available software, all of thehundred million general purpose computers in the world are encryptionengines of immense power. At some price in performance, the relationship between input and outputcan be arbitrarily complex and obscure and thus arbitrarily effective inconcealing the meaning of the output. The cost of computer performance has been falling steadily and rapidly forfifty years. It has now become so cheap that most capacity is not used forthe convenience of having it ready when it is wanted. The result is thatthe use of secret codes can be viewed as almost free. So cheap is automatic coding and encoding that some applications do it bydefault and globally, concealing it completely from the user. Since thedifference in cost between public codes and secret codes is vanishing andcan be paid in a currency, computer cycles, that might otherwise bewasted, secret codes can be used by default. Independent Long Key Variable The major weakness of Vernam's system was that it required so much keymaterial. This was compensated for by Lyman Morehouse who used two keytapes of 1000 and 999 characters, about eight feet each in length, incombination to produce an effective key tape of 999,000 characters,effectively 8000 feet in length. Morehouse had used a long key. Modern cryptography is tailored to a particular use by a key variable, orsimply a key. The key is a large integer that tailors the behavior of thestandard algorithm and makes it generate a cipher that is specific to thatnumber. The requirement for secrecy is limited to this number. The problem ofprotecting the data reduces to the simpler one of protecting the key. Access to the cleartext requires access to the combination of theciphertext, the base mechanism, usually a computer and a program, and thekey. Since the rest are readily available, the efficiency of any use dependsupon the fact that it is more expensive or difficult to obtain the keythan to obtain the protected data by other means. All other things being equal, the longer the key, the more secure themechanism. Key length is a trade off against the complexity and thesecrecy of the algorithm. The longer the key, the simpler and more obvious can be the mechanism oralgorithm. If the key is as long as the message, statistically random in appearance,and used only once (one-time pad), then such a simple and obviousmechanism as modulo addition will still provide effective security. For practical reasons, short keys and more complex mechanisms arepreferred.Complexity Based Cryptography (The Data Encryption Standard) In May 1973 the US National Bureau of Standards advertised in the FederalRegister for a proposal for an encryption mechanism to be employed as astandard mechanism for all of the needs of the civilian sectors of thegovernment. The ad stated that the successful proposal would be for a mechanism thatwould be secure for at least five years in spite of the fact that themechanism would be public and published. The resulting Data Encryption Standard was proposed by the IBMCorporation. It was invented by a team led by Walter Tuchman and was basedupon a concept originated by Horst Feistel of IBM's Yorktown ResearchLaboratory. This mechanism, which can be implemented on a chip and completelydescribed in a few 8.5"X11'' pages, changed the nature of cryptographyforever. The security of modern encryption mechanisms like the DES is rooted intheir complexity rather than in their secrecy. While traditional encryption relied upon the secrecy of the mechanism toconceal the meaning of the message, these modern mechanisms employstandard and public algorithms. These mechanisms are standard in the sense that they are of known strengthor have a known cost of attack. However, the trade-off is that theireffectiveness can not, must not, depend upon their secrecy. Rather, it relies upon the complexity of the mechanism. The complexity ofmodern ciphers is such that they can be effective even though most oftheir mechanism is public. The most well known, trusted, and widely used of all modern ciphers is theData Encryption Standard. Because of the intended breadth and duration ofthe use of this cipher, the sponsors specified that it should be assumedto be public. Its effectiveness should rely upon the secrecy only of the key (see thenext section). It has been public for more than fifteen years, but itseffectiveness is such that trying all possible keys with known plain andcipher text is still the cheapest practical attack. [The DES belongs to a class of ciphers known as Feistel ciphers. Theseciphers are also known as block product ciphers. They are called blockciphers because they operate on a fixed length block of bits orcharacters. They are called product ciphers because they employ bothsubstitution and transposition.] Automatic Key Management The same key must exist at both ends of the communication. Historically,keys were distributed by a separate channel or path than the one by whichthe encrypted traffic passed. The initial distribution and installation of the keys must be done in sucha way as not to disclose them to the adversary. When this is done manually, it represents a significant opportunity forthe compromise of the system. Because they were attempting to combine cryptography and computing in anovel manner, Tuchman and his team understood this problem very well. The products that they based upon the DES algorithm addressed it, in part,by automating the generation, distribution, installation, storage,control, and timely changing of the keys. Their elegant system is described in two papers published in the IBMSystems Journal Vol. 17(2) pp. 106-125 (1978) and covered by a number offundamental patents based upon it. [While NSA had automated some keymanagement operations, and while Rosenblum was awarded a patent for a "keydistribution center," these were ad hoc. This work is the first thatdescribes and implements a complete and integrated automatic system.] The impact of this concept on the effectiveness, efficiency, and ease ofapplication of modern cryptography is immense. However, it may also thethe least understood and appreciated. For example, much of the analysis of the strength of the DES is made inthe context of the primitive DES. However, the DES rarely appears as aprimitive. Instead it appears in implementations which use it in such away as to compensate for its inherent limitations. For example, automatic generation of the keys avoids the use of weak ortrivial keys. (the DES has four known weak keys and four semiweak keys.) Since automatic key management systems permit so many keys,they also reduce the exposure to "known plaintext" attacks. History suggests that codes are most often broken because the user failsto apply them with the necessary rigor and discipline, particularly whenchoosing, distributing, and installing keys. Automating of these steps provides much of the necessary discipline andrigor. Automatic key distribution and installation increases the effectiveness byprotecting the keys from disclosure during distribution, and by making thesystem resistant to the insertion of keys known to attackers. When keys are installed manually they become known to the human agent whoinstalls them. He is in a position to provide a copy of the key to others.To the extent that this agent is vulnerable to coercion or bribery, thesystem is weakened by this knowledge. Therefore, the system may be strengthened by automatic mechanisms whichprovide the agent with beneficial use of the key without granting himknowledge of it. For example, systems available from IBM and Motorola provide for the keyto be distributed in smartcards and automatically installed in the targetmachine. The key can be encrypted in the smartcard or destroyed by the installationprocess. In either case, the agent can use it, but cannot copy it or giveit to another. Just as the use of automata for encoding and decoding reduces the cost andinconvenience of using secret codes, the use of automata for keymanagement reduces the cost and inconvenience of changing the keysfrequently. By changing the key frequently, e.g., for each, file, session, message, ortransaction, the value to an adversary of obtaining a key is reduced, andthe effectiveness of the mechanism is improved. One way of looking at automated key management is that it increases theeffective length of the key, or makes it approach the length of the dataprotected. Asymmetric Key Cryptography However, even though most of the key management can be automated, mostsuch systems require some prearrangement. In any-to-any communications ina large open population, this requirement can quickly become overwhelming. For example, in a population of two hundred people, the number of keypairs and secret exchanges would be in the thousands with manyopportunities for keys to be compromised. Moreover, with traditional keys,the initial distribution of keys must be done in such a way as to maintaintheir secrecy, practically impossible in a large population. These problems are addressed, in part, by public key, or asymmetric key,cryptography. This mechanism was proposed by Whitfield Diffee, MartinHellman, and Ralph Merkle. It may be the single most innovative idea inmodern cryptography. The best known and most widely used implementation is the RSA algorithminvented by Ronald Rivest, Adi Shamir, and Leonard Adelman. [In this mechanism the key has two parts, only one of which must be keptsecret. The two parts have the special property that what is encryptedwith one can only be decrypted with the other. One half of the key-pair, called the private key, is kept secret and isused only by its owner. The other half, called the public key, is published and is used by allparties that want to communicate with the private key owner. It can be published and does not need to be distributed secretly. Since the public key, by definition, is available to anyone, then anyonecan send a message to the owner that only he can read.] With a minimum of pre-arrangement, this function provides the logicalanalog of an envelope that can only be opened by one person. The largerthe communicating population, and the more hostile the environment, thegreater is its advantage over symmetric key cryptography. This concealment from all but the intended recipient is the traditionaluse of cryptography. However, asymmetric key cryptography has another use. A message encrypted using the private key can be read by anyone withaccess to the public key, but it could only have been encrypted by theowner of the corresponding private key. This use is analogous to a digitalsignature. It provides confidence that the message originates where it appears tohave originated. Since if even a bit of the message is changed it will notdecrypt properly, this mechanism also provides confidence that the messagehas not been either maliciously or accidentally altered. In part, this is also true as between the two parties to a message that issent using symmetric key cryptography. That is, the recipient of themessage knows with a high degree of confidence that it originated with theother holder of the key; he knows it, but he cannot prove it to another. However, with asymmetric key cryptography, he can demonstrate it to athird party. If the owner of the key pair has acknowledged the public partof the key to the third party, then he cannot plausibly deny any messagethat can be decrypted with it. [The concept of the digital signature is such a novel concept as to easilyqualify as an invention on its own. However, it is so closely bound inorigin and literature to asymmetric key cryptography that I elect tosimply treat them as one.] These two abstractions, the logical envelope and the logical signature,can be composed so as to synthesize any and all of the controls that wehave ever been able to achieve by more traditional means. They can be used for payments, contracts, testaments, and high integrityjournals and logs. They provide us with a higher degree of security in an electronicenvironment than we were ever able to achieve in a paper environment. They provide protection in an open environment that is nearly as high asthat which we can achieve in an open one. The Impact of the GreatInventions The impact of these inventions is to provide us with secret codes that arecheap enough to be used by default, and arbitrarily strong. Given assumptions about the quantity of data to be protected, the lengthof time that it must remain secret, its value to an adversary, and theresources available to the adversary, it is possible to apply moderncryptography in such a way as to be as strong as required. While it is possible to state a problem in such a way as to defy such asolution, it is difficult to identify such a problem in the real world. That is, It is possible to specify so much data to be encrypted under asingle key, of such high value and which must remain safe for such a longtime that we cannot say with confidence that the mechanism can stand forthat time and cost. For example, we cannot say with confidence how to encrypt several hundredgigabytes worth several trillion dollars and keep it safe for amillennium. On the other hand, we are not aware of any real problems thatmeet such a specification. Put another way, we can always ensure that the cost of obtaining theinformation by cryptanalysis is higher than the value of the data or thecost of obtaining it by alternative means. While any code can be broken at some cost, modern codes are economicallyunbreakable, at least in the sense that the cost of doing so can be madeto exceed the value of doing it. A very small increase in the cost to the cryptographer can result inastronomical increases in the cost to a potential adversary. Perhaps just as important, these mechanisms are now sufficientlyconvenient to use, that, within bounds, they can be widely and easilyapplied. Given that the more data that is encrypted with a single mechanism, thegreater the value in breaking it, the more compromising information isavailable to an adversary, and that the more a mechanism is used thegreater the opportunity for a compromising error in its use, we shouldcontinue to apply cryptography only to data that can profit from its use. On the other we need never again be inhibited from using it by issues ofcost or convenience.Cryptography and Government Policy It should be obvious to a qualified observer that, announcements here tothe contrary not withstanding, we are losing the battle for security andprivacy in the computerized and networked world. We could have secret codes imbedded in all software of interest for free.This assertion assumes only that all such software is produced by thoserepresented here, who have already paid for licenses and absorbed much ofthe necessary development cost, and that the cost of a marginal cycle onthe desktop approaches zero. That we do not, is the result of ambivalent government policy. While oneagency of government has sponsored the use of standard cryptography,another has tried to undermine confidence in those standards. While one agency has asserted that public standards are essential, anotherhas sponsored secret ones, and a third has used public funds to furthersuch secret standards. While one agency has insisted that trusted codes are essential to worldprosperity, another has imposed restrictions on their export andundermined confidence in those that are exported. While one agency recognizes that national security depends upon worldprosperity, another believes that signals intelligence is more important.Those of you who have seen my comments in Risks, sci.crypt , and theCommunications of the ACM, know my position. It is that the prime mover behind all of these initiatives is NSA, thattheir motive is the preservation of their jobs and power by protecting theefficiency of signals intelligence, that their strategy is to discourageby every means that they can get away with all private and most commercialuse of cryptography. That they have infiltrated the departments of Stateand Commerce and the White House staff, and that they are using theDepartment of Justice. While they know that they cannot be fully successful, they also know thatthey do not have to be. Nor is this simply paranoia on my part. It is the only explanation thataccounts for all of the government's actions. It also meets the testsproposed by Machiavelli, Willie Sutton and "Deep Throat." While most of the government confesses that cryptography is essential topersonal privacy in the modern era, the administration is not prepared toadmit that even the current sparse use is consistent with the government'sresponsibility to preserve public order. Let me stress that the problem is government policy, not public policy andnot administration or congressional policy. This policy has been made insecret and has been resistant to public input. It is the policy of the bureaucracy and not of any individuals. I knowmost of the players in the development of this policy. I know none thatare pursuing a personal agenda, like the results, or are proud of theirroles in it. They are simply doing the best that they know how in the face of agencymomentum, administration consent, and the absence of congressionalguidance. However, the momentum behind these policies is such that thegood intentions and professionalism of the individuals is not sufficientto resist it. While the administration has aligned itself with the initiatives, it isnot their author. While the initiatives have sponsors within theadministration, they were here before the administration and they expectto be here when it is gone. They believe that the policy is important and that the administration isnot. While some committees of the congress have held hearings on the issues andeven decried the arbitrary actions of the bureaucracy, their hearingsalways conclude with executive sessions with the NSA and no legislativeinitiatives to curb the excesses. Forgive me a closing political observation not intended to be partisan.This government is too large, over-zealous and under-effective. It iscommitted to nothing so much as its own survival. It may be too late to influence it, but if it is not influenced, not onlywill we not enjoy the fruits of modern cryptography, but we may not enjoythose of telecommunications, trade, our labors, or even those of freedom.Bibliography Ehrsam, W. F., Matyas, S. M., Meyer, C. H., and Tuchman, W. L., "ACryptographic Key Management System for Implementing the Data EncryptionStandard," IBM Systems Journal Vol. 17(2) pp. 106-125 (1978). Kahn, D., The Codebreakers, Macmillan Co., New York (1967). Matyas, S. M., Meyer, C. H., "Generation, Distribution, and Installationof Cryptographic Keys," IBM Systems Journal Vol. 17(2) pp. 126-137 (1978). WT02-B12-74IA087-000631-B019-79http://res2.resnet.upenn.edu:80/cis590/reading.104.html 130.91.195.242 19970122063922 text/html 25888HTTP/1.0 200 OKDate: Wed, 22 Jan 1997 06:39:21 GMTServer: Apache/1.1.1Content-type: text/htmlContent-length: 25716Last-modified: Tue, 22 Nov 1994 06:32:27 GMTI decided to post this in spite of an excess on IP of crypto postings over the past few days (additional distribution only with author's consent -- read the end especially) From: WHMurray@DOCKMASTER.NCSC.MIL The Five Great Inventions of Twentieth Century Cryptography William Hugh Murray Preface [This talk was presented as the keynote address at the 1994 RSA SecurityConference, Redwood City, CA] Foreword Two years ago I opened the first of these conferences. Jim Bidzos invited me to "kick it off;" nothing so formal as a "keynote."While I wore this same suit, I just sort of got up here to shoot thebreeze with a few of my friends and colleagues. No notes, just sort of"off-the-cuff." He did not even tell me how long I could talk. As far as Iknow there were no reporters present; nothing that I said got me introuble. After the morning session was over, Jim hosted a lunch for some of thespeakers and panelists. Whit Diffie sat beside me, with his notes, andbegan to quiz me on my sources and authorities for my comments. He eventold me that some of my best stories were apocryphal (though he concededme the points that I made with them). Well, I see the same friends, but there are far more colleagues. Theprogram is more formal, Diffie still has his pad and pencil, the press ishere, my remarks are styled as a "keynote," they are sufficiently arguablethat I need to choose my words very carefully, and I have a fixed time toend. Prudence suggests that I use notes. Introduction Cryptography, the art of secret communication, is almost as old aswriting. Indeed, it has been suggested that, at least for a while, writingitself was a relative secret. Certainly it was esoteric and its use wasreserved to an initiated elite. Cryptography and recording and communicating technologies have played leapfrog through the pages of history. It is my thesis that both have changedso radically during the nineteenth and twentieth centuries as toconstitute a new era. On the recording and communicating side we have photography, telegraphy,telephony, radio, phonography, cinema, television, andtelecommunications.hy, telephony, radio, cinema, television, and thecomputer. Collectively, and even individually, these technologiesconstitute a dramatic change in our ability to make a mark across time andspace. We have seen a similar advance in our ability to conceal those records andmessages from all but a chosen few. Modern cryptography has its origins between the two great wars of thetwentieth century. .It was driven as much by the use of radio on thebattlefield as by any other single influence, but there are an infinitenumber of important recording and communicating applications that simplycannot be done in clear text. While more sparingly used and less well known, the advances incryptography have been no less dramatic than those in recording andcommunications. I propose to consider five inventions of the twentieth century that havedefined modern cryptography and that set it apart from ancient ortraditional cryptography. The impact of these technologies has been to simplify the use of codes,reduce their cost, and increase by orders of magnitude the cost to acryptanalyst of recovering information protected by the codes. What constitutes an invention or sets it apart from other inventions issomewhat arbitrary. Some of the inventions that I propose to discuss couldbe considered as a group of other inventions; the members of the groupmight or might not be significant by themselves. I have limited myself to a discussion of inventions rather thanaccomplishments, and to cryptography rather than to cryptanalysis. Many of the accomplishments of the century have been in cryptanalysis andmay have been greater than the inventions in cryptography. However,greatness is in the eye of the beholder. Certainly all the inventions havenot been limited to cryptography. For example, if cryptanalysts did not invent the modern computer, theycertainly gave it a major boost. They have lived to see the advantage thatit provides shift, with its scale, from them to the cryptographer. Automated Encoding and Decoding Modern cryptography begins in 1917 with the invention by Gilbert S.Vernam, an employee of the American Telephone & Telegraph Company, of theVernam System. Vernam used two paper tape readers, one for the message and the other forthe key. He added the two (bit-wise and modulo 2) to produce theciphertext. Moreover, he used the standard information technology of his day toautomate the encoding and decoding of information. Modern cryptography is automatic. Translation from plaintext to ciphertextand back again is performed automatically, that is by a machine orautomaton. While there may be a separate step, the conversion from one code to theother is done by a machine rather than by a person. Today that conversion can be done by almost any single user computer. Withappropriate controls and for some applications it can be done in amulti-user computer. Before computers, this encoding was done in special purpose machines. TheEnigma and Purple machines were both early and famous examples of suchmachines. The requirement to manually convert from natural language to secret codeshas always been a limitation. It tended to limit both the amount oftraffic encrypted and the complexity of the encoding schemes used. Therefore, encryption machines of any kind increase the complexity andeffectiveness of the codes available. At one level, the modern computer can be viewed as a general purpose codeconversion machine. That is, it converts information called input into anew representation called output. The relationship between the input and the output can be simple orcomplex, obvious or obscure, public or secret, and reversible orirreversible. If the conversion is complex, obscure, secret, and reversible, then thecomputer can be viewed as an encryption machine. But for want of a small amount of readily available software, all of thehundred million general purpose computers in the world are encryptionengines of immense power. At some price in performance, the relationship between input and outputcan be arbitrarily complex and obscure and thus arbitrarily effective inconcealing the meaning of the output. The cost of computer performance has been falling steadily and rapidly forfifty years. It has now become so cheap that most capacity is not used forthe convenience of having it ready when it is wanted. The result is thatthe use of secret codes can be viewed as almost free. So cheap is automatic coding and encoding that some applications do it bydefault and globally, concealing it completely from the user. Since thedifference in cost between public codes and secret codes is vanishing andcan be paid in a currency, computer cycles, that might otherwise bewasted, secret codes can be used by default. Independent Long Key Variable The major weakness of Vernam's system was that it required so much keymaterial. This was compensated for by Lyman Morehouse who used two keytapes of 1000 and 999 characters, about eight feet each in length, incombination to produce an effective key tape of 999,000 characters,effectively 8000 feet in length. Morehouse had used a long key. Modern cryptography is tailored to a particular use by a key variable, orsimply a key. The key is a large integer that tailors the behavior of thestandard algorithm and makes it generate a cipher that is specific to thatnumber. The requirement for secrecy is limited to this number. The problem ofprotecting the data reduces to the simpler one of protecting the key. Access to the cleartext requires access to the combination of theciphertext, the base mechanism, usually a computer and a program, and thekey. Since the rest are readily available, the efficiency of any use dependsupon the fact that it is more expensive or difficult to obtain the keythan to obtain the protected data by other means. All other things being equal, the longer the key, the more secure themechanism. Key length is a trade off against the complexity and thesecrecy of the algorithm. The longer the key, the simpler and more obvious can be the mechanism oralgorithm. If the key is as long as the message, statistically random in appearance,and used only once (one-time pad), then such a simple and obviousmechanism as modulo addition will still provide effective security. For practical reasons, short keys and more complex mechanisms arepreferred. Complexity Based Cryptography (The Data Encryption Standard) In May 1973 the US National Bureau of Standards advertised in the FederalRegister for a proposal for an encryption mechanism to be employed as astandard mechanism for all of the needs of the civilian sectors of thegovernment. The ad stated that the successful proposal would be for a mechanism thatwould be secure for at least five years in spite of the fact that themechanism would be public and published. The resulting Data Encryption Standard was proposed by the IBMCorporation. It was invented by a team led by Walter Tuchman and was basedupon a concept originated by Horst Feistel of IBM's Yorktown ResearchLaboratory. This mechanism, which can be implemented on a chip and completelydescribed in a few 8.5"X11'' pages, changed the nature of cryptographyforever. The security of modern encryption mechanisms like the DES is rooted intheir complexity rather than in their secrecy. While traditional encryption relied upon the secrecy of the mechanism toconceal the meaning of the message, these modern mechanisms employstandard and public algorithms. These mechanisms are standard in the sense that they are of known strengthor have a known cost of attack. However, the trade-off is that theireffectiveness can not, must not, depend upon their secrecy. Rather, it relies upon the complexity of the mechanism. The complexity ofmodern ciphers is such that they can be effective even though most oftheir mechanism is public. The most well known, trusted, and widely used of all modern ciphers is theData Encryption Standard. Because of the intended breadth and duration ofthe use of this cipher, the sponsors specified that it should be assumedto be public. Its effectiveness should rely upon the secrecy only of the key (see thenext section). It has been public for more than fifteen years, but itseffectiveness is such that trying all possible keys with known plain andcipher text is still the cheapest practical attack. [The DES belongs to a class of ciphers known as Feistel ciphers. Theseciphers are also known as block product ciphers. They are called blockciphers because they operate on a fixed length block of bits orcharacters. They are called product ciphers because they employ bothsubstitution and transposition.] Automatic Key Management The same key must exist at both ends of the communication. Historically,keys were distributed by a separate channel or path than the one by whichthe encrypted traffic passed. The initial distribution and installation of the keys must be done in sucha way as not to disclose them to the adversary. When this is done manually, it represents a significant opportunity forthe compromise of the system. Because they were attempting to combine cryptography and computing in anovel manner, Tuchman and his team understood this problem very well. The products that they based upon the DES algorithm addressed it, in part,by automating the generation, distribution, installation, storage,control, and timely changing of the keys. Their elegant system is described in two papers published in the IBMSystems Journal Vol. 17(2) pp. 106-125 (1978) and covered by a number offundamental patents based upon it. [While NSA had automated some keymanagement operations, and while Rosenblum was awarded a patent for a "keydistribution center," these were ad hoc. This work is the first thatdescribes and implements a complete and integrated automatic system.] The impact of this concept on the effectiveness, efficiency, and ease ofapplication of modern cryptography is immense. However, it may also thethe least understood and appreciated. For example, much of the analysis of the strength of the DES is made inthe context of the primitive DES. However, the DES rarely appears as aprimitive. Instead it appears in implementations which use it in such away as to compensate for its inherent limitations. For example, automatic generation of the keys avoids the use of weak ortrivial keys. (the DES has four known weak keys and four semiweak keys.) Since automatic key management systems permit so many keys,they also reduce the exposure to "known plaintext" attacks. History suggests that codes are most often broken because the user failsto apply them with the necessary rigor and discipline, particularly whenchoosing, distributing, and installing keys. Automating of these steps provides much of the necessary discipline andrigor. Automatic key distribution and installation increases the effectiveness byprotecting the keys from disclosure during distribution, and by making thesystem resistant to the insertion of keys known to attackers. When keys are installed manually they become known to the human agent whoinstalls them. He is in a position to provide a copy of the key to others.To the extent that this agent is vulnerable to coercion or bribery, thesystem is weakened by this knowledge. Therefore, the system may be strengthened by automatic mechanisms whichprovide the agent with beneficial use of the key without granting himknowledge of it. For example, systems available from IBM and Motorola provide for the keyto be distributed in smartcards and automatically installed in the targetmachine. The key can be encrypted in the smartcard or destroyed by the installationprocess. In either case, the agent can use it, but cannot copy it or giveit to another. Just as the use of automata for encoding and decoding reduces the cost andinconvenience of using secret codes, the use of automata for keymanagement reduces the cost and inconvenience of changing the keysfrequently. By changing the key frequently, e.g., for each, file, session, message, ortransaction, the value to an adversary of obtaining a key is reduced, andthe effectiveness of the mechanism is improved. One way of looking at automated key management is that it increases theeffective length of the key, or makes it approach the length of the dataprotected. Asymmetric Key Cryptography However, even though most of the key management can be automated, mostsuch systems require some prearrangement. In any-to-any communications ina large open population, this requirement can quickly become overwhelming. For example, in a population of two hundred people, the number of keypairs and secret exchanges would be in the thousands with manyopportunities for keys to be compromised. Moreover, with traditional keys,the initial distribution of keys must be done in such a way as to maintaintheir secrecy, practically impossible in a large population. These problems are addressed, in part, by public key, or asymmetric key,cryptography. This mechanism was proposed by Whitfield Diffee, MartinHellman, and Ralph Merkle. It may be the single most innovative idea inmodern cryptography. The best known and most widely used implementation is the RSA algorithminvented by Ronald Rivest, Adi Shamir, and Leonard Adelman. [In this mechanism the key has two parts, only one of which must be keptsecret. The two parts have the special property that what is encryptedwith one can only be decrypted with the other. One half of the key-pair, called the private key, is kept secret and isused only by its owner. The other half, called the public key, is published and is used by allparties that want to communicate with the private key owner. It can be published and does not need to be distributed secretly. Since the public key, by definition, is available to anyone, then anyonecan send a message to the owner that only he can read.] With a minimum of pre-arrangement, this function provides the logicalanalog of an envelope that can only be opened by one person. The largerthe communicating population, and the more hostile the environment, thegreater is its advantage over symmetric key cryptography. This concealment from all but the intended recipient is the traditionaluse of cryptography. However, asymmetric key cryptography has another use. A message encrypted using the private key can be read by anyone withaccess to the public key, but it could only have been encrypted by theowner of the corresponding private key. This use is analogous to a digitalsignature. It provides confidence that the message originates where it appears tohave originated. Since if even a bit of the message is changed it will notdecrypt properly, this mechanism also provides confidence that the messagehas not been either maliciously or accidentally altered. In part, this is also true as between the two parties to a message that issent using symmetric key cryptography. That is, the recipient of themessage knows with a high degree of confidence that it originated with theother holder of the key; he knows it, but he cannot prove it to another. However, with asymmetric key cryptography, he can demonstrate it to athird party. If the owner of the key pair has acknowledged the public partof the key to the third party, then he cannot plausibly deny any messagethat can be decrypted with it. [The concept of the digital signature is such a novel concept as to easilyqualify as an invention on its own. However, it is so closely bound inorigin and literature to asymmetric key cryptography that I elect tosimply treat them as one.] These two abstractions, the logical envelope and the logical signature,can be composed so as to synthesize any and all of the controls that wehave ever been able to achieve by more traditional means. They can be used for payments, contracts, testaments, and high integrityjournals and logs. They provide us with a higher degree of security in an electronicenvironment than we were ever able to achieve in a paper environment. They provide protection in an open environment that is nearly as high asthat which we can achieve in an open one. The Impact of the GreatInventions The impact of these inventions is to provide us with secret codes that arecheap enough to be used by default, and arbitrarily strong. Given assumptions about the quantity of data to be protected, the lengthof time that it must remain secret, its value to an adversary, and theresources available to the adversary, it is possible to apply moderncryptography in such a way as to be as strong as required. While it is possible to state a problem in such a way as to defy such asolution, it is difficult to identify such a problem in the real world. That is, It is possible to specify so much data to be encrypted under asingle key, of such high value and which must remain safe for such a longtime that we cannot say with confidence that the mechanism can stand forthat time and cost. For example, we cannot say with confidence how to encrypt several hundredgigabytes worth several trillion dollars and keep it safe for amillennium. On the other hand, we are not aware of any real problems thatmeet such a specification. Put another way, we can always ensure that the cost of obtaining theinformation by cryptanalysis is higher than the value of the data or thecost of obtaining it by alternative means. While any code can be broken at some cost, modern codes are economicallyunbreakable, at least in the sense that the cost of doing so can be madeto exceed the value of doing it. A very small increase in the cost to the cryptographer can result inastronomical increases in the cost to a potential adversary. Perhaps just as important, these mechanisms are now sufficientlyconvenient to use, that, within bounds, they can be widely and easilyapplied. Given that the more data that is encrypted with a single mechanism, thegreater the value in breaking it, the more compromising information isavailable to an adversary, and that the more a mechanism is used thegreater the opportunity for a compromising error in its use, we shouldcontinue to apply cryptography only to data that can profit from its use. On the other we need never again be inhibited from using it by issues ofcost or convenience. Cryptography and Government Policy It should be obvious to a qualified observer that, announcements here tothe contrary not withstanding, we are losing the battle for security andprivacy in the computerized and networked world. We could have secret codes imbedded in all software of interest for free.This assertion assumes only that all such software is produced by thoserepresented here, who have already paid for licenses and absorbed much ofthe necessary development cost, and that the cost of a marginal cycle onthe desktop approaches zero. That we do not, is the result of ambivalent government policy. While oneagency of government has sponsored the use of standard cryptography,another has tried to undermine confidence in those standards. While one agency has asserted that public standards are essential, anotherhas sponsored secret ones, and a third has used public funds to furthersuch secret standards. While one agency has insisted that trusted codes are essential to worldprosperity, another has imposed restrictions on their export andundermined confidence in those that are exported. While one agency recognizes that national security depends upon worldprosperity, another believes that signals intelligence is more important.Those of you who have seen my comments in Risks, sci.crypt , and theCommunications of the ACM, know my position. It is that the prime mover behind all of these initiatives is NSA, thattheir motive is the preservation of their jobs and power by protecting theefficiency of signals intelligence, that their strategy is to discourageby every means that they can get away with all private and most commercialuse of cryptography. That they have infiltrated the departments of Stateand Commerce and the White House staff, and that they are using theDepartment of Justice. While they know that they cannot be fully successful, they also know thatthey do not have to be. Nor is this simply paranoia on my part. It is the only explanation thataccounts for all of the government's actions. It also meets the testsproposed by Machiavelli, Willie Sutton and "Deep Throat." While most of the government confesses that cryptography is essential topersonal privacy in the modern era, the administration is not prepared toadmit that even the current sparse use is consistent with the government'sresponsibility to preserve public order. Let me stress that the problem is government policy, not public policy andnot administration or congressional policy. This policy has been made insecret and has been resistant to public input. It is the policy of the bureaucracy and not of any individuals. I knowmost of the players in the development of this policy. I know none thatare pursuing a personal agenda, like the results, or are proud of theirroles in it. They are simply doing the best that they know how in the face of agencymomentum, administration consent, and the absence of congressionalguidance. However, the momentum behind these policies is such that thegood intentions and professionalism of the individuals is not sufficientto resist it. While the administration has aligned itself with the initiatives, it isnot their author. While the initiatives have sponsors within theadministration, they were here before the administration and they expectto be here when it is gone. They believe that the policy is important and that the administration isnot. While some committees of the congress have held hearings on the issues andeven decried the arbitrary actions of the bureaucracy, their hearingsalways conclude with executive sessions with the NSA and no legislativeinitiatives to curb the excesses. Forgive me a closing political observation not intended to be partisan.This government is too large, over-zealous and under-effective. It iscommitted to nothing so much as its own survival. It may be too late to influence it, but if it is not influenced, not onlywill we not enjoy the fruits of modern cryptography, but we may not enjoythose of telecommunications, trade, our labors, or even those of freedom. Bibliography Ehrsam, W. F., Matyas, S. M., Meyer, C. H., and Tuchman, W. L., "ACryptographic Key Management System for Implementing the Data EncryptionStandard," IBM Systems Journal Vol. 17(2) pp. 106-125 (1978). Kahn, D., The Codebreakers, Macmillan Co., New York (1967). Matyas, S. M., Meyer, C. H., "Generation, Distribution, and Installationof Cryptographic Keys," IBM Systems Journal Vol. 17(2) pp. 126-137 (1978). WT02-B12-75IA087-000631-B019-129http://res2.resnet.upenn.edu:80/cis590/reading.105.html 130.91.195.242 19970122064005 text/html 5623HTTP/1.0 200 OKDate: Wed, 22 Jan 1997 06:40:05 GMTServer: Apache/1.1.1Content-type: text/htmlContent-length: 5452Last-modified: Tue, 22 Nov 1994 06:32:28 GMTUK Press coverage of Clipper How America plans to bug the electronic ageBig Brother joins scramble for data By Leonard Doyle 'Whether we like it or not, authorities will want to listen in on ourcommunications' A HIGH-RANKING official of the National Security Agency, America's largestand most secretive intelligence arm, is in London with the task of sellingthe 16 governments of the European Union and European Free TradeAssociation on the virtues of a controversial electronic scramblingtechnology. The Clinton administration hopes that the encryption devices will becomethe global standard for anyone wanting privacy while using cellular phones,computer networks and fax transmissions. They have a serious drawback foranyone looking for total privacy, however. The devices have a built-in"back door" that will allow spy agencies to listen in on allcommunications, or read faxes and electronic mail. Spy agencies in the US and Europe, with nearly 50 years' experience ofadvanced technology in surveillance of citizens, suspected criminals andforeign governments, have been concerned for some time about developmentsthat have put sophisticated encryption devices within reach of many. The agencies want to ensure that they are not left behind by the rapidadvances in high technology which have made telephone scramblers and themathematical codes used to encrypt computer and fax data relatively cheapand easy to use. The governments fear that electronic eavesdropping will be set back decadesif and when terrorists, money-launderers, drug traffickers and unfriendlygovernments gain widespread access to the technology. The NSA is concernedthat, despite the $30bn (=A321bn) a year it spends monitoring globalcommunications, it cannot keep pace with technological change and themassive spread of encryption codes. The NSA official, James Hearn, who until recently was the deputy directorfor information security at NSA's sprawling headquarters near WashingtonDC, is heading up a "liaison office" in London with a colleague, ClintBrooks, according to reliable sources in the computer security community onboth sides of the Atlantic. The US Embassy in London issued a pro formadenial about Mr Hearn's presence yesterday, saying: "There's nobody by thatname here." Mr Hearn is well known, however, to UK and European officials at thecutting edge of efforts to control the spread of highly sophisticatedscrambling devices. These encryption codes, developed by private softwarecompanies, are putting communication beyond easy reach of the NSA,Britain's GCHQ at Cheltenham and France's DGSE, to name but a few "Big Ear"agencies. As a response, the US has developed an encoding device for telephones andcomputers known as the "Clipper Chip", with a "back door" that will allowspy agencies armed with special electronic keys to eavesdrop. When theClinton administration decided to press ahead with the controversial codingdevices last week, the computer industry and privacy campaigners reactedwith outrage. "It's like trying to order people to use only resealable envelopes forcorrespondence, so that no communication can ever be private again," saidDavid Bannisar of Computer Professionals for Social Responsibility. Big computer companies including IBM and Apple, are bitterly opposed to thenew monitoring devices. But AT&T the US telephone company, which is fastestablishing itself in Europe, will put the eavesdropping technology intothe telephone scrambling devices it sells in high street shops for about=A3800 each. The US is keen to ensure that similar electronic monitoring technologybecomes standard in the rest of the industrialised world. The NSA's MrHearn has the task of persuading governments that the controversial ClipperChip for telephones and a technology called Tessera, for computer modems,is quickly adopted despite mounting opposition. The US, European Commission and four European Union countries - Britain,Germany, France and the Netherlands - are already deciding how toadminister the dawning electronic age of "information highways" which willbring an explosion in the use of hi-tech in everyday lives. A consultant to the European Commission who has worked on the newencryption standards claims that those who object to US efforts to regulatethe market for encryption are "politically naive"."Whether we like it or not, the authorities will want to listen in on ourcommunications," he said. "The Americans are to be admired for being upfront about it, when other countries are doing the same thing anyway." Experts in the field of information security often speak of physicalboundaries that now define the world being replaced by electronicboundaries. In this Orwellian world, which is at most five years away,people will be issued with so-called "smartcards" with microchips that canstore their entire personal history. The identity cards will be a passportfor ordinary citizens, used to store health records, for personal bankingpaying for travel and for identity checks at borders. In the same way, companies and even countries will be expected to usetechnology like the encryption Clipper Chip for data transmissions. "We are defining our new electronic world - which will become increasinglyimportant in a borderless Europe," the EU security consultant said. WT02-B12-76IA087-000631-B019-166http://res2.resnet.upenn.edu:80/cis590/reading.106.html 130.91.195.242 19970122064024 text/html 16937HTTP/1.0 200 OKDate: Wed, 22 Jan 1997 06:40:22 GMTServer: Apache/1.1.1Content-type: text/htmlContent-length: 16765Last-modified: Tue, 22 Nov 1994 06:32:30 GMTCARD FRAUD AND COMPUTER EVIDENCE - for cis590 Posted-Date: Mon, 14 Feb 1994 09:38:17 -0500Newsgroups: alt.security,comp.security.misc,sci.engr,sci.cryptPath:netnews.upenn.edu!msuinfo!agate!howland.reston.ans.net!pipex!pavo.csi.cam.ac.uk!rja14From: rja14@cl.cam.ac.uk (Ross Anderson)Subject: CARD FRAUD AND COMPUTER EVIDENCEFollowup-To: sci.cryptSender: news@infodev.cam.ac.uk (USENET news)Nntp-Posting-Host: ely.cl.cam.ac.ukOrganization: U of Cambridge Computer Lab, UKDate: Mon, 14 Feb 1994 13:36:50 GMTLines: 272Xref: netnews.upenn.edu alt.security:14783 comp.security.misc:7911sci.engr:8714 sci.crypt:23842Apparently-To: farber@pcpond.cis.upenn.edu A case has just concluded in England which may be significant for computer andcryptographic evidence in general, and for electronic banking in particular.It also give some interesting insights into the quality assurance and fraudinvestigation practices of one of Britain's largest financial institutions. I will be talking about this case to the BCS Computer Law Special InterestGroup on Thursday 17th February at 6pm. The meeting will be held at the officesof Bristows Cooke Carpmael, which can be found at 10 Lincoln's Inn Fields. Toget there, take the tube to Holborn, exit southwards and turn second left intoRemnant Street. For the sake of those who cannot make it, there follows a report of the casefrom the notes I made during the hearing. * * *1. Background. On February 8th, 10th and 11th, I attended the trial at Mildenhall Magistrates'Court, Suffolk, England, of a man who was charged with attempting to obtainmoney by deception after he complained that he had not made six of theautomatic teller machine transactions which appeared on his statement. The essence of the case was that John Munden, a police constable, hadcomplained to the manager of the Halifax Building Society in Newmarket aboutthese transactions, which appeared in September 1992. He had also stated thathis card had been in his possession at all times. Since the society wassatisifed about the security of its computer systems, it was alleged to followthat Munden must have made these transactions, or suffered them to be made;and thus that his complaint was dishonest. This trial had resumed after being adjourned in late 1993. According to theclerk, evidence was given for the Crown at the initial hearing by Mr Beresfordof the Halifax Building Society that the society was satisfied that its systemswere secure, and so the transaction must have been made with the card and PINissued to the customer. Beresford had no expert knowledge of computer systems,and had not done the investigation himself, but had left it to a member of hisdepartment. He said that fraudulent transactions were rarely if ever made fromlobby ATMs because of the visible cameras. The Newmarket branch manager, MrMorgan, testified that one of the transactions at issue had indeed been madefrom a machine inside the branch. He also said that in his opinion thedefendant had been convinced that he had not made the transaction; and that hewould not be aware of all the possible malfunctions of the ATM. The defence had objected that the evidence about the reliability of thecomputer systems was inadmissible as Beresford was not an expert. The courtallowed the prosecution an adjournment to go and look for some evidence; andat the last minute, on the 20th January, I was instructed by Mr Munden'ssolicitor to act as an expert witness for the defence. 2. The Prosecution Case. On 8th February, Beresford's evidence resumed. He admitted that the Halifaxhad some 150-200 `unresolved' transactions over the previous 3-4 years, andthat it would be possible for a villain to observe someone's PIN at the ATMand then make up a card to use on the account. He confirmed that the personwho investigated the incident had no technical qualifications, had acted underhis authority rather than under his direct supervision, and had involved thepolice without consulting him. Evidence was next given by Mr Dawson, the Halifax's technical support manager.He had originally written the bank's online system in 1971, and was nowresponsible for its development and maintenance. The ATM system had beenwritten in 1978 for IBM 3600 series machines, and altered in 1981 when theDiebold machines currently in use were purchased. All software was writteninternally, and in the case of the mainframe element, this had accreted tothe nucleus originally written in 1971. Amendments to the online system aremade at the rate of 2-3 per week. The PIN encryption scheme used was nonstandard. The PIN was encrypted twiceat the ATM and then once more in the branch minicomputer which controls it.At the mainframe, the outer two of these encryptions were stripped off andthe now singly encrypted PIN was encrypted once more with another key; the16 digit result was compared with a value stored on the main file record andon the online enquiry file. When asked whether system programmers could get access to the mainframeencryption software, he categorically denied that this was possible as thesoftware could only be called by an authorised program. When asked whether someone with access to the branch minicomputer could viewthe encrypted PIN, he denied that this was possible as there were no routinesto view this particular record (even although the mini received this field andhad PCs attached to it). When asked what operating system the mini used, hesaid that it was called either TOS or TOSS and that he thought it had beenwritten in Sweden. He could give no more information. He had never heard of ITSEC. He had not investigated any of the other 150-200 `unresolved transactions'because he had not been asked to. The last investigation he had done was ofanother transaction which had led to a court case, three years previously;he had no idea what proportion of transactions went wrong, was not privy toout-of-balance reports from branches, and was not familiar with branch rules onATM operations. He never visited the branch at Newmarket, where the disputedtransactions took place, but merely looked at the mainframe records to seewhether any fault records or error codes. He found none and took thisinformation at face value. The fault recording system does not show repairs. The cryptographic keys inthe ATM are not zeroed when the machine is opened for servicing. Themaintenance is done by a third party. The branch only loads initial keys intothe ATM if keys are lost. The Halifax has no computer security function as such, just the internalauditors and the technical staff; it does not use the term `quality assurance'. When asked by the bench what information was required to construct a card,Dawson initially said the institution identifier, the account number, theexpiry date, a service code, an ISO check digit, a proprietary check digit,and a card version number. He concluded from this that a card forger wouldhave to have access to an original card. However it turned out that the ATMsystem only checks the institution identifier, the account number and the cardversion number. He maintained doggedly that a forger would still have toguess the version number, or determine it by trial and error, and claimedthere was no record of an incorrect version number card being used. However, Munden's card was version 2, and it transpired later that version 1,though created, was not issued to him; and that an enquiry had been made from abranch terminal two weeks before the disputed transactions (the person makingthis enquiry could not be identified). When asked whether private investigatorscould get hold of customer account details, as had been widely reported in thepress, he just shrugged. He claimed that the system had been given a clean bill of health by theinternal and external auditors. The branch manager was recalled and examined on balancing procedures. Hedescribed the process, and how as a matter of policy the balancing recordswere kept for two years. However the balancing records for the two machinesin question could not be produced. There was then police evidence to the effect that Munden kept respectablerecords of his domestic accounts, which included references to the undisputedwithdrawals from ATMs, and that although he had once bounced a cheque he wasno more in financial difficulty than anybody else. The investigating officerhad only had evidence from the branch manager, not from Beresford or Dawson.The investigating officer also reported that Munden had served in the policeforce for nineteen years and that he had on occasion been commended by theChief Constable. 3. The Defence. That concluded the prosecution case, and the defence case opened with Mundengiving evidence. He denied making the transactions but could not produce analibi other than his wife for the times at which the alleged withdrawals hadtaken place. The only unusual matter to emerge from Munden's testimony was that when he wentin to the branch to complain, the manager had asked him how his holiday inIreland went. Munden was dumbfounded and the branch manager said that thetransaction code for one of the ATM withdrawals corresponded to their branchin Omagh. This was not apparent from the records eventually produced in court. The next witness was his wife, Mrs Munden. Her evidence produced a seriousupset: it turned out that she had had a county court judgment against her, in adispute about paying for furniture which she claimed had been defective, sometwo weeks before the disputed withdrawals took place. Her husband had notknown about this judgement until it emerged in court. I gave expert evidence to the effect that the Halifax's quality procedures,as described by Dawson, fell far short of what might be expected; that testingof software should be done by an independent team, rather than by theprogrammers and analysts who created it; and that Dawson could not beconsidered competent to pronounce on the security of the online system, and hehad designed it and was responsible for it. At a more detailed level, I informed the court that both national andinternational ATM network standards require that PIN encryption be conducted insecure hardware, rather than software; that the reason for this was that itwas indeed possible for system programmers to extract encryption keys fromsoftware, and that I understood this to have been the modus operandi of asustained fraud against the customers of a London clearing bank in 1985-6;that I had been involved in other ATM cases, in which some two dozendifferent types of attack had emerged and which involved over 2000 complaintsin the UK; and that the Halifax, uniquely among financial institutions, was adefendant in civil test cases in both England and Scotland. I continued that ATM cameras are used by a number of other UK institutions,including the Alliance and Leicester Building Society, to resolve such cases;that in other countries which I have investigated the practice would be notto prosecute without an ATM photograph, or some other direct evidence such as anumbered banknote being found on the accused; that card forgery techniques werewell known in the prison system, thanks to a document written by a man who hadbeen jailed at Winchester some two years previously for card offences; that Ihad personally carried out the experiment of manufacturing a card from anobserved PIN and discarded ticket, albeit with the account holder's consent andon an account with Barclays rather than the Halifax; that the PIN pad at theHalifax's Diebold ATM in Cambridge was so sited as to be easily visible fromacross the road; and that in any case the investigative procedures followed inthe case left very much to be desired. In cross examination, the prosecutor tried to score the usual petty points: heattacked my impartiality on the grounds that I am assisting the Organised CrimeSquad at Scotland Yard to investigate criminal wrongdoing in financialinstitutions (the reply from our lawyer was of course that helping theprosecution as well as the defence was hardly evidence of partiality); heclaimed that the PIN pad at the ATM in Newmarket was differently sited tothat in Cambridge, to which I had no answer as I had not had the time to gothere; and he asserted that the Alliance and Leicester did not use ATM cameras.On this point I was able to shoot him down as I had advised that institution'ssupplier. He finally tried to draw from me an alternative theory of thedisputed transactions - staff fraud, or a villain whom Munden had booked inthe past getting his own back by means of a forged card, or a pure technicalglitch? I was unable to do this as there had been neither the time nor theopportunity to demand technical disclosure from the Halifax, as had been thecase in two previous criminal cases I had helped defend (both of which weincidentally won). Dawson was recalled by the prosecution. He explained that only two of thethree tests carried out on new software were done by the analysis andprogrammers who had written it, and that the third or `mass test' was done byan independent team. He said that software failures could not cause falsetransactions to appear, since the online system was written in assembler, withthe result that errors caused an abend. He claimed that they did indeed possess a hardware security module, which wasbought in 1987 when they joined VISA, and which they used for interchangetransactions with VISA and Link although not for all transactions with theirown customers; and he finally repeated his categorical denial that any systemprogrammer could get at the encryption software. When asked by what mechanismthis was enforced, he said that they used a program called ACF2. In his closing speech, the defendant's lawyer pointed out the lack of anyapparent motive, and went on to point out the lack of evidence: the balancingrecords were not produced; the person responsible for attending to those ATMmalfunctions which the branch could not cope with was not identified; theHalifax employee who had carried out the investigation was not called; thehandwriting on the ATM audit rolls, which was the only way to tie them to aparticular machine, could not be identified; the cameras were not working;statements were not taken from branch staff; the disk in the ATM had notbeen produced; and the internal and external audit reports were not produced. He mentioned my expert opinion, and reiterated my point that when a designer ofa system says that he can't find anything wrong, what has he shown? He alsorecalled that in the High Court action in which the Halifax is the defendant,they had not relied on the alleged infallibility; and pointed out that if ATMsystems worked properly, then people wouldn't need to go to keep going to lawabout them. 4. The Verdict and Its Consequences. I have been aware for years that the legal system's signal-to-noise ratio isless than 10dB; however, in view of the above, you can understand that it waswith some considerable surprise that I learned late on Friday that the courthad convicted Munden. My own reaction to the case has been to withdraw my moneyfrom the Halifax and close my account there. Quite apart from their ramshacklesystems, the idea that complaining about a computer error could land me inprison is beyond my tolerance limit. No doubt it will take some time for the broader lessons to sink in. What is thepoint, for example, of buying hardware encryption devices if people can getaway with claiming that system programmers can never get at an authorisedlibrary? Why invest in elaborate digital signature schemes if they simplyrepair the banks' defence that the system cannot be wrong? Is there not a casefor giving more consideration to the legal and political consequences ofcomputer security designs? 5. Action. In the meantime, the police investigations branch have to consider whether JohnMunden will lose his job, and with it his house and his pension. In thisregard, it might just possibly be helpful if anyone who feels that Dawson'sevidence was untruthful on the point that software can be protected from systemprogrammers on an IBM compatible mainframe, or that his evidence was otherwiseunsatisfactory, could write expressing their opinion to the Chief Constable,Cambridgeshire Constabulary, Hinchingbrooke Park, Huntingdon, England PE18 8NP. Ross Anderson WT02-B12-77IA087-000631-B019-216http://res2.resnet.upenn.edu:80/cis590/reading.107.html 130.91.195.242 19970122064052 text/html 16468HTTP/1.0 200 OKDate: Wed, 22 Jan 1997 06:40:52 GMTServer: Apache/1.1.1Content-type: text/htmlContent-length: 16296Last-modified: Tue, 22 Nov 1994 06:32:30 GMTCARD FRAUD AND COMPUTER EVIDENCE From: rja14@cl.cam.ac.uk (Ross Anderson)Subject: CARD FRAUD AND COMPUTER EVIDENCEOrganization: U of Cambridge Computer Lab, UKDate: Mon, 14 Feb 1994 13:36:50 GMT A case has just concluded in England which may be significant for computer andcryptographic evidence in general, and for electronic banking in particular.It also give some interesting insights into the quality assurance and fraudinvestigation practices of one of Britain's largest financial institutions. I will be talking about this case to the BCS Computer Law Special InterestGroup on Thursday 17th February at 6pm. The meeting will be held at the officesof Bristows Cooke Carpmael, which can be found at 10 Lincoln's Inn Fields. Toget there, take the tube to Holborn, exit southwards and turn second left intoRemnant Street. For the sake of those who cannot make it, there follows a report of the casefrom the notes I made during the hearing. * * *1. Background. On February 8th, 10th and 11th, I attended the trial at Mildenhall Magistrates'Court, Suffolk, England, of a man who was charged with attempting to obtainmoney by deception after he complained that he had not made six of theautomatic teller machine transactions which appeared on his statement. The essence of the case was that John Munden, a police constable, hadcomplained to the manager of the Halifax Building Society in Newmarket aboutthese transactions, which appeared in September 1992. He had also stated thathis card had been in his possession at all times. Since the society wassatisifed about the security of its computer systems, it was alleged to followthat Munden must have made these transactions, or suffered them to be made;and thus that his complaint was dishonest. This trial had resumed after being adjourned in late 1993. According to theclerk, evidence was given for the Crown at the initial hearing by Mr Beresfordof the Halifax Building Society that the society was satisfied that its systemswere secure, and so the transaction must have been made with the card and PINissued to the customer. Beresford had no expert knowledge of computer systems,and had not done the investigation himself, but had left it to a member of hisdepartment. He said that fraudulent transactions were rarely if ever made fromlobby ATMs because of the visible cameras. The Newmarket branch manager, MrMorgan, testified that one of the transactions at issue had indeed been madefrom a machine inside the branch. He also said that in his opinion thedefendant had been convinced that he had not made the transaction; and that hewould not be aware of all the possible malfunctions of the ATM. The defence had objected that the evidence about the reliability of thecomputer systems was inadmissible as Beresford was not an expert. The courtallowed the prosecution an adjournment to go and look for some evidence; andat the last minute, on the 20th January, I was instructed by Mr Munden'ssolicitor to act as an expert witness for the defence. 2. The Prosecution Case. On 8th February, Beresford's evidence resumed. He admitted that the Halifaxhad some 150-200 `unresolved' transactions over the previous 3-4 years, andthat it would be possible for a villain to observe someone's PIN at the ATMand then make up a card to use on the account. He confirmed that the personwho investigated the incident had no technical qualifications, had acted underhis authority rather than under his direct supervision, and had involved thepolice without consulting him. Evidence was next given by Mr Dawson, the Halifax's technical support manager.He had originally written the bank's online system in 1971, and was nowresponsible for its development and maintenance. The ATM system had beenwritten in 1978 for IBM 3600 series machines, and altered in 1981 when theDiebold machines currently in use were purchased. All software was writteninternally, and in the case of the mainframe element, this had accreted tothe nucleus originally written in 1971. Amendments to the online system aremade at the rate of 2-3 per week. The PIN encryption scheme used was nonstandard. The PIN was encrypted twiceat the ATM and then once more in the branch minicomputer which controls it.At the mainframe, the outer two of these encryptions were stripped off andthe now singly encrypted PIN was encrypted once more with another key; the16 digit result was compared with a value stored on the main file record andon the online enquiry file. When asked whether system programmers could get access to the mainframeencryption software, he categorically denied that this was possible as thesoftware could only be called by an authorised program. When asked whether someone with access to the branch minicomputer could viewthe encrypted PIN, he denied that this was possible as there were no routinesto view this particular record (even although the mini received this field andhad PCs attached to it). When asked what operating system the mini used, hesaid that it was called either TOS or TOSS and that he thought it had beenwritten in Sweden. He could give no more information. He had never heard of ITSEC. He had not investigated any of the other 150-200 `unresolved transactions'because he had not been asked to. The last investigation he had done was ofanother transaction which had led to a court case, three years previously;he had no idea what proportion of transactions went wrong, was not privy toout-of-balance reports from branches, and was not familiar with branch rules onATM operations. He never visited the branch at Newmarket, where the disputedtransactions took place, but merely looked at the mainframe records to seewhether any fault records or error codes. He found none and took thisinformation at face value. The fault recording system does not show repairs. The cryptographic keys inthe ATM are not zeroed when the machine is opened for servicing. Themaintenance is done by a third party. The branch only loads initial keys intothe ATM if keys are lost. The Halifax has no computer security function as such, just the internalauditors and the technical staff; it does not use the term `quality assurance'. When asked by the bench what information was required to construct a card,Dawson initially said the institution identifier, the account number, theexpiry date, a service code, an ISO check digit, a proprietary check digit,and a card version number. He concluded from this that a card forger wouldhave to have access to an original card. However it turned out that the ATMsystem only checks the institution identifier, the account number and the cardversion number. He maintained doggedly that a forger would still have toguess the version number, or determine it by trial and error, and claimedthere was no record of an incorrect version number card being used. However, Munden's card was version 2, and it transpired later that version 1,though created, was not issued to him; and that an enquiry had been made from abranch terminal two weeks before the disputed transactions (the person makingthis enquiry could not be identified). When asked whether private investigatorscould get hold of customer account details, as had been widely reported in thepress, he just shrugged. He claimed that the system had been given a clean bill of health by theinternal and external auditors. The branch manager was recalled and examined on balancing procedures. Hedescribed the process, and how as a matter of policy the balancing recordswere kept for two years. However the balancing records for the two machinesin question could not be produced. There was then police evidence to the effect that Munden kept respectablerecords of his domestic accounts, which included references to the undisputedwithdrawals from ATMs, and that although he had once bounced a cheque he wasno more in financial difficulty than anybody else. The investigating officerhad only had evidence from the branch manager, not from Beresford or Dawson.The investigating officer also reported that Munden had served in the policeforce for nineteen years and that he had on occasion been commended by theChief Constable. 3. The Defence. That concluded the prosecution case, and the defence case opened with Mundengiving evidence. He denied making the transactions but could not produce analibi other than his wife for the times at which the alleged withdrawals hadtaken place. The only unusual matter to emerge from Munden's testimony was that when he wentin to the branch to complain, the manager had asked him how his holiday inIreland went. Munden was dumbfounded and the branch manager said that thetransaction code for one of the ATM withdrawals corresponded to their branchin Omagh. This was not apparent from the records eventually produced in court. The next witness was his wife, Mrs Munden. Her evidence produced a seriousupset: it turned out that she had had a county court judgment against her, in adispute about paying for furniture which she claimed had been defective, sometwo weeks before the disputed withdrawals took place. Her husband had notknown about this judgement until it emerged in court. I gave expert evidence to the effect that the Halifax's quality procedures,as described by Dawson, fell far short of what might be expected; that testingof software should be done by an independent team, rather than by theprogrammers and analysts who created it; and that Dawson could not beconsidered competent to pronounce on the security of the online system, and hehad designed it and was responsible for it. At a more detailed level, I informed the court that both national andinternational ATM network standards require that PIN encryption be conducted insecure hardware, rather than software; that the reason for this was that itwas indeed possible for system programmers to extract encryption keys fromsoftware, and that I understood this to have been the modus operandi of asustained fraud against the customers of a London clearing bank in 1985-6;that I had been involved in other ATM cases, in which some two dozendifferent types of attack had emerged and which involved over 2000 complaintsin the UK; and that the Halifax, uniquely among financial institutions, was adefendant in civil test cases in both England and Scotland. I continued that ATM cameras are used by a number of other UK institutions,including the Alliance and Leicester Building Society, to resolve such cases;that in other countries which I have investigated the practice would be notto prosecute without an ATM photograph, or some other direct evidence such as anumbered banknote being found on the accused; that card forgery techniques werewell known in the prison system, thanks to a document written by a man who hadbeen jailed at Winchester some two years previously for card offences; that Ihad personally carried out the experiment of manufacturing a card from anobserved PIN and discarded ticket, albeit with the account holder's consent andon an account with Barclays rather than the Halifax; that the PIN pad at theHalifax's Diebold ATM in Cambridge was so sited as to be easily visible fromacross the road; and that in any case the investigative procedures followed inthe case left very much to be desired. In cross examination, the prosecutor tried to score the usual petty points: heattacked my impartiality on the grounds that I am assisting the Organised CrimeSquad at Scotland Yard to investigate criminal wrongdoing in financialinstitutions (the reply from our lawyer was of course that helping theprosecution as well as the defence was hardly evidence of partiality); heclaimed that the PIN pad at the ATM in Newmarket was differently sited tothat in Cambridge, to which I had no answer as I had not had the time to gothere; and he asserted that the Alliance and Leicester did not use ATM cameras.On this point I was able to shoot him down as I had advised that institution'ssupplier. He finally tried to draw from me an alternative theory of thedisputed transactions - staff fraud, or a villain whom Munden had booked inthe past getting his own back by means of a forged card, or a pure technicalglitch? I was unable to do this as there had been neither the time nor theopportunity to demand technical disclosure from the Halifax, as had been thecase in two previous criminal cases I had helped defend (both of which weincidentally won). Dawson was recalled by the prosecution. He explained that only two of thethree tests carried out on new software were done by the analysis andprogrammers who had written it, and that the third or `mass test' was done byan independent team. He said that software failures could not cause falsetransactions to appear, since the online system was written in assembler, withthe result that errors caused an abend. He claimed that they did indeed possess a hardware security module, which wasbought in 1987 when they joined VISA, and which they used for interchangetransactions with VISA and Link although not for all transactions with theirown customers; and he finally repeated his categorical denial that any systemprogrammer could get at the encryption software. When asked by what mechanismthis was enforced, he said that they used a program called ACF2. In his closing speech, the defendant's lawyer pointed out the lack of anyapparent motive, and went on to point out the lack of evidence: the balancingrecords were not produced; the person responsible for attending to those ATMmalfunctions which the branch could not cope with was not identified; theHalifax employee who had carried out the investigation was not called; thehandwriting on the ATM audit rolls, which was the only way to tie them to aparticular machine, could not be identified; the cameras were not working;statements were not taken from branch staff; the disk in the ATM had notbeen produced; and the internal and external audit reports were not produced. He mentioned my expert opinion, and reiterated my point that when a designer ofa system says that he can't find anything wrong, what has he shown? He alsorecalled that in the High Court action in which the Halifax is the defendant,they had not relied on the alleged infallibility; and pointed out that if ATMsystems worked properly, then people wouldn't need to go to keep going to lawabout them. 4. The Verdict and Its Consequences. I have been aware for years that the legal system's signal-to-noise ratio isless than 10dB; however, in view of the above, you can understand that it waswith some considerable surprise that I learned late on Friday that the courthad convicted Munden. My own reaction to the case has been to withdraw my moneyfrom the Halifax and close my account there. Quite apart from their ramshacklesystems, the idea that complaining about a computer error could land me inprison is beyond my tolerance limit. No doubt it will take some time for the broader lessons to sink in. What is thepoint, for example, of buying hardware encryption devices if people can getaway with claiming that system programmers can never get at an authorisedlibrary? Why invest in elaborate digital signature schemes if they simplyrepair the banks' defence that the system cannot be wrong? Is there not a casefor giving more consideration to the legal and political consequences ofcomputer security designs? 5. Action. In the meantime, the police investigations branch have to consider whether JohnMunden will lose his job, and with it his house and his pension. In thisregard, it might just possibly be helpful if anyone who feels that Dawson'sevidence was untruthful on the point that software can be protected from systemprogrammers on an IBM compatible mainframe, or that his evidence was otherwiseunsatisfactory, could write expressing their opinion to the Chief Constable,Cambridgeshire Constabulary, Hinchingbrooke Park, Huntingdon, England PE18 8NP. Ross Anderson WT02-B12-78IA087-000631-B019-263http://res2.resnet.upenn.edu:80/cis590/reading.108.html 130.91.195.242 19970122064114 text/html 4733HTTP/1.0 200 OKDate: Wed, 22 Jan 1997 06:41:14 GMTServer: Apache/1.1.1Content-type: text/htmlContent-length: 4562Last-modified: Tue, 22 Nov 1994 06:32:31 GMTWilliam Safire SINK THE CLIPPER CHIP NY Times (copyright material so for personal use only) New York Times: Monday, February 14, 1994 Essay William Safire SINK THE CLIPPER CHIP Washington Well-meaning law and intelligence officials, vainly seeking to maintaintheir vanishing ability to eavesdrop, have come up with a scheme thatendangers the personal freedom of every American. Nobody doubts that F.B.I. wiretaps help catch crooks or that the NationalSecurity Agency's "Big Ears" alert us to the plans of terrorists. Andnobody can deny that new technology makes it easier for the bad guys toencode their communications to avoid the eavesdropping of the good guys. But the solution that faceless Clinton officials are putting forward showsoutdated law enforcement rooted in abysmal understanding of theinformation explosion. The Clinton notion, recycled from an aborted Bush idea, is to put the sameencryption chip; in every telephone and computer made in the U.S. Thisnew encoding device, or scrambler, would help you and me protect theprivacy of our conversations and messages and bank accounts from eachother. That sounds great, but here comes the catch: The FederalGovernment would know and be able to use the code numbers to wiretap eachof us. To the tune of "I Got Algorithm," the Eavesdrop Establishment is singingthat it will help us protect our privacy --- but not from intrusion by theFeds. In effect, its proposal demands we turn over to Washington aduplicate set of keys to our homes, formerly our castles, where not eventhe king in olden times could go. The "clipper chip" --- aptly named, as it clips the wings of individualliberty --- would encode, for Federal perusal whenever a judge rubber-stamped a warrant, everything we say on a phone, everything we write on acomputer, every order we give to a shopping network or bank or 800 or 900number, every electronic note we leave our spouses or dictate to ourpersonal-digit-assistant genies. Add to that stack of intimate date the medical information derived fromthe national "health security card" Mr. Clinton proposes we all carry.Combine it with the travel, shopping and credit data available from allour plastic cards, along with psychological and student test scores.Throw in the confidential tax returns, sealed divorce proceedings, welfarerecords, field investigations for job applications, raw files and C.I.A.dossiers available to the Feds, and you have the individual citizenstanding naked to the nosy bureaucrat. Assure us not that our personal life stories will be "safeguarded" bymultiple escrows in the brave new world of snooperware; we saw only lastmonth how political appointees can rifle the old-fashioned files ofcandidates and get off scot-free. Whenever personal information isamassed and readily available, it will be examined by the curious, and ifit is valuable, it will be stolen by political hackers. Ah, but wouldn't it be helpful to society to have instant access to theencoded communications of a Mafia capo, or a terrorist ordering theblow-up of a skyscraper, or a banker financing a dictator's nucleardevelopment? Sure it would. That's why no self-respecting vice overlord or terroristor local drug-runner would buy or use clipper-chipped Americantelecommunications equipment. They would buy non-American hardware withunmonitored Japanese or German or Indian encryption chips and laugh allthe way to the plutonium factory. The only people tap-able by American agents would be honest Americans ---or those crooked Americans dopey enough to buy American equipment with thepre-compromised American code. Subsequent laws to mandate the F.B.I.bug in every transmitter would be as effective as today's laws banningradar detectors. Tomorrow's law enforcement and espionage cannot be planned by people stuckin the wiretap and Big Ear mind-set of the past. The new Ultra secretis that the paradigm has shifted; encryption has overcome decryption. Billions now spent on passive technical surveillance must be shifted toactive means of learning criminal or aggressive plans. Human informersmust be recruited or placed, as "sigint" declines and "humint" rises inthe new era; psychic as well as monetary rewards for ratting must beraised; governments must collude closely to trace transfers of wealth. Cash in your clipper chips, wiretappers: you can't detect the crime waveof the future with those old earphones on. WT02-B12-79IA087-000631-B019-303http://res2.resnet.upenn.edu:80/cis590/reading.109.html 130.91.195.242 19970122064131 text/html 11806HTTP/1.0 200 OKDate: Wed, 22 Jan 1997 06:41:33 GMTServer: Apache/1.1.1Content-type: text/htmlContent-length: 11634Last-modified: Tue, 22 Nov 1994 06:32:32 GMTNotes from 2/10/94 Meeting NII Advisory Council from the Coalition for Networked Information distribution list Date: 2/11/94 1:05 AMFrom: cni-announce@cni.org*----------------------------------------------------------------------** ** NII Advisory Council ** February 10, 1994 ** **----------------------------------------------------------------------* PREFACE The following notes on the subject meeting were prepared by Paul EvanPeters, Executive Director, Coalition for Networked Information, toquickly convey some sense of the meeting to the subscribers of the cni-announce Internet distribution service and to other interested andconcerned parties. The discussions at this meeting flowed quickly and ranged widely. Itwas not possible to capture what each person said, or even to alwaysidentify exactly who was speaking. The following notes attempt toprovide an appreciation for the topics that were covered in the orderthey arose, but they do not attribute specific remarks to individualpersons. Additional information about this meeting and related matters will bedistributed, as soon as it becomes available, via cni-announce. Otherinformation of interest can be obtained, in addition to other means, bygophering to cni.org and iitf.doc.gov. MEETING NOTES Chairman Lewis (National Public Radio) opened. All members of theCouncil have made it clear that they are happy to give advice to theSecretary of Commerce and the rest of the Administration on thesematters. Chairman McCracken (Silicon Graphics) continued. A cold requires thatChairman Lewis preside for most of this meeting. NII should yield amore productive society, more jobs, more economic gains in general, anda more competitive economy. NII is the keystone of Administration'stechnology policy. This Council needs to generate a common view on afew key subjects. NII is currently a big amorphous idea that means somuch to each of us. We are still very much at the "wish list" stage.This Council represents the country to the Administration. This Councilneeds to focus on a few key issues. Each member of the Council introduced herself or himself, and made abrief statement about her or his interests and priorities. Chairmain Lewis remarked on the common threads from this round-robins ofintoductions and statements: the need for NII access, openness, andpartnerships, and the desire to be a substantive, effective council.Members want to play a role in defining what the NII is. In preparationfor the next meeting of the Council, each member will submit a one totwo page statement on this subject, including a list of priority issues. Reports were presented by the chairs of each of the three committeesthat support the Administration's Information Infrastructure Task Force(IITF): Arati Prabhakar reported on the IITF Committee on Applicationsand Technology; Sally Katzen reported on the IITF Committee onInformation Policy; and, Larry Irving reported on the IITF Committee onTelecommunications Policy. Brief discussions of what each committeewould like in the way of assistance from (members of) the Council. Chairman Lewis called for discussion. * Where is "universal service" going? - The Administration believes that a dynamic concept must bedeveloped, something that will evolve as technology continues to change.The Administration also wants to broaden the base of entities payinginto the subsidy pools that make universal service possible. - Are we going to have Federal preemption or will we have 50+definitions? There are state-by-state differences, and the Federalpolicy must account for those differences subject to some nationalconsensus regarding a minimum level of service. - Are we talking about transport only or are we also talking aboutcontent as well? In the telephony period it meant only transport. Weclearly needed an expanded definition of some sort. Chairman Lewis recognized Secretary of Commerce Brown upon his arrival. Secretary Brown welcomed the Council. Appreciates energy and diversityof group. Genuinely want to hear whatever the Council chooses to offer.In areas as important of this one, the Federal goverment cannot listenenough. The Council's advice is needed to void the law of unintendedconsequences in this instance. We want to ensure universal service,interoperability, investment, and competition. Chairman Lewis called for discussion. * In addition to the four things that the Secretary ended with, we needto educate the public in a real way on why we are working on the NII tobegin with. * This Council has to look at the problems to be be solved and createdby the NII below the level of 50,000 feet. The opportunity before thisCouncil is to talk in real terms about real impacts. Let's home it onthe specific actions that the government must take. * Access to free public education and to free public libraries issomething that we as a society decided long ago, and we have to makesure that the NII moves us forward rather than back in these terms. * We need to avoid "entitlement thinking," thinking that leads toprograms which transfer funds from one sector to another without cleararticulation of goals and accountability of results. * Even so, we need to talk in real terms about how to use the NII toget more information to more people without cost being a factor. Weneed to develop markets, yes; but we also need to provide for all ofour citizens in certain basic ways without conveying a sense of "you areneedy and therefore unworthy." * We must avoid a "one size will fit all" mentality. Where theinformation comes from and who paid for its creation are importantconsiderations. * It is important not to confuse cost, price, and value. * This talk is all well and good, but there is legislation pending andgovernment actions being considered. It is not clear that thoseproceedings are taking any consideration of the issues that we arediscussing, and that they even care that this Council exists. - Even if the Council cannot reach consensus on some of the mattersthat will break in the near future, all of us will be edified by thediscussion, each of us has numerous private ways to influence the courseof events, and there will be issues calling for our attention for cometime to come. Secretary Brown recognized Vice President Gore upon his arrival. Vice President Gore welcomed the Council. Appreciate the spirit andenthusiasm with which all of you are entering into this work. We arerelying on you for advice and input in more ways than you can imagine.In the government we are keenly aware of what we don't know, and thatthe real drivers of this transition are in the private sector; firstcomes the hardware, then comes the software, and, after a significantdelay, then comes the policy. :-) I am especially interested in yourideas on how we can achieve universal service. But enough from me ... Iam here to listen. Chairman Lewis called for discussion. * We are concerned first with what the NII is, then we will turn to howto provide the NII. We are also mindful of the fact that the life cycleof telecommunications policy is fifty years, more or less. Must the"information superhighway" give way to the "information supermarket"during that period? * The prior policy framework *awarded* monopolies and *required*universal service. We are on new ground with this Administration'spolicy framework, a framework that strives to promote *competition* andwhich *calls* for universal service. * One specific question to prime this thought process that was used ina previous period (start-up of the cable industry) is "Should thesuperbowl be broadcast for free?". * Universal access is quite different from universal service, as theuse of these phrases in the health care debate illustrates. Service isthe much preferrable term. * There is also a difference between subsidizing services andsubsidizing people. * It is also important to formulate a symmetric policy, one that looksto providers of services as well as to consumers of services. * The difference between "affordable" and "reasonable" prices is alsoimportant. * There are three basic components of telecommunication costs:connection, time, and intellectual property. We should keep open thepossibility of not charging schools and libraries for time. * Competition and not subsidies should drive this process. We need tomake sure that we get as much as we can from competition before we turnto subsidies. After all, legal electronic publishers find itcompetitively advantageous to offer their products and services at lowprices to law school students. - Loss leader stragegies may make sense in professional education,but they do not make sense in elementary and secondary education. - There are also markets that private interests don't compete for. * Glad to be part of the dialog on this big picture, and to hear thatthe Council has not been convened for rubber stamping Administrationviews and proposals. In this spirit, the Administration is well-advisedto reconsider its Clipper encryption strategy. - This proposal brings the clash between privacy, security, and lawenforcement to the front burner before we have built our nationalconsensus on how to balance these interests. - Many countries do not allow encryption at all. - What's more, encryption and code breaking has determined at leastone world war already. Chairman Lewis closed the discussion by taking note of the time. Chairman Lewis announced that the Council's next meetings aretentatively scheduled for March 18th, April 25th, and June 17th. Henoted that these meetings will likely be held in DC, but commented thatthis has not been decided and there is some sentiment that the meetingsbe moved around or that regional meetings of some description be held. Chairman Lewis adjourned the meeting with thanks to all involved. DOCUMENTS DISTRIBUTED Unites States Advisory Council on the National InformationInfrastructure. United States Department of Commerce, National Telecommunications andInformation Administration, "1993 Annual Report." United States Department of Commerce, National Telecommunications andInformation Administration, "Fact Sheet: Information InfrastructureTask Force (IITF)." United States Department of Commerce, National Telecommunications andInformation Administration, "IITF Committee Report: February 10, 1994." United States Department of Commerce, National Telecommunications andInformation Administration, "IITF Committee Report: December 9, 1993." United States Department of Commerce, National Telecommunications andInformation Administration, "Information Infrastructure Task Forceannounces Computer Bulletin Board," December 16, 1993. United States Department of Commerce, National Telecommunications andInformation Administration, "Pilot Demonstration Grants Program." United States Department of Commerce, National Telecommunications andInformation Administration, "The National Information Infrastructure." WT02-B12-80IA087-000631-B020-36http://res2.resnet.upenn.edu:80/cis590/reading.110.html 130.91.195.242 19970122064223 text/html 849HTTP/1.0 200 OKDate: Wed, 22 Jan 1997 06:42:01 GMTServer: Apache/1.1.1Content-type: text/htmlContent-length: 679Last-modified: Tue, 22 Nov 1994 06:32:33 GMTfrom a UK contributor " hardware crypto is a dog as far as markets are concerned" >>Given that GCHQ's main mission these days is sigint support for the>>FBI, it's hard to see how they could avoid involvement [on clipper]>>>>Nonetheless, hardware crypto is a dog as far as markets are>>concerned. The future is with software, and we held a workshop last>>December of fast software encryption which elicited a dozen new>>algorithms (including from the likes of Don Coppersmith, Jim>>Massey and David WHeeler).>>(The proceedings of this workshop are to be published by Springer Verlag I>gather.)>> WT02-B12-81IA087-000631-B020-70http://res2.resnet.upenn.edu:80/cis590/reading.111.html 130.91.195.242 19970122064238 text/html 12648HTTP/1.0 200 OKDate: Wed, 22 Jan 1997 06:42:40 GMTServer: Apache/1.1.1Content-type: text/htmlContent-length: 12476Last-modified: Tue, 22 Nov 1994 06:32:34 GMTFIRP report comments -- forward to your lists if you wish Date: Tue, 15 Feb 94 17:12:30 -0500From: Stephen D Crocker <crocker@tis.com> These are the meat of the comments I've supplied in response to thedraft FIRP report. Response to the Draft Report of the Federal Internetworking Requirements Panel (FIRP), 14 January 1994 Part 1: Strategic Comments Stephen D. Crocker Vice President, Trusted Information Systems, Inc. IETF Security Area Director 15 February 1994 INTRODUCTION "The Federal Internetworking Requirements Panel (FIRP) was establishedby the National Institute of Standards and Technology (NIST) toreassess federal requirements for open systems networks and torecommend policy on the [U.S.] Government's use of networkingstandards." [Preface, para 1.] The FIRP report describes the need for the U.S. Federal Government toembrace not only the OSI protocol suite but also the ubiquitous TCP/IPProtocol Suite. In fact, Internet Standards, which include the TCP/IPProtocol Suite, are in very wide use in the Government, throughout theU.S. and throughout the world. Some OSI products and systems exist,and it may be impossible to switch completely to TCP/IP-based systems.Nonetheless, the report says, it is time to acknowledge the widespreaduse of the Internet Standards and give formal sanction to their use inthe Government. This is indeed a welcome change, and it should help the Governmenttake better advantage of modern data networking. This memo is the first of two responses to the report. In this memo,some issues are raised with respect to the recommendations in the FIRPreport, and suggestions are made for avoiding problems in the future. In the other memo, comments are given with respect to specificsections of the report. STRATEGIC COMMENTS This panel was convened in response to a divergence between thestrategy the U.S. Federal Government had been following for severalyears and the direction of the marketplace. As the report makesclear, the divergence had become so great that the policy no longerreflected attainable objectives. The accommodation of the InternetStandards brings policy into line with widespread practice and removesobstacles for rational management decisions in the future. In this light, it's worth examining the recommendations to ascertainif they are sufficient to avoid similar problems in the future. Aswith any large organization, the U.S. Federal Government pursuesmultiple policy objectives and has ingrained organizationalimperatives. Recommendations that respond only to the currentmarketplace without also anticipating the future or without includingthe flexibility to follow the lead of the marketplace may lead to theconvening of a similar panel in the not too distant future. The FIRP report makes five recommendations: 1. The role of oversight and integration across federal agency internetworking activities should be strengthened within the Office of Management and Budget. 2. The roles and responsibilities for fostering standards and assessing technological change should be refocused and strengthened by the Department of Commerce. 3. The roles and responsibilities for infrastructure development and operations to support all internetworking services from advanced research and development to leading edge to core/commodity services should be clearly defined and formally assigned through the Information Infrastructure Task Force. 4. The roles and responsibilities of affinity groups should be defined, including how they are created and coordinated by the Government Information Technology Services working group. 5. In accordance with OMB Circular A-119, Revised October 1992, voluntary standards should be adopted and used by Federal agencies, and international standards should be considered in the interests of promoting trade. The current GOSIP policy should be modified by the Department of Commerce to reflect the wider range of international voluntary standards for internetworking. Recommendation 1 asks that OMB's role be strengthened. OMB has thecharter to review the roles, responsibilities and performances of thevarious agencies which provide, develop or guide the U.S. Government'sinternetworking activities. This is an important role. The OMB should develop guidelines formeasuring the performance of the assigned agencies and the attainmentof the overall objectives. Although there is usually a preference toavoid duplication of activities, some degree of competition,exploration of alternative strategies and comparison of results isdesirable because it tends to produce more cost effective products andservices that are better matched to the needs of the users. Whereverfeasible, the OMB should also foster multiple approaches and/orparticipation by multiple agencies in order to provide for maximumfeedback within the system. Recommendation 2 suggests the Department of Commerce be tasked withnew responsibility for "fostering standards." Presumably the context of this recommendation is with respect tointernal standards within the U.S. Government. The general arena fordeveloping Internet Standards is the Internet Engineering Task Force(IETF) which operates in conjunction with the Internet ArchitectureBoard (IAB) under the auspices of the Internet Society. The InternetSociety, along with NSF, ARPA, DOE and NASA, provide considerablefinancial support to the standards activities. This process enjoyswide spread support form the industrial, academic and governmentcommunities, and as a result, the standards developed in this arenareflect the needs of marketplace and are usually adopted widely andquickly. Even if this recommendation is understood to be limited to refer tointernal use of the U.S. Government, the recommendation is flawed."Department of Commerce" here certainly includes NIST, but is likelyto include other parts of the Department. While NIST is indeed thefederal agency tasked with promoting and developing standards, NISTand the rest of the Department have at least two difficulties toovercome. First, NIST has been the lead agency with respect to GOSIP. NISTpersonnel are deeply knowledgeable about the OSI suite and lessfamiliar with the TCP/IP Protocol Suite. NIST is not now in aposition to provide leadership in this area, although it does have thetechnical strength to follow, assist and participate in the ongoingstandards activities. One challenge for NIST in the next few yearswill be to strengthen its staff and adjust its direction to movetoward a stronger involvement in the Internet Standards activities. Asignificant part of this challenge is working in a standards arena inwhich the U.S. Government does not have de jure authority or vetopower. Second, the Department of Commerce is heavily committed to aparticular strategy with respect to cryptography that is currently inconflict with the forces in the marketplace. NIST is the lead agencyinvolved in the promulgation of the Digital Signature Standard (DSS)and the "Clipper" escrowed-key encryption system. Both of theseinitiatives are meeting very strong resistance from industry andacademia. The RSA algorithm is the de facto standard for signaturesand key exchange, and some form of DES and/or some proprietaryalgorithms, e.g. RC2 and RC4, are likely to be the de facto standardsfor bulk encryption. The U.S. Government's orientation toward cryptography comes from thespecific concerns of the intelligence and law enforcement agencies.While not denying the principle that the intelligence and lawenforcement agencies have legitimate concerns, it is far from clearthat the approach being taken by the Department in support of theseconcerns will be successful. In fact, it is entirely possible theseinitiatives will not succeed in the marketplace. If so, the resultwill be the existence of dual standards in which the Governmentalgorithms will be used only under duress, both the Government and thegeneral population will bear unnecessary costs dealing with dualstandards, the introduction of strong security controls will beretarded, and the intelligence and law enforcement agencies will notsucceed in preventing the use of strong encryption, except in so faras they succeed in retarding the use of encryption altogether. OnFebruary 4, 1994, the Department announced it had made substantialprogress in its review of policies governing cryptography. Itsannounced that export controls on DES and similar cryptography willremain in place, that the Department will continue to promulgate theDigital Signature Standard despite uncertainties about the patent andlicenses, and it will adopt the escrowed encryption system (Clipper)as a Government standard. Nothing in the public record supports thesedecisions, and it was made clear that these decisions are driven bythe views of the law enforcement and intelligence agencies. The purpose of citing these controversies concerning cryptographypolicy here is to explicate a consequence relevant to the FIRP report.The Commerce Department, and in particular NIST, have a conflict ofinterest. Like a lawyer with two clients with intertangled interests,the Department is trying to serve two constituencies. Oneconstituency is the federal government as a whole, and in that role,it must do the best job it can of interpreting the market forces andadopting federal standards that are consistent with the marketplace. The Department's other constituency is the particular needs of the lawenforcement and intelligence agencies. Those agencies desire toinfluence and change the direction of the marketplace. In service ofthis role, NIST is adopting federal standards that reflect thedirection the law enforcement and intelligence agencies want themarket to go. The only way for the Department to be successful is if the lawenforcement and intelligence agencies prevail and the marketplaceadopts the standards the Government is promulgating. Perhaps thiswill happen, and if so, the Government's gamble will pay off.However, if the marketplace continues to adopt RSA as the preferredpublic key algorithm, if DES and other non-escrowed algorithms areused for symmetric key encryption, and if products with encryption arebecome prevalent in non-U.S. markets, not only will the stated goalsof the law enforcement and intelligence communities be lost, the restof the federal government and indeed the rest of the country will havepaid the price in struggling with dual standards. Like a stubborn child with a tensed jaw, the U.S. Government seemsbent on pressing forward with these initiatives. So be it. But inhanding out accolades because NIST is now willing to accommodate theprotocols that have been commonplace for many years, it's fair to notethat NIST and the rest of the Department are engaged in an exercisewhich promises to bring a repeat of the same divergence, confusion andwaste of resources which the FIRP report documents. Recommendation 3 suggests that each role and responsibility should betasked to some specific agency. Apparently this is aimed at reducingduplication. While useful in principle, this approach is fragile. Ifthe assigned agencies are incompetent or inefficient, everyonesuffers. The report does suggest that some assignments may bedecentralized. Decentralization should be emphasized. Whereverpossible, multiple approaches and multiple agencies should beencouraged. Competition and comparison are enormously useful forces.As noted above with respect to recommendation 1, the OMB shouldencourage as much decentralization as possible and should oversee theagencies establishing a means of measuring the results. Recommendations 4 and 5 are oriented toward implementation of thefirst three recommendations and raise fewer strategic concerns exceptthat recommendation 5 implicitly acknowledges that the role of theU.S. Government in the standards process shift from one of controllingthe process to one of participating in the process. As noted abovewith respect to recommendation 2, this shift poses an institutionalchallenge for the Government in general and NIST in particular. WT02-B12-82IA087-000631-B020-108http://res2.resnet.upenn.edu:80/cis590/reading.112.html 130.91.195.242 19970122064257 text/html 1415HTTP/1.0 200 OKDate: Wed, 22 Jan 1997 06:42:59 GMTServer: Apache/1.1.1Content-type: text/htmlContent-length: 1244Last-modified: Tue, 22 Nov 1994 06:32:35 GMT"foreign press is *torching* U.S. snoop-n-peep project" from a friend [Just received this from an associate in Switzerland who is well-known tomany in the computer racket. --jim] ...I've been meaning to ask you justhow much play the Clipper issue has gotten in the U.S. popular press.I'm really surprised at how much coverage you see here, in press that'sthe equivalent of Time/Newsweek/big city newspapers, and universallynegative. Basically, as seen in the Swiss and French press, the US isusing its big stick muscle to ram a technology down the throats ofpeople worldwide so that NSA can snoop on them. This is particularlyan issue in the case of GSM (global cellular phones), where the US haspretty much won the battle to make Europe weaken its original super-toughvoice encryption, threatening to deny access to the internal U.S.market if they do (and then they pull a switcheroo, after GSM isweakened, by not adopting it but going for Clipper instead). The sense I got in the U.S. was that Clipper was still pretty much onlyan issue in the technologically knowledeable subcommunity, so I'dbe interested to hear if it's now getting broader visibility. [unauthorized copy, thus anonymous, here] WT02-B12-83IA087-000631-B020-138http://res2.resnet.upenn.edu:80/cis590/reading.113.html 130.91.195.242 19970122064316 text/html 9815HTTP/1.0 200 OKDate: Wed, 22 Jan 1997 06:43:15 GMTServer: Apache/1.1.1Content-type: text/htmlContent-length: 9644Last-modified: Tue, 22 Nov 1994 06:32:37 GMTCPSR Alert 3.04 (Clipper Update) ============================================================== @@@@ @@@@ @@@ @@@@ @ @ @@@@ @@@@ @@@@@@ @ @ @ @ @ @ @ @ @ @ @ @ @ @ @@@ @ @@@ @@@@@ @ @@@ @@@ @ @ @ @ @ @ @ @ @ @ @ @ @ @@@@ @ @@@ @ @ @ @ @@@@ @@@@ @ @ @ ============================================================= Volume 3.04 February 15, 1994 ------------------------------------------------------------- Published by Computer Professionals for Social Responsibility Washington Office (Alert@washofc.cpsr.org) SPECIAL EDITION --- CLIPPER UPDATE ------------------------------------------------------------- Contents [1] Clipper Petition Tops 10,000 Mark [2] Safire Slams Clipper [3] A Tough Question [4] Clipper Facts: Definition of "Tesserea" [5] Sign the Clipper Petition! [6] New Files at the CPSR Internet Library [1] Clipper Petition Tops 10,000 Mark The electronic petition begun by CPSR to oppose Clipper has generatedwell over 10,000 responses in two weeks. The daily signature totalscontinue to increase, currently running at almost 2,000 per day! The number of people who have opposed Clipper already exceeds thecurrent estimated government orders for Clipper chips. Other upcoming milestones: 12,000 Number of computer networks connected to the Internet 15,000 Estimated number of total lawful wiretaps, 1968-1994 70,000 Anticipated number of Clipper purchases this year More details on the petition are re-printed below, just in case youhaven't already forwarded a copy to every person and mailing list youknow. ------------------------------------------------------------- [2] Safire Slams Clipper For those of you who might have missed it, William Safire published avery good essay on the Clipper proposal yesterday (February 14). We'reproviding some excerpts here and recommend the piece in its entirety.Let's hope Safire can do for Clipper what he did for Bobby Inman. Well-meaning law and intelligence officials, vainly seeking to maintain their vanishing ability to eavesdrop, have come up with a scheme that endangers the personal freedom of every American. * * * The "clipper chip" --- aptly named, as it clips the wings of individual liberty --- would encode, for Federal perusal whenever a judge rubber-stamped a warrant, everything we say on a phone, everything we write on a computer, every order we give to a shopping network or bank or 800 or 900 number, every electronic note we leave our spouses or dictate to our personal-digit-assistant genies. Add to that stack of intimate data the medical information derived from the national "health security card" Mr. Clinton proposes we all carry. Combine it with the travel, shopping and credit data available from all our plastic cards, along with psychological and student test scores. Throw in the confidential tax returns, sealed divorce proceedings, welfare records, field investigations for job applications, raw files and C.I.A. dossiers available to the Feds, and you have the individual citizen standing naked to the nosy bureaucrat. * * * The only people tap-able by American agents would be honest Americans --- or those crooked Americans dopey enough to buy American equipment with the pre-compromised American code. Subsequent laws to mandate the F.B.I. bug in every transmitter would be as effective as today's laws banning radar detectors. * * * Cash in your clipper chips, wiretappers: you can't detect the crime wave of the future with those old earphones on. --------------------------------------------------------------- [3] A Tough Question During the briefing on February 4 at which the formal adoption of theEscrowed Encryption Standard (aka Clipper) was announced, Mark Richards,Deputy Assistant Attorney General for the Criminal Division, was askedthe following hypothetical question: Suppose NSA goes to the key escrow agents and says, "We intercepted a Clipper-encrypted communication overseas. No U.S. persons were parties, so the Foreign Intelligence Surveillance Act does not apply and we don't need a warrant." How do the escrow agents determine whether or not to provide the keys? Doesn't this create a huge loophole in the system? Richards' response was that there would be "some" mechanism developed toensure that there would be no abuse of the key escrow system, but addedthat any such procedures "might not be made public." The response wasless than assuring. The development of secret procedures for foreignintelligence use of escrowed keys does nothing to assure the public ofthe system's integrity. It creates a very real possibility that the keyescrow system will be based upon nothing more than NSA's unilateralrepresentations concerning the circumstances of a particularinterception. It was not at all apparent why these procedures couldn't be made public.Like so much of the Clipper proposal, valid concerns are met with theclaim that "national security" precludes the disclosure of relevantinformation. This is why many of us believe this is a dangerous andill-advised way to design our civilian communications infrastructure. --------------------------------------------------------------- [4] Clipper Facts: Definition of "Tesserea" The Defense Department reportedly plans to employ the Clipper technologyin a device known as a "Tessera Card." We checked the dictionary andfound the results to be kind of frightening: Terrerea n. Lat. (pl. tessereae). Literally, "four-cornered". Used to refer to four-legged tables, chairs, stools, etc. Also, a single piece of mosaic tile; a single piece of a mosaic. _Pol._: An identity chit or marker. Tessereae were forced on conquered peoples and domestic slaves by their Roman occupiers or owners. Slaves or Gauls who refused to accept a tesserea were branded or maimed as a form of identification. >From Starr's History of the Classical World and the Oxford Unabridged.(thanks to Clark Matthews) ---------------------------------------------------------------- [5] Sign the Clipper Petition! Electronic Petition to Oppose Clipper *Please Distribute Widely* On January 24, many of the nation's leading experts in cryptography andcomputer security wrote President Clinton and asked him to withdraw theClipper proposal. The public response to the letter has been extremely favorable,including coverage in the New York Times and numerous computer andsecurity trade magazines. Many people have expressed interest in adding their names to the letter.In response to these requests, CPSR is organizing an Internet petitiondrive to oppose the Clipper proposal. We will deliver the signedpetition to the White House, complete with the names of all the peoplewho oppose Clipper. To sign on to the letter, send a message to: Clipper.petition@cpsr.org with the message "I oppose Clipper" (no quotes) You will receive a return message confirming your vote. Please distribute this announcement so that others may also expresstheir opposition to the Clipper proposal. ------------------------------------------------------------- [6] New Files at the CPSR Internet Library The following Clipper-related files are now available at the CPSRInternet Library: NIST Announcement of FIPS-185 (Escrowed Encryption Standard) /cpsr/privacy/crypto/clipper/fips_185_clipper_feb_1994.txt "Big Brother Inside" Postscript file parody of Intel's logo. Perfect for stickers, posters. Designed by Matt Thomlinson. /cpsr/privacy/crypto/clipper/big_brother_inside_sticker.ps All February 4 White House releases on Clipper are available at /cpsr/privacy/crypto/clipper An analysis of US cryptography policy by Professor Lance Hoffman commissioned by NIST /cpsr/privacy/crypto/hoffman_crypto_policy_1994 The CPSR Internet Library is a free service available viaFTP/WAIS/Gopher/listserv from cpsr.org:/cpsr. Materials from PrivacyInternational, the Taxpayers Assets Project and the Cypherpunks are alsoarchived. For more information, contact ftp-admin@cpsr.org. ======================================================================= To subscribe to the Alert, send the message: "subscribe cpsr-announce <your name>" (without quotes or brackets) tolistserv@cpsr.org. Back issues of the Alert are available at the CPSRInternet Library FTP/WAIS/Gopher cpsr.org /cpsr/alert Computer Professionals for Social Responsibility is a national,non-partisan, public-interest organization dedicated to understandingand directing the impact of computers on society. Founded in 1981, CPSRhas 2000 members from all over the world and 22 chapters across thecountry. Our National Advisory Board includes a Nobel laureate andthree winners of the Turing Award, the highest honor in computerscience. Membership is open to everyone. For more information, please contact: cpsr@cpsr.org or visit the CPSRdiscussion conferences on The Well (well.sf.ca.us) or Mindvox(phantom.com). ------------------------ END CPSR Alert 3.04 ----------------------- WT02-B12-84IA087-000631-B020-183http://res2.resnet.upenn.edu:80/cis590/reading.114.html 130.91.195.242 19970122064334 text/html 514HTTP/1.0 200 OKDate: Wed, 22 Jan 1997 06:43:36 GMTServer: Apache/1.1.1Content-type: text/htmlContent-length: 344Last-modified: Tue, 22 Nov 1994 06:32:38 GMTAPPLIED ETHICS APPLIED ETHICS. The Center for the Advancement of Applied Ethics, CarnegieMellon University, produces interactive multimedia packages, distancelearning courses and video programs topics such as diversity in theworkplace, professional ethics, the right to die and conflict resolution.For info: pm2n+@andrew.cmu.edu. WT02-B12-85IA087-000631-B020-221http://res2.resnet.upenn.edu:80/cis590/reading.115.html 130.91.195.242 19970122064357 text/html 6027HTTP/1.0 200 OKDate: Wed, 22 Jan 1997 06:43:54 GMTServer: Apache/1.1.1Content-type: text/htmlContent-length: 5856Last-modified: Tue, 22 Nov 1994 06:32:38 GMTLife In Cyberspace By the way , if you look at the end you will see the "InformationInfrastructure Task Force has opened a computer bulletin board for thepublic. Anyone with a computer and a modem can access it by calling (202)501-1920.". Why in the H_LL is that not reachable via the Internet. Couldit be that those in charge of the IITF dont understand where the world is? Dave PPUBLICATION DATE Tuesday. February 15, 1994HEADLINE Life In Cyberspace COMPUTERS IN THE ^90s The Toll-Free Superhighway?BYLINE Joshua QuittnerLENGTH 82 Lines WASHINGTON A RED-HAIRED MAN hustled up the steps to the Old ExecutiveOffice Building in Washington right to the front of the line of 400 orso people who stood stamping against the cold. His approach sent a murmur of recognition through the crowd onThursday. It was John Sculley, ex-chairman of Apple and now ex-chief of Spectrum Information Technologies, and he was carrying theworld's biggest briefcase and wearing a wool hat, pulled down to hisbushy-red eyebrows. The hat had a small hole frayed in it, deadcenter, and it made you think about how unemployment was treatingJohn Sculley. After a while, the line moved and slowly, the people on it were allowed in to watch the first meeting of the National Information Infrastructure Task Force. The Indian Treaty Room had beenreserved,which may have been someone's idea of irony. Many of thenatives of cyberspace already suspect they're going to be displacedby the armies of Hollywood and Home Shopping. The room wasquickly abandoned in favor of something larger, across the hall. A long table stretched across the front of the room and 31people (the task force) sat around it, half of them with their backs tous. John Sculley sat facing the room. There was a blue velvet curtainand an American flag for a backdrop. One of the first orders of business, was defining what, exactly,the National Information Infrastructure is. "It's such a big,amorphous idea, it means so much to each of us," said co-chairmanDelano Lewis, who also happens to be the president of NationalPublic Radio. As an exercise, Lewis gave each of the members somehomework: Write two pages on the National InformationInfrastructure, "defining it - what it means." The National Information Infrastructure is not yet a householdphrase, though I'm pretty sure it refers to the interconnectednetworks of fiber-optic and coaxial cable, phone lines, satellites andbroadcast towers that move the nation's communications. No oneagrees on what the proper metaphor is. During the three-hour-longmeeting, it was described as a national information superhighway; anational information supermarket; a "river of information and we'replacing the buoys"; and a "fast train leaving the station and we don'twant to be the caboose." But the country doesn't need a common metaphor to start talkingabout some of the problems it faces as this thing takes on arecognizable form. One of the big issues is universal service: Howdoes the nation ensure that all people can get at information as itmigrates to pay services? This is where John Sculley comes in. "We need to find a way thatevery American can go to a library and access online informationwithout having to pay for it," he said. And without easy, affordableaccess, he said, classrooms would be crippled. It's funny whatunemployment will do for your point of view. Now, Sculley's suggestion is not exactly outrageous. You go to alibrary and you can read any book in the place for free. You can eventake books out if you have a card. So you'd expect the same ideawould carry over into the Information Age, when so much of theinformation we need will be available only online, for money. But Vance Opperman, president of West Publishing, almostjumped out of his seat when Sculley said the words, "without havingto pay for it." West is one of the world's biggest online publishers. "If you have information available for free, soon you'll get whatyou pay for," Opperman said. "John, I'm amazed. I don't think you'resuggesting that all information should be available for free . . . Thatwould be the end of the information industry in this country." Now Sculley did a funny thing. Maybe it was all those years ofrunning Pepsi and Apple that kicked in, or maybe it was theshakiness of being without portfolio. He backed down. "I'm not suggesting we create moreentitlement," he said, flustered. Luckily, by this point, Vice President Al Gore had joined thegroup. Gore, as I'm sure you're aware, is the person in the federalgovernment most responsible for putting the National InformationInfrastructure in the public agenda. He was the one that introducedthe term "national information superhighway" into the vernacular. Gore held up his hand. "I'm not prepared to yield that point," hesaid to Sculley, "that we should be providing information for free toclassrooms. I wouldn't want to prematurely take that off the burner,not at all." Some of the panelists said later that it was good to have a vicepresident who can not only spell potato, but can even find a digitizedphotograph of one on the Internet. ***** NET TIPS The Information Infrastructure Task Force has opened acomputer bulletin board for the public. Anyone with a computer anda modem can access it by calling (202) 501-1920. You can browsethrough documents, news releases and selected legislation. You canalso leave comments for the task force. To send information to thetask force over the Internet, use this e-mail address:cfranz@ntia.doc.gov. **END OF STORY REACHED** WT02-B12-86IA087-000631-B020-251http://res2.resnet.upenn.edu:80/cis590/reading.116.html 130.91.195.242 19970122064417 text/html 1484HTTP/1.0 200 OKDate: Wed, 22 Jan 1997 06:44:17 GMTServer: Apache/1.1.1Content-type: text/htmlContent-length: 1313Last-modified: Tue, 22 Nov 1994 06:32:39 GMTNOTICE: Clinton/Gore Proposed "Title VII" Broadband Regulation on ftp.eff.org Date: Wed, 16 Feb 1994 11:00:45 -0600From: djw@eff.org (Daniel J. Weitzner) EFF has obtained a draft of the Clinton Administration's propsed newregulatory scheme for interactive broadband networks. Draft is available by ftp on ftp.eff.org in: /pub/EFF/Policy/Legislation/title-vii-version-1 **************************************************************************"I believe in markets doing what they do well, which is to develop technology,and letting citizens do what they ideally do well, which is to set policy." -Esther Dyson The Electronic Frontier Foundation is working to protect your privacy. Tohelp stop Clipper and eliminate export controls on cryptography, support abill introduced in the House of Representatives, HR 3627. To support thebill, send email to <cantwell@eff.org>. ......................................................................Daniel J. Weitzner, Senior Staff Counsel <djw@eff.org>Electronic Frontier Foundation 202-347-5400 (v)1001 G St, NW Suite 950 East 202-393-5509 (f)Washington, DC 20001 *** Join EFF!!! Send mail to membership@eff.org for information *** WT02-B12-87IA087-000631-B020-291http://res2.resnet.upenn.edu:80/cis590/reading.117.html 130.91.195.242 19970122064458 text/html 841HTTP/1.0 200 OKDate: Wed, 22 Jan 1997 06:44:59 GMTServer: Apache/1.1.1Content-type: text/htmlContent-length: 671Last-modified: Tue, 22 Nov 1994 06:32:40 GMTCRYPTO CHIP DEBUTS iPower (note self destruct .. djf) >>From the News Briefs in Dr. Dobb's Developer Update, March 1994:>>CRYPTO CHIP DEBUTS>>National Semiconductor has released the iPower encryption chip,>which is designed for use in PCMCIA cards and provides a range>of security features. The chip can encrypt data via multiple>encryption algorithms, and will self-destruct upon any>tampering attempt, using a self-contained chemical. Cards that>use the iPower chip can also provide additional functions such>as tracking user access times. The iPower division is based [in]>Santa Clara, CA 408-721-8797.> WT02-B12-88IA087-000631-B020-323http://res2.resnet.upenn.edu:80/cis590/reading.118.html 130.91.195.242 19970122064512 text/html 740HTTP/1.0 200 OKDate: Wed, 22 Jan 1997 06:45:14 GMTServer: Apache/1.1.1Content-type: text/htmlContent-length: 570Last-modified: Tue, 22 Nov 1994 06:32:41 GMTNEWBIE HELP! for PGP [for those interested .. djf] From: qwerty@netcom.com (Xenon)Subject: Re: NEWBIE HELP!Organization: PGP Info Clearinghouse. Help sent (PGP FAQ). Send mail to qwerty@netcom.com with Subject"Bomb me!" for Gary Edstrom's PGP FAQ and my "Here's How to MacPGP!"guides. They are also available by anonymous ftp from netcom.com in/pub/gbe and /pub/qwerty. PGP is the free public key encryption programdesigned by Phil Zimmerman. -=Xenon=- <qwerty@netcom.com> And if you aren't in the US, get PGP off a non-US ftp site. WT02-B12-89IA087-000631-B021-29http://res2.resnet.upenn.edu:80/cis590/reading.119.html 130.91.195.242 19970122064534 text/html 5432HTTP/1.0 200 OKDate: Wed, 22 Jan 1997 06:45:33 GMTServer: Apache/1.1.1Content-type: text/htmlContent-length: 5261Last-modified: Tue, 22 Nov 1994 06:32:42 GMTCFS 1.0.4 Unix Cryptographic File System source code now available -- thought you all would be interested in tech progress on this front .. djf] From: mab@research.att.com (Matt Blaze) Source code for version 1.0 of CFS, the Cryptographic File System, isnow available upon request for research and experimental use in the USand Canada. CFS pushes encryption services into the Unix(tm) file system. Itsupports secure storage at the system level through a standard Unixfile system interface to encrypted files. Users associate acryptographic key with the directories they wish to protect. Files inthese directories (as well as their pathname components) aretransparently encrypted and decrypted with the specified key withoutfurther user intervention; cleartext is never stored on a disk or sentto a remote file server. CFS employs a novel combination of DESstream and codebook cipher modes to provide high security with goodperformance on a modern workstation. CFS can use any available filesystem for its underlying storage without modification, includingremote file servers such as NFS. System management functions, such asfile backup, work in a normal manner and without knowledge of the key. CFS runs under SunOS and several other BSD-derived systems with NFS.It is implemented entirely at user level, as a local NFS serverrunning on the client machine's "loopback" interface. It consists ofabout 5000 lines of code and supporting documentation. You must have"root" access to install CFS. CFS was first mentioned at the work-in-progress session at the Winter'93 USENIX Conference and was more fully detailed in: Matt Blaze, "A Cryptographic File System for Unix", Proc. 1st ACM Conference on Computer and Communications Security, Fairfax, VA, November 1993. (PostScript available by anonymous ftp from research.att.com in the file dist/mab/cfs.ps. The version being released differs from the version described in thepaper in a few ways: * The encryption scheme has been strengthened, and now providesapproximately the security of 3-DES with the online latency of onlysingle-DES. * Support for the smartcard-based key management system is notincluded. * A few of the tools are not included (in particular, cname and ccat). * The performance has been improved. * The security of the system against certain non-cryptanalytic attackshas been improved somewhat. CFS is being distributed as a research prototype; it is COMPLETELYUNSUPPORTED software. No warranty of any kind is provided. We willnot be responsible if the system deletes all your files and emails thecleartext directly to the NSA or your mother. Also, we do not havethe resources to port the software to other platforms, although youare welcome to do this yourself. The software was developed underSunOS and BSDI, and there are also unsupported user-contributed portsavailable for AIX, HP/UX, Irix, Linux, Solaris and Ultrix. We reallycan't promise to provide any technical support at all, beyond thesource code itself. We also maintain a mailing list for CFS users anddevelopers; subscription information is included with the source code. Because of export restrictions on cryptographic software, we are onlyable to make the software available within the US and Canada to US andCanadian citizens and permanent residents. Unfortunately, we cannotmake it available for general anonymous ftp or other uncontrolledaccess, nor can we allow others to do so. Sorry. Legal stuff from the README file: * Copyright (c) 1992, 1993, 1994 by AT&T. * Permission to use, copy, and modify this software without fee * is hereby granted, provided that this entire notice is included in * all copies of any software which is or includes a copy or * modification of this software and in all copies of the supporting * documentation for such software. * * This software is subject to United States export controls. You may * not export it, in whole or in part, or cause or allow such export, * through act or omission, without prior authorization from the United * States government and written permission from AT&T. In particular, * you may not make any part of this software available for general or * unrestricted distribution to others, nor may you disclose this software * to persons other than citizens and permanent residents of the United * States and Canada. * * THIS SOFTWARE IS BEING PROVIDED "AS IS", WITHOUT ANY EXPRESS OR IMPLIED * WARRANTY. IN PARTICULAR, NEITHER THE AUTHORS NOR AT&T MAKE ANY * REPRESENTATION OR WARRANTY OF ANY KIND CONCERNING THE MERCHANTABILITY * OF THIS SOFTWARE OR ITS FITNESS FOR ANY PARTICULAR PURPOSE. If you would like a copy of the CFS source code, please send email to: cfs@research.att.com DO NOT REPLY DIRECTLY TO THIS MESSAGE. Be sure to include a statementthat you are in the US or Canada, are a citizen or permanent residentof the US or Canada, and have read and understand the licenseconditions stated above. Also include an email address in a US orCanada-registered domain. The code will be sent to you via email in auuencoded compressed tarfile. WT02-B12-90IA087-000631-B021-73http://res2.resnet.upenn.edu:80/cis590/reading.120.html 130.91.195.242 19970122064549 text/html 22561HTTP/1.0 200 OKDate: Wed, 22 Jan 1997 06:45:51 GMTServer: Apache/1.1.1Content-type: text/htmlContent-length: 22389Last-modified: Tue, 22 Nov 1994 06:32:43 GMTBarlow Wired article on Clipper - "Jackboots on the Infobahn" ! [note: this article and other Clipper material are archived at:ftp://ftp.eff.org/pub/EFF/Policy/Clipper/Similar material can be found at soda.berkeley.edu.] -=-=-=-=-=-=-=-=-=-=-=-=-=-=-=-=-=-=-=-=-=-=-=-=-=-=-=-=-=-=-=-=-=-=-=-=-=-=-=-=-=-=-=-Copyright 1993,4 Wired USA Ltd. All Rights Reserved=-=-=-=-=-=-=-=For complete copyright information, please see the end of this file=-=-=-=-=-=-=-=-=-=-=-=-=-=-=-=-=-=-=-=-=-=-=-=-=-=-=-=-=-=-=-=-=-=-=-=-=-=-=-= WIRED 2.04Electrosphere************* Jackboots on the Infobahn^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^ Clipper is a last ditch attempt by the United States, the last great powerfrom the old Industrial Era, to establish imperial control over cyberspace. By John Perry Barlow [Note: The following article will appear in the April 1994 issue of WIRED.We, the editors of WIRED, are net-casting it now in its pre-published formas a public service. Because of the vital and urgent nature of its message,we believe readers on the Net should hear and take action now. You are freeto pass this article on electronically; in fact we urge you to replicate itthroughout the net with our blessings. If you do, please keep the copyrightstatements and this note intact. For a complete listing of Clipper-relatedresources available through WIRED Online, send email to <infobot@wired.com>with the following message: "send clipper.index". - The Editors of WIRED] On January 11, I managed to schmooze myself aboard Air Force 2. It wasflying out of LA, where its principal passenger had just outlined hisvision of the information superhighway to a suited mob of television, show-biz, and cable types who fervently hoped to own it one day - if they couldever figure out what the hell it was. >From the standpoint of the Electronic Frontier Foundation the speech hadbeen wildly encouraging. The administration's program, as announced by VicePresident Al Gore, incorporated many of the concepts of open competition,universal access, and deregulated common carriage that we'd been pushingfor the previous year. But he had said nothing about the future of privacy, except to cite amongthe bounties of the NII its ability to "help law enforcement agenciesthwart criminals and terrorists who might use advanced telecommunicationsto commit crimes." On the plane I asked Gore what this implied about administration policy oncryptography. He became as noncommittal as a cigar-store Indian. "We'll bemaking some announcements.... I can't tell you anything more." He hurriedto the front of the plane, leaving me to troubled speculation. Despite its fundamental role in assuring privacy, transaction security, andreliable identity within the NII, the Clinton administration has notdemonstrated an enlightenment about cryptography up to par with the rest ofits digital vision. The Clipper Chip - which threatens to be either the goofiest waste offederal dollars since President Gerald Ford's great Swine Flu program or,if actually deployed, a surveillance technology of profound malignancy -seemed at first an ugly legacy of the Reagan-Bush modus operandi. "This isgoing to be our Bay of Pigs," one Clinton White House official told me atthe time Clipper was introduced, referring to the disastrous plan to invadeCuba that Kennedy inherited from Eisenhower. (Clipper, in case you're just tuning in, is an encryption chip that theNational Security Agency and FBI hope will someday be in every phone andcomputer in America. It scrambles your communications, making themunintelligible to all but their intended recipients. All, that is, but thegovernment, which would hold the "key" to your chip. The key wouldseparated into two pieces, held in escrow, and joined with the appropriate"legal authority.") Of course, trusting the government with your privacy is like having aPeeping Tom install your window blinds. And, since the folks I've met inthis White House seem like extremely smart, conscious freedom-lovers -hell, a lot of them are Deadheads - I was sure that after they were fullymoved in, they'd face down the National Security Agency and the FBI, letClipper die a natural death, and lower the export embargo on reliableencryption products. Furthermore, the National Institutes of Standards and Technology and theNational Security Council have been studying both Clipper and exportembargoes since April. Given that the volumes of expert testimony they hadcollected overwhelmingly opposed both, I expected the final report wouldgive the administration all the support it needed to do the right thing. I was wrong. Instead, there would be no report. Apparently, they couldn'tdraft one that supported, on the evidence, what they had decided to doinstead. THE OTHER SHOE DROPS On Friday, February 4, the other jackboot dropped. A series ofannouncements from the administration made it clear that cryptography wouldbecome their very own "Bosnia of telecommunications" (as one staffer putit). It wasn't just that the old Serbs in the National Security Agency andthe FBI were still making the calls. The alarming new reality was that theinvertebrates in the White House were only too happy to abide by them.Anything to avoid appearing soft on drugs or terrorism. So, rather than ditching Clipper, they declared it a Federal DataProcessing Standard, backing that up with an immediate government order for50,000 Clipper devices. They appointed the National Institutes of Standardsand Technology and the Department of Treasury as the "trusted" thirdparties that would hold the Clipper key pairs. (Treasury, by the way, isalso home to such trustworthy agencies as the Secret Service and the Bureauof Alcohol, Tobacco, and Firearms.) They reaffirmed the export embargo on robust encryption products, admittingfor the first time that its purpose was to stifle competition to Clipper.And they outlined a very porous set of requirements under which the copsmight get the keys to your chip. (They would not go into the procedure bywhich the National Security Agency could get them, though they assured usit was sufficient.) They even signaled the impending return of the dread Digital Telephony, anFBI legislative initiative requiring fundamental reengineering of theinformation infrastructure; providing wiretapping ability to the FBI wouldthen become the paramount design priority. INVASION OF THE BODY SNATCHERS Actually, by the time the announcements thudded down, I wasn't surprised bythem. I had spent several days the previous week in and around the WhiteHouse. I felt like I was in another remake of The Invasion of the Body Snatchers.My friends in the administration had been transformed. They'd been subsumedby the vast mindfield on the other side of the security clearance membrane,where dwell the monstrous bureaucratic organisms that feed on fear. They'dbeen infected by the institutionally paranoid National Security Agency'sWeltanschauung. They used all the telltale phrases. Mike Nelson, the White House point manon the NII, told me, "If only I could tell you what I know, you'd feel thesame way I do." I told him I'd been inoculated against that argument duringVietnam. (And it does seem to me that if you're going to initiate aprocess that might end freedom in America, you probably need an argumentthat isn't classified.) Besides, how does he know what he knows? Where does he get his information?Why, the National Security Agency, of course. Which, given its stronginterest in the outcome, seems hardly an unimpeachable source. However they reached it, Clinton and Gore have an astonishingly simplebottom line, to which even the future of American liberty and prosperity issecondary: They believe that it is their responsibility to eliminate, bywhatever means, the possibility that some terrorist might get a nuke anduse it on, say, the World Trade Center. They have been convinced that suchplots are more likely to ripen to hideous fruition behind a shield ofencryption. The staffers I talked to were unmoved by the argument that anyone smartenough to steal a nuclear device is probably smart enough to use PGP orsome other uncompromised crypto standard. And never mind that the lastpeople who popped a hooter in the World Trade Center were able to get itthere without using any cryptography and while under FBI surveillance. We are dealing with religion here. Though only ten American lives have beenlost to terrorism in the last two years, the primacy of this threat hasbecome as much an article of faith with these guys as the Catholicconviction that human life begins at conception or the Mormon belief thatthe Lost Tribe of Israel crossed the Atlantic in submarines. In the spirit of openness and compromise, they invited the ElectronicFrontier Foundation to submit other solutions to the "problem" of thenuclear-enabled terrorist than key escrow devices, but they would not admitinto discussion the argument that such a threat might, in fact, be somekind of phantasm created by the spooks to ensure their lavish budgets intothe post-Cold War era. As to the possibility that good old-fashioned investigative techniquesmight be more valuable in preventing their show-case catastrophe (as it wasafter the fact in finding the alleged perpetrators of the last attack onthe World Trade Center), they just hunkered down and said that whenwiretaps were necessary, they were damned well necessary. When I asked about the business that American companies lose because oftheir inability to export good encryption products, one staffer essentiallydismissed the market, saying that total world trade in crypto goods wasstill less than a billion dollars. (Well, right. Thanks more to thediligent efforts of the National Security Agency than to dim salespotential.) I suggested that a more immediate and costly real-world effect of theirpolicies would be to reduce national security by isolating Americancommerce, owing to a lack of international confidence in the security ofour data lines. I said that Bruce Sterling's fictional data-enclaves inplaces like the Turks and Caicos Islands were starting to look real-worldinevitable. They had a couple of answers to this, one unsatisfying and the other scary.The unsatisfying answer was that the international banking community couldjust go on using DES, which still seemed robust enough to them. (DES is theold federal Data Encryption Standard, thought by most cryptologists to benearing the end of its credibility.) More frightening was their willingness to counter the data-enclave futurewith one in which no data channels anywhere would be secure fromexamination by one government or another. Pointing to unnamed othercountries that were developing their own mandatory standards andrestrictions regarding cryptography, they said words to the effect of,"Hey, it's not like you can't outlaw the stuff. Look at France." Of course, they have also said repeatedly - and for now I believe them -that they have absolutely no plans to outlaw non-Clipper crypto in the US.But that doesn't mean that such plans wouldn't develop in the presence ofsome pending "emergency." Then there is that White House briefingdocument, issued at the time Clipper was first announced, which assertsthat no US citizen "as a matter of right, is entitled to an unbreakablecommercial encryption product." Now why, if it's an ability they have no intention of contesting, do theyfeel compelled to declare that it's not a right? Could it be that they arepreparing us for the laws they'll pass after some bearded fanatic hasgotten himself a surplus nuke and used something besides Clipper toconceal his plans for it? If they are thinking about such an eventuality, we should be doing so aswell. How will we respond? I believe there is a strong, though currentlyuntested, argument that outlawing unregulated crypto would violate theFirst Amendment, which surely protects the manner of our speech as clearlyas it protects the content. But of course the First Amendment is, like the rest of the Constitution,only as good as the government's willingness to uphold it. And they are, asI say, in the mood to protect our safety over our liberty. This is not a mind-frame against which any argument is going to be veryeffective. And it appeared that they had already heard and rejected everyargument I could possibly offer. In fact, when I drew what I thought was an original comparison betweentheir stand against naturally proliferating crypto and the folly of KingCanute (who placed his throne on the beach and commanded the tide to leavehim dry), my government opposition looked pained and said he had heardthat one almost as often as jokes about roadkill on the informationsuperhighway. I hate to go to war with them. War is always nastier among friends.Furthermore, unless they've decided to let the National Security Agencydesign the rest of the National Information Infrastructure as well, we needto go on working closely with them on the whole range of issues likeaccess, competition, workplace privacy, common carriage, intellectualproperty, and such. Besides, the proliferation of strong crypto willprobably happen eventually no matter what they do. But then again, it might not. In which case we could shortly find ourselvesunder a government that would have the automated ability to log the time,origin and recipient of every call we made, could track our physicalwhereabouts continuously, could keep better account of our financialtransactions than we do, and all without a warrant. Talk about crimeprevention! Worse, under some vaguely defined and surely mutable "legal authority,"they also would be able to listen to our calls and read our e-mail withouthaving to do any backyard rewiring. They wouldn't need any permission atall to monitor overseas calls. If there's going to be a fight, I'd rather it be with this government thanthe one we'd likely face on that hard day. Hey, I've never been a paranoid before. It's always seemed to me that mostgovernments are too incompetent to keep a good plot strung together all theway from coffee break to quitting time. But I am now very nervous about thegovernment of the United States of America. Because Bill 'n' Al, whatever their other new-paradigm virtues, haveallowed the very old-paradigm trogs of the Guardian Class to define astheir highest duty the defense of America against an enemy that existsprimarily in the imagination - and is therefore capable of anything. To assure absolute safety against such an enemy, there is no limit to theliberties we will eventually be asked to sacrifice. And, with a ClipperChip in every phone, there will certainly be no technical limit on theirability to enforce those sacrifices. WHAT YOU CAN DO GET CONGRESS TO LIFT THE CRYPTO EMBARGO The administration is trying to impose Clipper on us by manipulating marketforces. By purchasing massive numbers of Clipper devices, they intend toinduce an economy of scale which will make them cheap while the exportembargo renders all competition either expensive or nonexistent. We have to use the market to fight back. While it's unlikely that they'llback down on Clipper deployment, the Electronic Frontier Foundationbelieves that with sufficient public involvement, we can get Congress toeliminate the export embargo. Rep. Maria Cantwell, D-Washington, has a bill (H.R. 3627) before theEconomic Policy, Trade, and Environment Subcommittee of the House Committeeon Foreign Affairs that would do exactly that. She will need a lot of helpfrom the public. They may not care much about your privacy in DC, but theystill care about your vote. Please signal your support of H.R. 3627, either by writing her directly ore-mailing her at cantwell@eff.org. Messages sent to that address will beprinted out and delivered to her office. In the subject header of yourmessage, please include the words "support HR 3627." In the body of yourmessage, express your reasons for supporting the bill. You may also expressyour sentiments to Rep. Lee Hamilton, D-Indiana, the House Committee onForeign Affairs chair, by e-mailing hamilton@eff.org. Furthermore, since there is nothing quite as powerful as a letter from aconstituent, you should check the following list of subcommittee andcommittee members to see if your congressional representative is amongthem. If so, please copy them your letter to Rep. Cantwell. > Economic Policy, Trade, and Environment Subcommittee: Democrats: Sam Gejdenson (Chair), D-Connecticut; James Oberstar, D-Minnesota; Cynthia McKinney, D-Georgia; Maria Cantwell, D-Washington; EricFingerhut, D-Ohio; Albert R. Wynn, D-Maryland; Harry Johnston, D-Florida;Eliot Engel, D-New York; Charles Schumer, D-New York. Republicans: Toby Roth (ranking), R-Wisconsin; Donald Manzullo, R-Illinois;Doug Bereuter, R-Nebraska; Jan Meyers, R-Kansas; Cass Ballenger, R-NorthCarolina; Dana Rohrabacher, R-California. > House Committee on Foreign Affairs: Democrats: Lee Hamilton (Chair), D-Indiana; Tom Lantos, D-California;Robert Torricelli, D-New Jersey; Howard Berman, D-California; GaryAckerman, D-New York; Eni Faleomavaega, D-Somoa; Matthew Martinez, D-California; Robert Borski, D-Pennsylvania; Donal Payne, D-New Jersey;Robert Andrews, D-New Jersey; Robert Menendez, D-New Jersey; Sherrod Brown,D-Ohio; Alcee Hastings, D-Florida; Peter Deutsch, D-Florida; Don Edwards,D-California; Frank McCloskey, D-Indiana; Thomas Sawyer, D-Ohio; LuisGutierrez, D-Illinois. Republicans: Benjamin Gilman (ranking), R-New York; William Goodling, R-Pennsylvania; Jim Leach, R-Iowa; Olympia Snowe, R-Maine; Henry Hyde, R-Illinois; Christopher Smith, R-New Jersey; Dan Burton, R-Indiana; EltonGallegly, R-California; Ileana Ros-Lehtinen, R-Florida; David Levy, R-NewYork; Lincoln Diaz-Balart, R-Florida; Ed Royce, R-California. BOYCOTT CLIPPER DEVICES AND THE COMPANIES WHICH MAKE THEM. Don't buy anything with a Clipper Chip in it. Don't buy any product from acompany that manufactures devices with Big Brother inside. It is likelythat the government will ask you to use Clipper for communications with theIRS or when doing business with federal agencies. They cannot, as yet,require you to do so. Just say no. LEARN ABOUT ENCRYPTION AND EXPLAIN THE ISSUES TO YOUR UNWIRED FRIENDS The administration is banking on the likelihood that this stuff is tootechnically obscure to agitate anyone but nerds like us. Prove them wrongby patiently explaining what's going on to all the people you know who havenever touched a computer and glaze over at the mention of words like"cryptography." Maybe you glaze over yourself. Don't. It's not that hard. For some hands-onexperience, download a copy of PGP - Pretty Good Privacy - a sharewareencryption engine which uses the robust RSA encryption algorithm. And learnto use it. GET YOUR COMPANY TO THINK ABOUT EMBEDDING REAL CRYPTOGRAPHY IN ITS PRODUCTS If you work for a company that makes software, computer hardware, or anykind of communications device, work from within to get them to incorporateRSA or some other strong encryption scheme into their products. If they saythat they are afraid to violate the export embargo, ask them to considermanufacturing such products overseas and importing them back into theUnited States. There appears to be no law against that. Yet. You might also lobby your company to join the Digital Privacy and SecurityWorking Group, a coalition of companies and public interest groups -including IBM, Apple, Sun, Microsoft, and, interestingly, Clipper phonemanufacturer AT&T - that is working to get the embargo lifted. ENLIST! Self-serving as it sounds coming from me, you can do a lot to help bybecoming a member of one of these organizations. In addition to giving youaccess to the latest information on this subject, every additional memberstrengthens our credibility with Congress. > Join the Electronic Frontier Foundation by writing membership@eff.org. > Join Computer Professionals for Social Responsibility by e-mailingcpsr.info@cpsr .org. CPSR is also organizing a protest, to which you can lend your supportby sending e-mail to clipper.petition@cpsr.org with "I oppose Clipper" inthe message body. Ftp/gopher/WAIS to cpsr.org /cpsr/privacy/ crypto/clipper for more info. In his LA speech, Gore called the development of the NII "a revolution."And it is a revolutionary war we are engaged in here. Clipper is a lastditch attempt by the United States, the last great power from the oldIndustrial Era, to establish imperial control over cyberspace. If theywin, the most liberating development in the history of humankind couldbecome, instead, the surveillance system which will monitor ourgrandchildren's morality. We can be better ancestors than that. San Francisco, California Wednesday, February 9, 1994 * * * John Perry Barlow (barlow@eff.org) is co-founder and Vice-Chairman of theElectronic Frontier Foundation, a group which defends liberty, both inCyberspace and the Physical World. He has three daughters. =-=-=-=-=-=-=-=-=-=-=-=WIRED Online Copyright Notice=-=-=-=-=-=-=-=-=-=-=-= Copyright 1993,4 Wired USA Ltd. All rights reserved. This article may be redistributed provided that the article and this notice remain intact. This article may not under any circumstances be resold or redistributed for compensation of any kind without prior written permission from Wired Ventures, Ltd. If you have any questions about these terms, or would like information about licensing materials from WIRED Online, please contact us via telephone (+1 (415) 904 0660) or email (info@wired.com). WIRED and WIRED Online are trademarks of Wired Ventures, Ltd. =-=-=-=-=-=-=-=-=-=-=-=-=-=-=-=-=-=-=-=-=-=-=-=-=-=-=-=-=-=-=-=-=-=-=-=-=-= WT02-B12-91IA087-000631-B021-119http://res2.resnet.upenn.edu:80/cis590/reading.121.html 130.91.195.242 19970122064625 text/html 9036HTTP/1.0 200 OKDate: Wed, 22 Jan 1997 06:46:25 GMTServer: Apache/1.1.1Content-type: text/htmlContent-length: 8865Last-modified: Tue, 22 Nov 1994 06:32:44 GMTFWD>Electronic Privacy -- A Date: 18 Feb 1994 01:06:33 -0800From: "Jane Metcalfe" <jane@wired.com> Mail*Link(r) SMTP FWD>Electronic Privacy -- A Cal Date: 2/16/94 8:30 PMFrom: WIRED Online-=-=-=-=-=-=-=-=-=-=-=-=-=-=-=-=-=-=-=-=-=-=-=-=-=-=-=-=-=-=-=-=-=-=-=-=-=-=-=-=-=-=-=-=-=-=PLEASE REDISTRIBUTE THIS MESSAGE WIDELY!!=-=-=-=-=-=-=-=-=-=-=-=-For copyright information, please see the end of this file.-=-=-=-=-=-=-=-=-=-=-=-=-=-=-=-=-=-=-=-=-=-=-=-=-=-=-=-=-=-=-=-=-=-=-=-=-=-=-=-=-=-= To: WIRED Online Information Services <hotwired@wired.com>Subject: Electronic Privacy -- A Call to Action This is a pivotal moment in history. The national security state, with the backing of the Clinton-Goreadministration, is attempting a stealth strike on our rights. If theysucceed, we could shortly find ourselves under a government with theautomated ability to log the time, origin, and recipient of every call ande-mail message, to monitor our most private communications, to track ourphysical whereabouts continuously, and to keep better account of ourfinancial transactions than we do -- all without a warrant. Fact: On Friday, February 4, 1994, the Clinton administration announcedsupport for the Clipper Chip and SKIPJACK encryption scheme as nationalstandards. Fact: Federal security agencies have been meeting with telecommunicationscompanies to design back doors into the entire National InformationInfrastructure (NII), including every telephone and data network, evenincluding fax machines. In other words, any system connected to the NIIwould be required to include a "back door" in order to facilitatemonitoring by government agencies. We at WIRED Online believe that the adoption of these administrationinitiatives could result in a profound infringement of individual freedomand privacy, ours as well as yours. We urge you to read the rest of thisletter, to examine the available materials, to consider these importantissues for yourself, and to act to preserve the Bill of Rights incyberspace. The proposed encryption scheme, which uses the SKIPJACK encryptionalgorithm and the Clipper Chip, relies on a "key escrow" system with abuilt-in "back door" so that security agents can decrypt and monitor evensupposedly "secure" communications. While the administration claims thatthere will be "safeguards," the technology was developed by the virtuallyinsular National Security Agency, and its algorithms remain classified. The scope of Clipper is significantly broader than any previoussurveillance strategy. The Clipper Chip will be installed directly intotelecommunications devices such as telephones, computers, and digital set-top boxes for interactive TV. Since the system can be used to encrypt anycommunications that pass across telecommunications lines (including text,sound and images), ANY AND ALL communication that passes through yoursystem has the possibility of being intercepted. In addition, the administration's Information Infrastructure Task ForceWorking Group on Privacy is attempting to "front load" the NII withtrapdoor technologies that would allow security agencies easy access todigitial conversations, including capturing electronic communicationsmidstream. No communication system would be exempt from this effort, fromthe national telephone network to your local office computer network. Of course, the administration claims that these trapdoors will be used onlyto catch criminals and that your privacy will be protected. But, as JohnPerry Barlow has put it, "trusting the government with your privacy is liketrusting a Peeping Tom to install your window blinds." These government inititatives, taken together, constitute one of the mostgrievous threats to our constitutional liberties in modern times. Thesecurity agencies and the administration are involved in a stealth strikeat our freedoms that could effectively abrogate the Bill of Rights incyberspace, where we and our descendants will be spending increasinglylarger parts of lives. The Clipper initiative and the plans to require "back doors" throughout theNII immediate critical assessment. WIRED encourages you to seriouslyconsider how these proposals might affect you. To help inform yourdecision, WIRED Online has set up a Clipper information archive through ourInfobot mail server, Internet Gopher, World Wide Web, and other onlinesites. The WIRED Online Clipper Archive features crucial essays written for WIREDby John Perry Barlow and Brock N. Meeks. If you do nothing else, read thesestories. You can have them sent to you immediately by electronic mail bycopying the following three lines into the body of an electronic mailmessage addressed to infobot@wired.com: send clipper/privacy.meeks send clipper/privacy.barlow end The WIRED Online Clipper Archive also includes re-posted comments fromJerry Berman (of the Electronic Frontier Foundation (EFF)) and DorothyDenning (encryption expert and Clipper proponent), a copy of the EFF's_EFFector Online_ newsletter documenting the Clipper controversy, and anelectronic anti-Clipper petition circulated by the Computer Professionalsfor Social Responsibility (CPSR). We have also set up links to othervaluable sources of information on Clipper, including those maintained bythe EFF and CPSR. You can access our archive via the following WIRED Online services: o WIRED Infobot e-mail server send e-mail to infobot@wired.com, containing the words "send clipper/index" on a single line inside the message body o WIRED Gopher gopher to gopher.wired.com select "Clipper Archive" o WIRED on World Wide Web http://www.wired.com select "Clipper Archive" o WIRED on America Online keyword: WIRED o WIRED on the WELL type "go wired" from any "OK" prompt type "clipper" to access the menu WIRED Online encourages you to take the time to familiarize yourself withthese issues, beginning with the tools and access we've provided. Then takethe next step -- ACT!!! Sign the CPSR petition against Clipper. Call orwrite your Congressional representatives and let them know how you feelabout the Clipper and NII "backdoor" initiatives, BEFORE a decision is madefor you that will have a profound effect on the future of your freedom andprivacy. Please do not reply to this message directly. To discuss these issues withWIRED readers and staff members, please use discussion areas on the WELL,America Online, and USENET (alt.wired). If you have questions or commentsabout Clipper that are not answered in the online archives or thesediscussion spaces, please address them to online@wired.com and be sure toinclude the word "clipper" in the subject line. If you would like to receive future WIRED-related bulletins, you cansubscribe to our new Hotwired mailing list. To do so, just send an e-mailmessage to infobot@wired.com containing the line subscribe hotwired This low-volume moderated list is a great way to keep abreast of importantissues on the Digital Frontier and to find out about new services offeredhere at WIRED Online. Thanks for your attention. -- The staff of WIRED Online =-=-=-=-=-=-=-=-=-=-=-=WIRED Online Copyright Notice=-=-=-=-=-=-=-=-=-=-=-= Copyright 1993,4 Wired USA Ltd. All rights reserved. This article may be redistributed provided that the article and this notice remain intact. This article may not under any circumstances be resold or redistributed for compensation of any kind without prior written permission from Wired Ventures, Ltd. If you have any questions about these terms, or would like information about licensing materials from WIRED Online, please contact us via telephone (+1 (415) 904 0660) or e-mail (info@wired.com). WIRED and WIRED Online are trademarks of Wired Ventures, Ltd. =-=-=-=-=-=-=-=-=-=-=-=-=-=-=-=-=-=-=-=-=-=-=-=-=-=-=-=-=-=-=-=-=-=-=-=-=-= ------------------ RFC822 Header Follows ------------------Received: by qm.wired.com with SMTP;16 Feb 1994 20:30:01 -0800Received: from petersburg.wired.com by gw.wired.com (5.67/wps.com-hackery) id AA09927; Wed, 16 Feb 94 20:10:24 -0800Message-Id: <9402170410.AA09927@wired.com>Mime-Version: 1.0Content-Type: text/plain; charset="us-ascii"Date: Wed, 16 Feb 1994 20:12:20 -0800To: hotWIRED Subscribers <hotwired@wired.com>From: WIRED Online <online@wired.com>Subject: Electronic Privacy -- A Call to Action WT02-B12-92IA087-000631-B021-160http://res2.resnet.upenn.edu:80/cis590/reading.122.html 130.91.195.242 19970122064641 text/html 3645HTTP/1.0 200 OKDate: Wed, 22 Jan 1997 06:46:43 GMTServer: Apache/1.1.1Content-type: text/htmlContent-length: 3474Last-modified: Tue, 22 Nov 1994 06:32:45 GMTno subject EFF WANTS YOU - TO CALL FOR SENATE HEARINGS ON CLIPPER! *** Distribute Widely *** Feb. 15, 1994 Dear Friends on the Electronic Frontier, Thank you for your efforts in fighting the government's ill-consideredClipper proposal. We have already delivered over 2250 messages supportingH.R. 3627 to Rep. Cantwell, and your messages have continued to flood in.We'd now like to ask you to help us call for Congressional hearings onClipper by writing to Senator Patrick Leahy c/o leahy@eff.org. As we have previously reported, the Clinton Administration has announcedthat it plans to proceed on every front to make the Clipper Chipencryption scheme a national standard and to discourage the developmentand sale of alternative powerful encryption technologies. If thegovernment succeeds in this effort, the resulting blow to individualfreedom and privacy could be immeasurable. So far, the government has resisted requests that it explain its policy.When the Presidential Decision Directive calling for Clipper deploymentfirst appeared last spring, the Administration promised a report thatre-evaluated cryptography and privacy policy in light of technologicalchanges, the coming of the National Information Infrastructure, and theend of the Cold War. The Administration also made a commitment tomeaningful public dialog before taking any major action on escrowdeployment or new legislation. Yet in spite of the efforts of EFF, CPSR, ACLU, and other groups toprovide extensive input to the Administration, the promised policy reportnever arrived, and the Administration has now said there will be no reportafter all. This failure of public accountability makes Congressionalhearings an absolute necessity. There are individuals in Congress willing to look into the Clipperproposal and related policies--if they hear from you. Senator PatrickLeahy (D-Vermont), who chairs one of the key committees responsible forthese issues, has asked for comments and concerns about the viability ofthe Clipper initiative. Here's where we need your help. *Please write Senator Leahy at leahy@eff.org and ask that the Senate hold hearings about Clipper.* Senate hearings maybe the only means of ensuring public feedback about Clipper, and, just asimportant, they may be the only means of forcing the Administration toexplain its Clipper policy. Please express your concerns about the UnitedStates' Clipper policy and cryptographic policy in general. Your lettersin support of hearings will be printed out and delivered to the senator. And if you haven't written Rep. Maria Cantwell to show your support forH.R. 3627, her bill to relax export restrictions on encryption technology,now's the time to do so. Just send e-mail to cantwell@eff.org and put "I support H.R. 3627" in your Subject header. Letters in supportof the bill will be printed out and delivered to Rep. Cantwell. Our fight to keep national encryption policy out in the open--and tocontinue allowing individuals to use encryption to ensure their ownprivacy--has only just begun. In the coming weeks and months, we will beworking to give you more ways to make your voice heard on these vitalpublic issues. Sincerely, Jerry BermanExecutive DirectorElectronic Frontier Foundation See ftp://ftp.eff.org/pub/EFF/Policy/Clipper/ for more information on theClipper/Skipjack key escrow scheme. WT02-B12-93IA087-000631-B021-207http://res2.resnet.upenn.edu:80/cis590/reading.123.html 130.91.195.242 19970122064720 text/html 14905HTTP/1.0 200 OKDate: Wed, 22 Jan 1997 06:47:22 GMTServer: Apache/1.1.1Content-type: text/htmlContent-length: 14733Last-modified: Tue, 22 Nov 1994 06:32:45 GMTJust to keep people up to date... Blacknet, the official word From: tcmay@netcom.com (Timothy C. May)Subject: Re: Blacknet worriesTo: cypherpunks@toad.comDate: Sun, 20 Feb 1994 12:33:12 -0800 (PST)Cc: tcmay@netcom.com (Timothy C. May) Hal Finney makes some comments about the dangers (I call them benefits) ofsystems like "BlackNet," the hypothetical-but-inevitable entity I describedlast fall. These dangers/benefits have been apparent to me since around 1988or so and are the main motivator of my interest in "crypto-anarchy," the setof ideas that I espouse. (I don't often dwell on them on this list, partly because I already have inthe past, and in the "Crypto-Anarchist Manifesto" and other rants at thesoda.berkeley.edu archive site, and partly because the Cypherpunks list issomewhat apolitical...apolitical in the sense that we have libertarians,anarcho-syndicalists, anarcho-capitalists, Neo-Pagans, ChristianFundamentalists, and maybe even a few unreconstructed Communists on theList, and espousing some particular set of beliefs is discouraged by commonagreement.) However, since Hal has raised some issues, and the general issues of datahavens, anonymous information markets, espionage, and other "illegal"markets have been raised, I'll comment. Besides, volume on the List has beenawfully light the past few days. Maybe it's my mail delivery system slowingdown, maybe it's the Olymics (I say put Tonya up on the gold medalist'splatform, put the gold medal around her neck, then the noose, then kick theplatform out from under her), or maybe it's the natural exhaustion of thelast set of hot topics. First, a legal caveat. I openly acknowledge having written the BlackNetpiece--proof is obvious. But I did *not* post it to Cypherpunks, nor to anyother mailing lists and certainly not to Usenet. Rather, I dashed it off onenight prior to a nanotechnology discussion in Palo Alto, as a concreteexample of the coming future and how difficult it will be to "bottle up" newtechnologies (a point Hal alludes to). I sent this note off to several of myassociates, via anonymous remailers, so as to make the point in a moretangible way. I also printed out copies and passed them out at the nanotechmeeting, which was around last September or so. Someone decided to post this (through a remailer) to the Cypherpunks list.Kevin Kelly and John Markoff told me they've seen it on numerous other listsand boards, and of course Detweiler has recently posted it to dozens ofnewsgroups (though it got cancelled and only the "echoes" remain in mostplaces...a few folks forwarded copies to ohter sites, with comments, so theywere not affected by the cancellation message). My legal protection, my point here, is that I did not post the BlackNetpiece, it does not exist as an actual espionage or data haven entity, and mypoint was rhetorical and is clearly protected by the First Amendment (to theConstitution of the country in which I nominally reside). On to Hal Finney's points:> Tim's Blacknet story has gotten a lot of reaction after Detweiler's> random posting escapade last week. I think it is a good essay, but there> is one point I don't think was stressed enough.> > > BlackNet is currently building its information inventory. We are interested> > in information in the following areas, though any other juicy stuff is> > always welcome. "If you think it's valuable, offer it to us first."> > > > - trade secrets, processes, production methods (esp. in semiconductors)> > - nanotechnology and related techniques (esp. the Merkle sleeve bearing)...> The glaring omision, mentioned only in passing, is military intelligence. Yes, military intelligence will become much more "fungible" in the future Ienvision. It already is, of course, a la the Walkers, but computer-mediatedmarkets and secure encryption will make it so much more efficient andliquid. Buyers will be able to advertise their wants and their prices. Dittofor sellers. Of course, decoys, disinformation, and the like come to thefore. To pick a trivial example, someone sits above a busy port and watches shipmovements from the privacy of his apartment. He summarizes these, then sellsthem for a paltry-but-comfortable $3000 a month to some other nation. (Theease of doing this means others will get into the market. Prices will likelydrop. Hard to predict the final prices...the beauty of free markets.) > A friend at work tells me that in the Manhattan project, presumably one> of the most secret projects ever attempted, the Soviet Union had no Yes, Hal's point is valid. William Gibson, so reviled in some cyberpunkquarters (it's tres chic to bash him) anticipated this some years back in"Count Zero," in which the scientists of a company are held isolated on amesa in New Mexico--recall the rescue/escape by ultralight aircraft off themesa? The motivation for thinking about BlackNet, which is what I dubbed thiscapability in late 1987, was a discussion with the late Phil Salin that yearabout his as-yet-unfunded company, "AMIX," the American InformationExchange. I played the Devil's Advocate and explained why I thoughtcorporate America--his main target for customers--would shun such a system.My thinking? - corporations would not allow employees to have corporate accounts, as itwould make leakage of corporate information too easy (Example: "We will pay $100,000 for anyone who knows how to solve the chargebuildup problem during ion implant of n-type wafers." Many corporationsspend millions to solve this, others never did. A "market" for suchsimple-to-answer items would revolutionize the semiconductor industry--butwould also destroy the competitive advantage obtained by those who firstsolved the problems. Another example, from earlier on, is the alpha particleproblem plaguing memory chips. I figured out the problem and the solution in1977, at Intel, and then Intel kept it a deep secret for the next year,allowing its competitors to wallow in their soft error problems for thatentire year. When I was eventually allowed to publish--a decision made forvarious reasons--the competitors raced for the telephones even before I'dfinished presenting my paper! Imagine how much I could've sold my"expertise" for in the preceding year--or even after. Of course, Intelcould have deduced who was selling what, by various intelligence-counterintelligence ploys familiar to most of you (canary traps, barium,tagged info). But the point is still clear: an information market systemlike AMIX means "digital moonlighting," a system corporations will notlightly put up with. If information markets spread, even "legit" ones like AMIX (not featuringanonymity), I expect many corporations to make non-participation in suchmarkets a basis for continuing employment. (The details of this, the legalissues, I'll leave for later discussions.) > Keeping business secrets and manufacturing techniques secret is one thing.> But, from the point of view of the government, the world of Blacknet could> be an utter disaster for the protection of military secrets. Despite its> consumption of a large fraction of our society's resources, government jobs> tend not to be high paying, especially compared to jobs with comparable> degrees of responsibility in civilian life. The temptation to sell secrets> for cash has got to be present for almost everyone. But it is balanced against> the immense practical problems involved: making contacts, arranging> deliveries, being caught in a "sting" operation. Yes, which is why I always used to use "B-2 Stealth Bomber blueprints forsale" as my canonical example of a BlackNet ad. Hundreds of folks atNorthrup had access to various levels of B-2 secrets. The "problem" for themwas that military intelligence (Defense Intelligence Agency, Office of NavalIntelligence, CIA, NDA, etc.) was watching them (and they knew this) andmonitoring the local bars and after-work hangouts. Read "The Falcon and theSnowman," or rent the movie, for some details on this. Anonymous markets completely change the equation! (By the way, many other "tradecraft" aspects of espionage are similarlychanged forever....and probably already have been changed. Gone will be themessages left in Coke cans by the side of the road, the so-called "deaddrops" so favored by spies for communicating microfilm, microdots, and codedmessages. What I call "digital dead drops" already allow nearly untraceable,unrestricted communication. After all, if I can use a remailer to reach St.Petersburg.... Or if I can place message bits in the LSB of a image and thenplace this on Usenet for world-wide distribution..... (I described this inmy first message on using LSBs of audio and picture files in 1988, insci.crypt). The world has already changed for the spy. And Mafia guys on therun are using CompuServe to communicate with their wives...the Feds can'ttap these ever-changing systems....a likely motivation for currentClipper/Capstone/Tessera/Digital Telephony schemes.) > Blacknet could remove most of this risk. With near-perfect anonymity> and digital cash, a tidy side income could be created for anyone with access> to classified information. There would be no need for risky physical meetings.> The money could be spent on a few nice extras to make life more comfortable,> without fear of it being traced. Yep! That's the beauty of it all. "Classified classifieds," so to speak. "NoMore Secrets." At least, no more secrets that you don't keep yourself! (Asubtle point: crypto-anarchy doesn't mean a "no secrets" society; it means asociety in which individuals must protect their own secrets and not count ongovernments or corporations to do it for them. It also means "publicsecrets," like troop movements and Stealth production plans, or the tricksof implaniting wafers, will not remain secret for long.) > How many people would succumb to such temptation? People do undergo security> checks, and presumably those who pass are mostly honest. But they are human,> and money is a powerful motivator. Especially if the person figures that if> he doesn't sell the info someone else will, the temptation will be all the> stronger. Yes. All of this is true. > There are possible countermeasures: frequent lie-detector tests (as in Snow> Crash); "fingerprinting" documents so everybody has a slightly different> copy, allowing sting operations to identify the culprits; perhaps even> swamping the legitimate offers of cash with bogus ones (a denial-of-service> attack, in effect). But none of these are really likely to solve the> problem. We went around several times on the Extropians list (which I am no longeron, by the way--for unrelated reasons), especially with regard to what mostfolks consider an even more disturbing use of BlackNet-type services: liquidmarkets for killings and extortion. Pun intended. Buyers and sellers of"hits" can get in contact anonymously, place money (digicash) in escrow with"reputable escrow services" ("Ace's Anonymous Escrow--You slay 'em, we pay'em"), and the usual methods of stopping such hits fail. (The Mob rarely is stopped, as they use their own hitters, usually broughtif from distant cities for just the one job. And reputations are paramount.Amateurs usually are caught because they get in contact with potentialhitters by "asking around" in bars and the like...and somebody calls thecops and the FBI then stings 'em. Anonymous markets, digital cash, escrowservices, and reputation services all change the equation dramatically. Ifthe hit is made, the money get transferred. If the hit is not made, no moneyis transferred. In any case, the purchaser of the hit is fairly safe.Implication of the purchaser can still happen, but by means other than theusual approach of setting up a sting.) > This is probably the issue which has the government really scared, the> issue which turned Barlow's government friends against free encryption, as> he describes in his Wired article ("if you knew what I know, you'd oppose> it too"). The NSA in particular has for a long time been wildly paranoid Yes, if I could think all this stuff up in 1987-8, so can a lot of others.It was clear to me, at the Crypo Conference in 1988, that David Chaum hadthought of these uses and was deliberately navigating around them in hisscenarios for digicash. He just raised his eyebrows and nodded when Idiscussed a few of the less fearsome applications. > its own secrets than discovering others'. I could see any technology which> would facilitate sellouts by their people to be considered a mortal threat,> something to be fought by any means. And I imagine that the rest of the> military intelligence community would feel the same way. To the governments of the world, facing these and other threats to theircontinued ways of doing business (notice that I didn't say "to theircontinued existence"), the existence of strong encryption in the hands ofthe population is indeed a mortal threat. They'll cite the "unpopular" uses: kiddie porn nets, espionage, selling oftrade secrets (especially to "foreigners"), the bootlegging of copyrightedmaterial, "digital fences" for stolen information, liquid markets inliquidations, and on and on. They won't mention a basic principle of westerncivilization: that just because _some_ people mis-use a technology that isno reason to bar others. Just because some people mis-use camcorders to film naked children is noreason to ban cameras, camcorders, and VCRs. Just because some folks mis-usefree speech is no reason to ban free speech. And just because some willmis-use encryption--in the eyes of government--is not a good reason to banencryption. In any case, it's too late. The genie's nearly completely out of the bottle.National borders are just speed bumps on the information highway. The things I've had in my .sig for the past couple of years are coming. Timothy C. May | Crypto Anarchy: encryption, digital money, tcmay@netcom.com | anonymous networks, digital pseudonyms, zero408-688-5409 | knowledge, reputations, information markets, W.A.S.T.E.: Aptos, CA | black markets, collapse of governments.Higher Power: 2^859433 | Public Key: PGP and MailSafe available."National borders are just speed bumps on the information superhighway." WT02-B12-94IA087-000631-B021-247http://res2.resnet.upenn.edu:80/cis590/reading.124.html 130.91.195.242 19970122064737 text/html 11354HTTP/1.0 200 OKDate: Wed, 22 Jan 1997 06:47:37 GMTServer: Apache/1.1.1Content-type: text/htmlContent-length: 11182Last-modified: Tue, 22 Nov 1994 06:32:47 GMTLadder DES (fwd) From: ritter@cactus.org (Terry Ritter)Message-Id: <9402220836.AA26111@cactus.org>Subject: Ladder DESTo: cypherpunks@toad.comDate: Tue, 22 Feb 1994 02:36:33 -0600 (CST)X-Mailer: ELM [version 2.4 PL22]Content-Type: textContent-Length: 10805Sender: owner-cypherpunks@toad.comPrecedence: bulk Ritter Software Engineering 2609 Choctaw Trail Austin, Texas 78745 (512) 892-0494, ritter@cactus.org Ladder-DES: A Proposed Candidate to Replace DES Terry Ritter February 22, 1994 Introduction Data enciphered by DES, the US Data Encryption Standard, has become vulnerable to modern technical attacks. Currently, such attacks require substantial capital and high-tech engineering development to produce a special "DES breaking" machine. However, once such a machine is built, attacks would become relatively fast and cheap. Businesses which currently protect very expensive and marketable secrets with DES should take immediate notice. To maintain earlier levels of security, DES must be replaced with a stronger cipher. The one obvious alternative to DES is a simple construct built from DES called triple-DES. Triple-DES, while generally being thought of as "strong enough," also carries the baggage of requiring three times the processing of normal DES. Because every security system is required to provide more benefit than its cost, raising costs by a factor of three (when compared to the alternative of normal DES) is a significant issue. Such costs could dangerously delay the retirement of ordinary DES. Requirements The goal of this sequence of designs is to identify one or more better candidates to replace DES. Obviously, the first requirement is that each candidate be substantially "stronger" than normal DES. One problem here is that we can only _argue_ strength, so it is important that candidate designs be openly presented and reviewed. We cannot expect that most proposals will withstand such review. The second requirement is that each candidate design also be faster than triple-DES; otherwise, we might just as well use triple-DES and be done with it. Speed is a measurable design quantity. My third requirement is to include operation on data blocks larger than the 8-byte DES block. Although DES is not normally used in a way which is conducive to "dictionary" attack, such attacks could be effective on the bare cipher itself. This raises the possibility that a "certificational" weakness may exist which we currently do not know how to exploit, but which may be dangerous anyway. This particular weakness depends upon small blocks. At this point there is still some question as to whether it is _possible_ to come up with candidate designs which meet these three requirements. Ladder Diagrams DES itself is frequently shown in figures which are described as "ladder diagrams" because of their appearance: | v Initial Permutation v <-- SPLIT --> | | | k1 | v v | XOR <-- f -----| | | | k2 | | v v |----- f --> XOR | | . . . | k16 | | v v |----- f --> XOR | | | | --> COLLECT <-- v Inv. Init. Perm. | v This is the data-transformation part of DES. Not shown is the key-schedule computation which produces k1 through k16, the 48-bit "round" keys. Also not shown is the construction of function "f." It will later be interesting to note that in DES each 32-bit data rail value is expanded to 48 bits, the XOR occurs with a 48-bit key, and the result contracted to 32 bits in 6-bit to 4-bit substitutions known as "S-boxes." Ladder-DES Consider this simple construct which looks something like two rungs or steps on a ladder: A B | k1 | v v | XOR <- DES1 ----| | | | k2 | | v v |---- DES2 -> XOR | | v v C D A, B, C and D represent 8-byte blocks; k1 and k2 represent 56-bit DES keys. This enciphers two DES data blocks in two DES operations; this is a data rate similar to normal DES. It can be described as working on a single large block composed of A and B. Note that the data paths are twice the size of those used in DES itself. Also note that the design is asymmetric: While ciphertext block C is a function of every bit in plaintext blocks A and B, as well as every bit in key k1, ciphertext block D is _also_ a function of key k2. Known-Plaintext Attack on Two-Rung Ladder-DES With known-plaintext, we essentially have a single-DES complexity: Since A is known and C is known, the output of DES1 is known. Since the input to DES1 is also known, to find k1 we just do a normal DES search. Alternately, since B is known and D is known, the output of DES2 is known. Since the input to DES2 is also known, to find k2 we just do a normal DES search. Total complexity: twice DES; thus, hardly worth using. Four-Rung Ladder-DES Now consider a similar construct, twice as long: A B | k1 | v v | XOR <- DES1-----| | | | k2 | | v v |---- DES2 -> XOR | | | k3 | v v | XOR <- DES3 ----| | | | k4 | | v v |---- DES4 -> XOR | | v v C D A and B are 64-bit DES blocks; k1 through k4 are 56-bit DES keys. A total of four DES operations process two DES blocks at double-DES rates. We would expect this to be both stronger than normal DES and faster than triple-DES. In general, the left-leg of a ladder-DES structure is affected by one fewer key than the right-leg. Belief Can we "believe" in this basic structure? Well, DES itself is based on it. But we do need to remember that DES also includes seriously nonlinear data expansions and contractions around each XOR. Certainly expansion and contraction could be added to ladder- DES, although this could be expensive. (To avoid specifying particular S-box contents, we could specify a cryptographic RNG which would be used to permute a base S-box arrangement; this should also avoid normal differential attacks.) It is not clear that the lack of expansion and contraction operations necessarily negates the overall approach. Key Reduction The four-rung ladder-DES construct uses four 56-bit DES keys, but certainly a cipher would be strong enough if it had "only" a real two-key (112-bit) keyspace. Thus, we might consider making k3 = k1, and k4 = k2, or perhaps, k3 = k1 and k4 = k1 XOR k2. On the other hand, perhaps it would be worthwhile to support additional keys simply to avoid the necessity of showing that a reduced key approach could never reduce strength. Known-Plaintext Attack on Four-Rung Ladder-DES No longer do we have the advantage of knowing both the input to and the output from XOR operations, so we can no longer gain access to the output of particular DES operations. Thus, the obvious search strategy is not available. Divide-And-Conquer Attack on Four-Rung Ladder-DES Normally we try to separate the effects of the different DES operations, so we can "divide and conquer" each separately. In this case, DES4 is the obvious first choice, since with the keys k1..k3 fixed, only k4 affects the output, and then it only affects block D. However, unless we know the values of k1 and k2, we don't know the input to the bottom XOR, and so apparently cannot separate DES4 to work on it. Meet-In-The-Middle Attack on Four-Rung Ladder-DES With four keys involved, and no obvious "middle," it is not clear how this attack could be applied. 2x Four-Rung Ladder-DES The basic Ladder-DES construct can be expanded to cipher four blocks at once: A B C D | k1 | | k2 | v v | v v | XOR <- DES1 ----| XOR <- DES2 ----| | | | | | k3 | | k4 | | v v | v v |---- DES3 -> XOR |---- DES4 -> XOR | | | | v v v v E F G H Re-arrange Blocks H E F G | k5 | | k6 | v v | | v | XOR <- DES5 ----| XOR <- DES6 ----| | | | | | k7 | | k8 | | v v | v v |---- DES7 -> XOR |---- DES8 -> XOR | | | | v v v v I J K L This construct enciphers four DES data blocks in eight DES operations; again, this is a speed comparable to double-DES, and substantially faster than triple-DES. Ciphertext block I is now a function of every bit in plaintext blocks A, B, C, and D, as well as every bit in keys k1, k2, k4, and k5. Every bit in the 64-bit I is a complex function of 480 bits. We could certainly afford to reduce the number of keys in these constructs, and this might be done in any number of ways. For the 2x construct, for example: k2 := k1 XOR k3; k4 := k3 XOR k5; k6 := k5 XOR k7; k8 := k7 XOR k1; leaving us with a need for four keys: k1, k3, k5 and k7. It is also possible that the same two keys could be used in every two- rung ladder-DES section, for a total of two keys. Conclusion DES operations can be arranged into a "ladder-DES" constructs which are especially-clean and familiar and seem to resist known attacks. These constructs seem potentially stronger than normal DES and are demonstrably faster than triple-DES. Thus, ladder-DES could be a reasonable candidate to replace DES. WT02-B12-95IA087-000631-B021-290http://res2.resnet.upenn.edu:80/cis590/reading.125.html 130.91.195.242 19970122064801 text/html 5150HTTP/1.0 200 OKDate: Wed, 22 Jan 1997 06:47:57 GMTServer: Apache/1.1.1Content-type: text/htmlContent-length: 4979Last-modified: Tue, 22 Nov 1994 06:32:48 GMTAnother Brick in the Wall CyberWire Dispatch//Copyright (c) 1994 Jacking in from Another Brick in the Wall Port: Washington, DC -- The White House is being heavily lobbied by lawenforcement agencies and national intelligence agencies to make the use ofthe government designed Clipper Chip mandatory in telephones, fax machinesand cable systems, according to classified documents obtained by Dispatch. When the Administration announced on February 4th that it was endorsingthe controversial Clipper Chip program, it asserted that any use of thechip would be voluntary. But the White House carefully hedged its bet:Buried deep in the background briefing papers that accompanied theannouncement was the Administration's official policy that U.S. citizensweren't guaranteed any constitutional right to choose their own encryptiontechnologies. Government officials have brushed aside concerns from civil libertiesgroups and privacy advocates that sporadic adoption of Clipper wouldeventually spawn a mandatory use policy. To try and forestall that,however, the government has instituted a subtle coercion tactic: You can'tdo business with Uncle Sam unless your products are "clipper equipped,"according to National Institute for Standards and Technology AssistantDeputy Director Raymond Kammer. The Administration's desire for industry to sign-on as an early Clipper"team player" was so overwhelming that it bribed AT&T into agreeing topublicly support the idea, according to classified documents obtained byDispatch. On the same day last April when Clipper was first unveiled, AT&T publiclyproclaimed it would be installing the chip in its encryption products. Aclassified April 30, 1993 memo from the Assistant Secretary of Defensesays: "[T]he President has directed that the Attorney General request thatmanufacturers of communications hardware use the trapdoor chip, and atleast AT&T has been reported willing to do so (having been suitablyincentivised by promises of Government purchases)." The government says "incentivised" while prosecuting attorney's all overthe country say, "bribed." You make the call. Take Your Privacy and Shove It============================== That same memo says the Clipper proposal is a "complex set of issues [that]places the public's right to privacy in opposition to the public's desirefor safety." If "privacy prevails... criminals and spies... consequentlyprosper," the memo says. What's the answer to such freeflowing privacy? The memo says lawenforcement and national security agencies "propose that cryptography bemade available and required which contains a 'trapdoor' that would allowlaw enforcement and national security officials, under proper supervision,to decrypt enciphered communications." The operative word here is"required." Two Track Dialog================ While Clinton's policy wonks wring their hands over such issues asuniversal access to the National Information Infrastructure, lawenforcement and national security officials couldn't care less, frankly.The Working Group on Privacy for the Information Infrastructure Task Forcewas told in clean, cold language that the desire of law enforcement is to"front load" the NII with "intercept technologies." Under the guise of "doit now or we'll catch less bad guys." It's all black or white to these guys. Other classified Dept. of Defensedocuments chime on this debate: "This worthy goal (of building the NII) isindependent of arguments as to whether or not law enforcement and nationalsecurity officials will be able to read at will traffic passing along theinformation superhighway." This is not science fiction. The Clipper chip is like a cancer that haseaten into the fabric of all levels of government, including the military.Classified DoD documents state that a "full-scale public debate is neededto ascertain the wishes of U.S. citizens with regard to their privacy, andthe impact on public safety of preserving privacy at the expense ofwiretapping and communications intercept capabilities of law enforcementand national security personnel." In other words, they don't think you know what you want. To them, it's akind of tradeoff, a twisted sort of privacy auction. What do you bid?Your privacy for two drug lords, a former KGB spy and a pedophile. What'sthe price? Your government wants to know. Honest. The jury's still out, according to these classified documents: "It is notclear what the public will decide." But you can rest safely, the Pentagon does. Why? Again from a secretmemo: "In the meantime, DoD has trapdoor technology and the Government isproceeding with development of the processes needed to apply thattechnology in order to maintain the capability to perform licit interceptof communications in support of law enforcement and national security." Meeks out... WT02-B12-96IA087-000631-B021-323http://res2.resnet.upenn.edu:80/cis590/reading.126.html 130.91.195.242 19970122064821 text/html 5344HTTP/1.0 200 OKDate: Wed, 22 Jan 1997 06:48:23 GMTServer: Apache/1.1.1Content-type: text/htmlContent-length: 5173Last-modified: Tue, 22 Nov 1994 06:32:49 GMT Emotion vs. Reason in the Clipper "Debate" Date: Sun, 20 Feb 94 12:57 PSTFrom: lauren@vortex.com (Lauren Weinstein; PRIVACY Forum Moderator)Subject: Emotion vs. Reason in the Clipper "Debate" Greetings. The PRIVACY Forum submission box is piled high with Clipperrelated messages. I will not be distributing most of them. The level ofdiscourse demonstrated in some of the submissions I've received isshockingly low--replete with ad hominem attacks and emotionally potent butlogically deprived arguments. The "debate" over Clipper is threatening tobe pulled straight into the sewer. This is clearly not an encouragingdevelopment. The issues of Clipper and related topics are too important tobe dragged down to such a low level. Other activities regarding this debate are also of concern. As you mayknow, CPSR (Computer Professionals for Social Responsibility) has beensponsoring an e-mail anti-Clipper petition drive. EFF (Electronic FrontierFoundation) is sponsoring a similar e-mail based drive to pressure for U.S.Congressional hearings regarding Clipper. While many of the goals of both organizations are often laudable, I am notconvinced that such "petition" techniques are appropriate to thecircumstances at hand. The ease of sending e-mail means that it wouldprobably be possible to get 10's of 1000's of quickie "add my name to thelist" messages to such automated petition servers for virtually *any*topic. People don't have to understand, think about, or even have reallyheard about a subject, they just shoot an empty message off to an address andadd their userid to the list. Even if we assume that there isn't muchfraud from persons sending in multiple messages under differing names(certainly possible and simple on many systems) what does such quickieknee-jerk response mechanisms provide to enhance the debate? CPSR has been comparing the response to their current drive to the similareffort conducted against "Lotus Marketplace" sometime back. One could arguethat the techniques used to convince a private firm not to market aparticular niche information product (and of course, all the relatedinformation is still widely available!) is not necessarily applicable toarguing against a major cryptographic system with strong government backingand apparently not inconsiderable bipartisan support (at least outside of the"technical" community). CPSR has also recently been "promoting" a "BigBrother Inside" postscript picture that I feel serves little but to furthertrivialize this matter. Such "power by numbers" petitions remind me of the efforts (sometimessuccessful) of various pressure groups to force advertisers to drop supportof television programs with aspects that the particular group findsdistasteful, and of the practice of some radio talk show hosts to encouragetheir listeners to flood some entity with calls and/or letters opposing orsupporting particular views. In almost all of these cases, the key isn'treasoned debate, it's just names and numbers--to try blind them with shearvolume! That such techniques are sometimes successful, and that politicians andorganizations will often react to such pressure petition drives, should notbe an endorsement of such techniques being used. There is more at stakethan simply "winning" a particular argument--the general coarsening ofdebate on so many topics into a flurry of opinion polls, petition drives,emotional television images, and the briefest of soundbites, threatens tochange the nature of democracy in fundamental and negative ways. Clipper may not be the most important issue facing the world today. Butthere seems to be a trend toward treating this highly technical issue thesame way we tend to treat discussions of gun control, abortion, and criminalsentencing in the U.S.--that is, with a maximum of emotion and a minimum oflogic. I don't like Clipper. I think it's a bad idea. I have expressed thissentiment in the past in detail, so I won't go into the details again now.Almost a year ago in this forum, I suggested that interested persons on bothsides of the issue inform their representatives and the involved parties oftheir thoughts on the matter and to express their opinions in PRIVACY Forumas well. I had hoped that such communications would be thoughtful and richin meaningful arguments that would raise the level of discourse. I amdiscouraged to see the level of discussion now appearing from some messagesin the PRIVACY Forum submission inbox and in some other network listsand newsgroups. Please folks. I know it's easy to get wound up in these matters--allthe more so when it's so simple to just shoot off an e-mail messagein a matter of minutes. But unless we all try to take the high road inthese discussions, the importance of the issues are going to be drownedout in the shouting. Then, ultimately, we *all* lose, on bothsides of the debate. A sampling of the Clipper messages that I thought were most suitable forthis issue of the digest have been included below, along with othernon-Clipper items. --Lauren-- WT02-B12-97IA087-000631-B021-362http://res2.resnet.upenn.edu:80/cis590/reading.127.html 130.91.195.242 19970122064837 text/html 9331HTTP/1.0 200 OKDate: Wed, 22 Jan 1997 06:48:37 GMTServer: Apache/1.1.1Content-type: text/htmlContent-length: 9160Last-modified: Tue, 22 Nov 1994 06:32:50 GMT Re: Campaign and Petition Against Clipper from Dorothy Denning [I may have sent this before, excuse if I did ..djf] Date: Wed, 09 Feb 1994 17:23:28 -0500 (EST)From: denning@cs.georgetown.edu (Dorothy Denning)Subject: Re: Campaign and Petition Against Clipper CPSR has announced a petition campaign to oppose the Clipperinitiative. I would like to caution people about signing the petition.The issues are extremely complex and difficult. The Clipper initiativeis the result of considerable deliberation by many intelligent peoplewho appreciate and understand the concerns that have been expressed andwho worked hard to accommodate the conflicting interests. Thedecisions that have been made were not made lightly. I would like to respond to some of the statements that CPSR has madeabout Clipper in their campaign and petition letters: The Clipper proposal, developed in secret by the National Security Agency, is a technical standard that will make it easier for government agents to wiretap the emerging data highway. The standard (FIPS 185) is not a standard for the Internet or any otherhigh speed computer network. It is for the telephone system. Quotingfrom FIPS 185: "Data for purposes of this standard includes voice,facsimile and computer information communicated in a telephone system.A telephone system for purposes of this standard is limited to a systemwhich is circuit switched and operating at data rates of standardcommercial modems over analog voice circuits or which uses basic-rateISDN or a similar grade wireless service." The standard will not make it any easier to tap phones, let alonecomputer networks. All it will do is make it technically possible todecrypt communications that are encrypted with the standard, assumingthe communications are not superencrypted with something else. Lawenforcers still need to get a court order just to intercept thecommunications in the first place, and advances in technology have madeinterception itself more difficult. The standard will make it muchharder for anyone to conduct illegal taps, including the government. The purpose of the standard is to provide a very strong encryptionalgorithm - something much stronger than DES - and to do so in a waythat does not thwart law enforcement and national security objectives.Keys are escrowed so that if someone uses this technology, they cannotuse it against national interests. Industry groups, professional associations and civil liberties organizations have expressed almost unanimous opposition to the plan since it was first proposed in April 1993. "The public does not like Clipper and will not accept it ..." The private sector and the public have expressed nearly unanimous opposition to Clipper. As near as I know, neither CPSR nor any other group has conducted anysystematic poll of industry, professional societies, or the public.While many people have voiced opposition, there are many moreorganizations and people who have been silent on this issue. The ACMis in the process of conducting a study on encryption. CPSR is amember of the study group, as am I. Steve Kent is chair. Our goal isa report that will articulate the issues, not a public statement eitherfor or against. The International Association for Cryptologic Researchhas not to my knowledge made any official statement about Clipper. The Administration ignored the overwhelming opposition of the general public. When the Commerce Department solicited public comments on the proposal last fall, hundreds of people opposed the plan while only a few expressed support. Hundreds of people is hardly overwhelming in a population of 250million, especially when most of the letters were the same and came inthrough the net following a sample letter that was sent out. The technical standard is subject to misuse and compromise. It would provide government agents with copies of the keys that protect electronic communications. "It is a nightmare for computer security." I have been one of the reviewers of the standard. We have completedour review of the encryption algorithm, SKIPJACK, and concluded it wasvery strong. While we have not completed our review of the key escrowsystem, from what I have seen so far, I anticipate that it will providean extremely high level of security for the escrowed keys. The underlying technology was developed in secret by the NSA, an intelligence agency responsible for electronic eavesdropping, not privacy protection. Congressional investigations in the 1970s disclosed widespread NSA abuses, including the illegal interception of millions of cables sent by American citizens. NSA is also responsible for the development of cryptographic codes toprotect the nation's most sensitive classified information. They havean excellent track record in conducting this mission. I do not believethat our requirements for protecting private information are greaterthan those for protecting classified information. I do not know thefacts of the 1970s incident that is referred to here, but it soundslike it occurred before passage of the 1978 Foreign IntelligenceSurveillance Act. This act requires intelligence agencies to get acourt order in order to intercept communications of American citizens.I am not aware of any recent evidence that the NSA is engagingin illegal intercepts of Americans. Computer security experts question the integrity of the technology. Clipper was developed in secret and its specifications are classified. The 5 of us who reviewed the algorithm unanimously agreed that it wasvery strong. We will publish a final report when we complete or fullevaluation. Nothing can be concluded from a statement questioning thetechnology by someone who has not seen it regardless of whether thatperson is an expert in security. NSA overstepped its legal authority in developing the standard. A 1987 law explicitly limits the intelligence agency's power to set standards for the nation's communications network. The 1987 Computer Security Act states that NIST "shall draw on thetechnical advice and assistance (including work products) of theNational Security Agency." There is no evidence to support law enforcement's claims that new technologies are hampering criminal investigations. CPSR recently forced the release of FBI documents that show no such problems. CPSR obtained some documents from a few FBI field offices. Thoseoffices reported no problems. CPSR did not get reports from all fieldoffices and did not get reports from local law enforcement agencies. Ican tell you that it is a fact that new communications technologies,including encryption, have hampered criminal investigations. Ipersonally commend law enforcement for trying to get out in front ofthis problem. If the plan goes forward, commercial firms that hope to develop new products will face extensive government obstacles. Cryptographers who wish to develop new privacy enhancing technologies will be discouraged. The standard is voluntary -- even for the government. Mr. Rotenberg said "We want the public to understand the full implications of this plan. Today it is only a few experts and industry groups that understand the proposal. I support this objective. Unfortunately, it is not possible for mostof us to be fully informed of the national security implications ofuncontrolled encryption. For very legitimate reasons, these cannot befully discussed and debated in a public forum. It is even difficult totalk about the full implications of encryption on law enforcement.This is why it is important that the President and Vice-President befully informed on all the issues, and for the decisions to be made atthat level. The Feb. 4 decision was made following an inter-agencypolicy review, headed by the National Security Council, that examinedthese issues using considerable input from industry, CPSR, EFF, andindividuals as well as from law enforcement and intelligence agencies.In the absence of understanding the national security issues, I believewe need to exercise some caution in believing that we can understandthe full implications of encryption on society. As part of the Feb. 4 announcement, the Administration announcedthe establishment of an Interagency Working Group on Encryptionand Telecommunications, chaired by the White House Office ofScience and Technology Policy and National Security Council, withrepresentatives from Commerce, Justice, State, Treasury, FBI,NSA, OMB, and the National Economic Council. The group is towork with industry and public interest groups to develop newencryption technologies and to review and refine encryption policy.The NRC's Computer Science and Telecommunications Board will alsobe conducting a study of encryption policy. These comments may be distributed. Dorothy DenningGeorgetown University WT02-B12-98IA087-000631-B021-403http://res2.resnet.upenn.edu:80/cis590/reading.128.html 130.91.195.242 19970122064901 text/html 4732HTTP/1.0 200 OKDate: Wed, 22 Jan 1997 06:49:01 GMTServer: Apache/1.1.1Content-type: text/htmlContent-length: 4561Last-modified: Tue, 22 Nov 1994 06:32:51 GMTThe Clipper Chip Will Block Crime [ for ip] Date: Tue, 22 Feb 1994 17:22:55 -0500 (EST)From: denning@cs.cosc.georgetown.edu (Dorothy Denning) ======================================================================| Newsday, Tuesday, February 22, 1994, Viewpoints | ====================================================================== The Clipper Chip Will Block Crime By Dorothy E. Denning Hidden among the discussions of the information highway is a fiercedebate, with huge implications for everyone. It centers on a tinycomputer chip called the Clipper, which uses sophisticated coding toscramble electronic communications transmitted through the phonesystem. The Clinton administration has adopted the chip, which would allowlaw enforcement agencies with court warrants to read the Clipper codesand eavesdrop on terrorists and criminals. But opponents say that, ifthis happens, the privacy of law-abiding individuals will be a risk.They want people to be able to use their own scramblers, which thegovernment would not be able to decode. If the opponents get their way, however, all communications on theinformation highway would be immune from lawful interception. In aworld threatened by international organized crime, terrorism, and roguegovernments, this would be folly. In testimony before Congress, DonaldDelaney, senior investigator with the New York State Police, warnedthat if we adopted an encoding standard that did not permit lawfulintercepts, we would have havoc in the United States. Moreover, the Clipper coding offers safeguards against casualgovernment intrusion. It requires that one of the two components ofa key embedded in the chip be kept with the Treasury Department and theother component with the Commerce Department's National Institute ofStandards and Technology. Any law enforcement official wanting towiretap would need to obtain not only a warrant but the separatecomponents from the two agencies. This, plus the superstrong code andkey system would make it virtually impossible for anyone, even corruptgovernment officials, to spy illegally. But would terrorists use Clipper? The Justice Department hasordered $8 million worth of Clipper scramblers in the hope that theywill become so widespread and convenient that everyone will use them.Opponents say that terrorists will not be so foolish as to useencryption to which the government holds the key but will scrambletheir calls with their own code systems. But then who would havethought that the World Trade Center bombers would have been stupidenough to return a truck that they had rented? Court-authorized interception of communications has been essentialfor preventing and solving many serious and often violent crimes,including terrorism, organized crime, drugs, kidnaping, and politicalcorruption. The FBI alone has had many spectacular successes thatdepended on wiretaps. In a Chicago case code-named RUKBOM, theyprevented the El Rukn street gang, which was acting on behalf of theLibyan government, from shooting down a commercial airliner using astolen military weapons system. To protect against abuse of electronic surveillance, federalstatutes impose stringent requirements on the approval and executionof wiretaps. Wiretaps are used judiciously (only 846 installedwiretaps in 1992) and are targeted at major criminals. Now, the thought of the FBI wiretapping my communications appeals tome about as much as its searching my home and seizing my papers.But the Constitution does not give us absolute privacy fromcourt-ordered searches and seizures, and for good reason. Lawlessnesswould prevail. Encoding technologies, which offer privacy, are on a collisioncourse with a major crime-fighting tool: wiretapping. Now theClipper chip shows that strong encoding can be made available in a waythat protects private communications but does not harm society if itgets into the wrong hands. Clipper is a good idea, and it needssupport from people who recognize the need for both privacy andeffective law enforcement on the information highway. ======================================================================| Copyright Newsday. All rights reserved. This article can be freely || distributed on the net provided this note is kept intact, but it may || not be sold or used for profit without permission of Newsday. | ====================================================================== WT02-B12-99IA087-000631-B022-3http://res2.resnet.upenn.edu:80/cis590/reading.129.html 130.91.195.242 19970122064944 text/html 1909HTTP/1.0 200 OKDate: Wed, 22 Jan 1997 06:49:45 GMTServer: Apache/1.1.1Content-type: text/htmlContent-length: 1738Last-modified: Tue, 22 Nov 1994 06:32:52 GMTFBI Director on industrial espionage From: kadie@cs.uiuc.edu (Carl M Kadie) Quotes of FBI Director Louis Freeh from a Clarinet/Reuters story. Hewas speaking to the Executives' Club of Chicago on Thursday. "The threat is real." "A nation's power is increasingly measured by economicprosperity at home and competitiveness abroad. And in some ways, theUnited States is a sitting duck for countries and individuals who wantto take a short cut to power." "We had $1.5 trillion invested in research and development during the1980's alone. We also have an open society and a devotion to freemarket principles that can make it relatively easy to steal secretsand technology." [At least 20 nations are] "actively engaged in economic espionage." "This kind of information [cost and price structure, research anddevelopment results, marketing plans, bids and customer lists] can beintercepted from fax and satellite communications. It can be monitoredfrom cellular and microwave telephone links. It can be retrieved frominadequately protected computer systems." "Advanced telecommunications technology will make it impossible forthe FBI to carry out court-approved surveillance in life-and-deathcases." "The country will be unable to protect itself against terrorism,violent crime, foreign threats, drug trafficking, espionage,kidnapping and other grave crimes." "Development of technology is moving so rapidly that several hundredcourt-authorized surveillances already have been prevented by newtechnological impediments with advanced communications equipment." ========= --Carl Kadie -- I do not represent any organization; this is just me. = kadie@cs.uiuc.edu = WT02-B12-100IA087-000631-B022-36http://res2.resnet.upenn.edu:80/cis590/reading.130.html 130.91.195.242 19970122065000 text/html 13654HTTP/1.0 200 OKDate: Wed, 22 Jan 1997 06:50:01 GMTServer: Apache/1.1.1Content-type: text/htmlContent-length: 13482Last-modified: Tue, 22 Nov 1994 06:32:53 GMTCPSR Clipper Petition /rsp Posted-Date: Wed, 23 Feb 1994 11:34:54 -0500Organization: CPSR Washington OfficeX-Umcp-To: Dave FarberFrom: Marc Rotenberg <Marc_Rotenberg@washofc.cpsr.org>To: Dave Farber <farber@central.cis.upenn.edu>Date: Wed, 23 Feb 1994 10:48:25 ESTSubject: CPSR Clipper Petition /rsp CPSR Clipper Petition /rsp to DenningDave, Nice to see you in SF. I hear that you circulated Dorothy's comments on theCPSR Clipper petition to Interesting People. Howabout circulating the response? Thanks, Marc. Dorothy Denning has raised important questions about the Clipper proposal.As she says "the issues are extremely complex and difficult." Below I'vetried to answer the points she has raised. Please read her comments and myresponse. Speak with others interested in the Clipper proposal. If onbalance, after reviewing the arguments, you decide Clipper is a mistakethen you should express your opposition by sending a message to: CLIPPER.PETITION@CPSR.ORG with the words "I oppose Clipper" in the subject header. If you have already signed the petition, ask afriend or colleague to sign. Your help is needed. Marc Rotenberg, director, CPSR Washington office >> The Clipper proposal, developed in secret by the>> National Security Agency, is a technical standard>> that will make it easier for government agents to>> wiretap the emerging data highway. > The standard (FIPS 185) is not a standard for the> Internet or any other high speed computer network. It> is for the telephone system. The letter to the President makes clear that we are concerned about"Clipper and associated standards" which include the Capstone EESconfiguration for data transmission. It is clearly the intent of the EES proposal to cover both voice and datatransmissions. > The standard will not make it any easier to tap phones,> let alone computer networks. All it will do is make it> technically possible to decrypt communications that are> encrypted with the standard, assuming the communications> are not superencrypted with something else. This is a little bit like saying that leaving a master key for every houseon your block with the police will not make it easier for the police toopen locked doors. We may disagree about whether this is a good idea, but let's be clear aboutthe intent of the proposal. > The purpose of the standard is to provide a very strong> encryption algorithm - something much stronger than DES> - and to do so in a way that does not thwart law> enforcement and national security objectives. Keys are> escrowed so that if someone uses this technology, they> cannot use it against national interests. The NSA is responsible for foreign signal interception. It has no legalauthority to conduct wire surveillance. What are the NSA's "nationalsecurity" interests in domestic wire surveillance? >> Industry groups, professional associations and>> civil liberties organizations have expressed almost>> unanimous opposition to the plan since it was first>> proposed in April 1993. >> The private sector and the public have expressed>> nearly unanimous opposition to Clipper. > As near as I know, neither CPSR nor any other group has> conducted any systematic poll of industry, professional> societies, or the public. To the best of my knowledge, there has never been a proposed technicalstandard that generated more opposition. Firms across thetelecommunications and computer industry oppose Clipper. Computer securitypeople and cryptographers oppose Clipper. Privacy experts oppose Clipper. >> The Administration ignored the overwhelming>> opposition of the general public. When the Commerce>> Department solicited public comments on the>> proposal last fall, hundreds of people opposed the> plan while only a few expressed support. > Hundreds of people is hardly overwhelming in a> population of 250 million, especially when most of the> letters were the same and came in through the net> following a sample letter that was sent out. I would encourage Dorothy, or anyone else, to take a poll of anyrepresentative user group -- Interesting People perhaps -- if thereis any doubt about how the public feels about the proposal. >> The technical standard is subject to misuse and>> compromise. It would provide government agents with>> copies of the keys that protect electronic>> communications. "It is a nightmare for computer>> security." > I have been one of the reviewers of the standard. We> have completed our review of the encryption algorithm,> SKIPJACK, and concluded it was very strong. While we> have not completed our review of the key escrow system,> from what I have seen so far, I anticipate that it will> provide an extremely high level of security for the> escrowed keys. Dorothy endorsed the proposal before she joined the "review" team. Thegroup that she refers to, a White House task force, has an interestinghistory. The majority of cryptographers asked to participate declined. >> The underlying technology was developed in secret>> by the NSA, an intelligence agency responsible for>> electronic eavesdropping, not privacy protection.>> Congressional investigations in the 1970s disclosed>> widespread NSA abuses, including the illegal>> interception of millions of cables sent by American>> citizens. > NSA is also responsible for the development of> cryptographic codes to protect the nation's most> sensitive classified information. They have an> excellent track record in conducting this mission. Senator Frank Church, who conducted the most extensive hearings ever heldon the National Security Agency, said that the NSA's intelligence gatheringcapabilities were important for the security of the United States. He alsosaid that the massive eavesdropping capability created "A tremendouspotential for abuse." If ever turned against the communications system ofthe United States: no American would have any privacy left . . . there would be no place to hide. We must see to it that this agency and all agencies that possess this technology operate within the law and under proper supervision, so that we never cross over that abyss. That is an abyss from which there is no return. " (NBC Meet the Press, 1975) >> Computer security experts question the integrity of>> the technology. Clipper was developed in secret and>> its specifications are classified. > The 5 of us who reviewed the algorithm unanimously> agreed that it was very strong. We will publish a final> report when we complete or full evaluation. Nothing can> be concluded from a statement questioning the technology> by someone who has not seen it regardless of whether> that person is an expert in security. The original CPSR letter to the President, asking for the withdrawal ofClipper, was signed by Hellman, Rivest, Diffie, Merkle, and others. Manymore experts are adding their names daily to the CPSR petition. >> NSA overstepped its legal authority in developing>> the standard. A 1987 law explicitly limits the>> intelligence agency's power to set standards for>> the nation's communications network. > The 1987 Computer Security Act states that NIST "shall> draw on the technical advice and assistance (including> work products) of the National Security Agency." The original replacement for DES, proposed by the Department of Commerce in1989, would have had these characteristics: -- public, unclassified-- implementable in both hardware or software-- usable by federal Agencies and U.S. based multi-national corporation-- a level of security sufficient for the protection of unclassified, sensitive information and commercial propriety and/or valuableinformation. The final proposal, developed with the "technical assistance" of the NSA,has these characteristics. -- The Clipper algorithm Skipjack is classified-- Public access to the reasons underlying the proposal is restricted-- Skipjack can be implemented only in tamper-proof hardware-- It will not be used by multi-national corporations-- The security of the configuration remains unproven. The Computer Security Act was passed precisely because the NSA triedpreviously to grab civilian computer security turf. The law wasspecifically intended to control the type of abuse that results from secretstandard-setting arrangements. If there any doubt among Interesting People about the illegal activities ofthe NSA in the development of the EES, please consult the minutes of theNSA/NIST Technical Working Group (TWG) that produced the standard. Theminutes should be available from the National Security Agency PublicInformation Office. That phone number is 301/688-6524. >> There is no evidence to support law enforcement's>> claims that new technologies are hampering criminal>> investigations. CPSR recently forced the release of>> FBI documents that show no such problems. > CPSR obtained some documents from a few FBI field> offices. Those offices reported no problems. CPSR did> not get reports from all field offices and did not get> reports from local law enforcement agencies. I can tell> you that it is a fact that new communications> technologies, including encryption, have hampered> criminal investigations. The statement is illogical. There is still no evidence to support the FBI'sclaims. The FBI made certain claims that cryptography was impeding criminalinvestigation conducted by wiretap. CPSR investigated the FBI's claims byfiling a Freedom of Information Act suit to obtain the relevant documents.The documents provided to us by the Department of Justice revealed thatnone of the FBI field officers had encountered any obstacles. TheDepartment of Justice has just informed us that they provided to us allrelevant documents concerning the Clipper proposal. There is one reported case where cryptography made it difficult for lawenforcement to obtain evidence. That case concerned reading the contents ofa file on a hard disk after it was seized. If this is the problem that the Clipper proposal is intended to solve, thenthe key escrow scheme must be extended to every single encrypted file -- notjust encrypted communications -- everywhere in the world. Every encrypted file. Everywhere. >> If the plan goes forward, commercial firms that>> hope to develop new products will face extensive>> government obstacles. Cryptographers who wish to>> develop new privacy enhancing technologies will be>> discouraged. > The standard is voluntary -- even for the government. An FBI legislative proposal now under consideration at the White Housewould mandate a Clipper-like scheme. That proposal is backed by fines upto $10,000 per day and jail time. That's not voluntary. >> Mr. Rotenberg said "We want the public to>> understand the full implications of this plan.>> Today it is only a few experts and industry groups>> that understand the proposal. > I support this objective. Unfortunately, it is not> possible for most of us to be fully informed of the> national security implications of uncontrolled> encryption. For very legitimate reasons, these cannot> be fully discussed and debated in a public forum. This assertion has never been supported by evidence. It has been usedsimply to stifle criticism. > The Feb. 4 decision was made> following an inter-agency policy review, headed by the> National Security Council, that examined these issues> using considerable input from industry, CPSR, EFF, and> individuals as well as from law enforcement and> intell CPSR did not participate in the inter-agency policy review. Our positionfrom the very beginning is that these decisions must be made openly. > In the absence of understanding> the national security issues, I believe we need to> exercise some caution in believing that we can> understand the full implications of encryption on> society. This premise, if accepted, would mean that people in the United Stateswould have no right to express political views when the government claimed"national security." Certainly, there are matters of national security thatmust be protected, but when an agency with expertise in wire surveillancedevelops a secret standard for eavesdropping and tells those who raisequestions that there are matters of national security that they would notunderstand, there is good reason for concern. If you believe that Clipper is a mistake, please express your views bysending email with the words "I oppose Clipper" in the subject header toCLIPPER.PETITION@CPSR.ORG. WT02-B12-101IA087-000631-B022-80http://res2.resnet.upenn.edu:80/cis590/reading.131.html 130.91.195.242 19970122065038 text/html 20741HTTP/1.0 200 OKDate: Wed, 22 Jan 1997 06:50:37 GMTServer: Apache/1.1.1Content-type: text/htmlContent-length: 20569Last-modified: Tue, 22 Nov 1994 06:32:54 GMTMcCandlish responds to Denning (and White), re: Clipper (fwd) Forwarded message:>From mech Wed Feb 23 16:29:09 1994From: Stanton McCandlish <mech>Message-Id: <199402232129.QAA26181@eff.org>Subject: McCandlish responds to Denning (and White), re: ClipperTo: hwhite@ccs.neu.edu (Howard White)Date: Wed, 23 Feb 1994 16:29:07 -0500 (EST)Cc: denning@cs.cosc.georgetown.edu, denning@guvax.acc.georgetown.edu, mech@eff.orgIn-Reply-To: <199402182202.RAA28617@denali.ccs.neu.edu> from "Howard White"at Feb 18, 94 05:02:50 pmMIME-Version: 1.0Content-Type: text/plain; charset=US-ASCIIContent-Transfer-Encoding: 7bitContent-Length: 19010 > from Howard White> >> > Your responses to the Campaign and Petition Against Clipper document were> > good. Thank you for the attention to the topic. I'd like to ask one> > question of my own. Why has the EFF seeminglly taken such a strong stand> > against Clipper? [Denning replies:] > Thanks for your kind words. I don't know why really, but I speculate that> they just don't take seriously what the FBI and NSA say about law enforcement> and national security concerns. The EFF founders have been opposing these> parts of the government since their youth. EFF was originally started> to defend hackers against over-zealous law enforcers.>> Dorothy Hmm, well Howard, Dr. Denning, last I looked, is not an EFF spokesperson,so I wouldn't put too much weight on her comments about what EFF does anddoes not take seriously. Casting aspersions on people's allegedly wilder youths has norelevance to current policy matters. By such reasoning, Dr. Denningshould also be opposed to Clipper, since the head of the govt. pushingClipper admits to having smoked marijuana, and may have even dodged thedraft back in the hippie era. Also EFF was not founded as a hacker defense organization. It was foundedto protect, and help define, civil liberties in the realm of computers andtelecommunications. That some of these cases are cases of alleged systemcrackers is not surprising, but it hardly indicates that EFF is limitedto, or began as, "hacker defense". Such [lack of] logic is tatamount tosaying that the US welfare system is a Black support fund, because moreAfrican-Americans are using it that Anglos, Asians, or Hispanics. Avoiding such diversions, and getting back to the real issue here:for the record, EFF is indeed concerned with national security and lawenforcement, but does not see that Clipper will in any way serve legitimatelaw enforcement or national security needs. It was publicly known, right fromday one, that Clipper is tappable by LE and intelligence agencies, andthat the keys are held by govt. institutions. Criminals, spies andterrorists are highly unlikely to use Clipper or other Skipjack-based"products" like Capstone and Tessera. The "products" threaten theviability of US businesses, as do the current crypto export regulations;not to mention that the govt. is not in the business of being in business,and competing in a cryptography product marketplace - the govt. issupposed to be in the business of governing (protecting US citizens fromdepradations of those that would harm their person or property, andprotecting the US from foreign invasion.) The privacy risks involved with a scheme like the Clipper EES system faroutweigh the gains for (legitmate) law enforcement and intelligenceefforts, particulary given the following: * the "authorization" required to get Clipper keys is left entirely undefined* proof of this authorization will supposedly only be required to be *faxed*, leaving the entire escrow system wide open for abuse* the algorithm is classified, and thus is not open to the public scrutiny necessary to see if it is adequate security, even without key escrow* key escrow is, conceptually, no different from a requirement that police and spies have copies of all of your house and car keys, your computer passwords, and your safe combinations - key escrow is un-American and unconsitutional.* the NSA, in direct countervention of the spirit, if not the word, of legislation prohibiting it's involvement in domestic surveillance, has been the primary driving force behind Clipper from the outset.* the keys, as of the most recent White House briefings, are to be held by agencies that are closely related to the very law enforcement and intelligence bodies the split-key escrow system is supposed to protect users from* any security system with a security hole (like key escrow) is, by very definition, insecure. Relying upon an insecure system thought to be secure is often more dangerous that having little or no security (and being well aware of the fact, and able to plan accordingly)* referring to "key escrow" as "escrow" at all is misleading. A true escrow system would hold users keys *for the users*. The current Clipper plans would hold users keys *for police and intelligence agents*. The "key escrow" scheme is actually a key *surrender* scheme.* under current Dept. of Justice regulations for obtaining escrowed keys, there is no mechanism in place to ensure that the keys requested are relevant to the case at all, belong to the person the requesting agencies think they do, or are destroyed after the monitoring ceases. Furthermore, there is no way to enforce the cessation of monitoring after the legally "authorized" cut-off date, nor are any procedures in place for assuring that the unscrupulous do not begin building "collections" of keys, surrepetitiously. Even more disturbing, though, is that possession of the keys allows agents to decrypt *all* communications, even from years past, made with that key, regardless of whether or not the communications are relevant to the case at hand.* worse yet, the regulations conclude with a notice that basically says that *even if the key [and thus the evidence] is obtained by breaking every single rule of the procedure, illegally* that the evidence is still admissible in court. This attempts to get around all legal restriction regarding what is and is not proper evidence. Such a [lack of] regulation could easily subvert the entire judicial process, and make a mockery of the democracy this country was founded on. This system dangerously sets up a system of "rules" that can be broken with impunity, while still allowing the rulebreaker to "win the game." To be viable, the system would have to ensure that, like the rest of the evidence-gathering process, use of escrowed keys most be done properly for evidence to be admissable, and that agents and agencies that abuse the system are liable for their criminal behaviour.* because only privacy-careless law abiding citizens, and very stupid criminals, would use Clipper, Clipper appears to be designed with the monitoring of non-criminals in mind. The only way that Clipper would be of any use in catching the "terrorists, drug dealers, and child molesters" govt. spokespersons wave before the public like scarecrows [shades of "the Reds are coming, the Reds are coming!], would be if all non-key-escrow crypto is outlawed. The Administration, today, says it has no plans to ban non-EES cryptographic applications. However the Administration also promised a full report on the viability of Clipper, and instead simply announced it's intentions, despite clear majority opinion against Clipper, to proceed full steam ahead, with out the necessary legislative involvement; no report has yet been issued. Keep in mind also that the Clinton Administration is unlikely to last beyond the next 3 years. The Admin. that follows may very well decide to ban non-Clipper crypto. The Administration's assurances on this matter, then, are the farthest thing from comforting or sufficient. Logically, Clipper is either designed with the intent to rid the US of cryptography that the NSA cannot peek through, or it is designed for cloak-and-dagger monitoring of those who are not even criminals (perhaps those with unpopular religious or political views). There are simply no other reasonable explanations.* and, finally, wiretaps are not as useful to law enforcement as law enforcement would like people to believe. Only about 1000, often fewer, wiretaps are done each year in the US. Only a small fraction of them yield convictions. Certain agencies of the govt. would like to compromise the privacy, security, and civil liberties of the entire populace to preserve one of the least-used and least-effective investigative methods available to law enforcement. > Thanks for your answer. I've been reading books and articles about the EFF> for several years now and I've met Mitch Kapor through cyberspace so I> think my understanding of the EFF is well rounded and mature. My take on> the EFF is that the founders saw that law enforcement blundering around in> cyperspace using the current legal standards which were highly> inappropriate. The test cases have clearly shown that law enforcement has> made huge errors. The EFF has stated many times that theft and/or> distribution of passwords, credit card numbers, phone access codes, and the> like is clearly illegal. The EFF clearly wants illegal activities stopped.> But law enforcement practices that dictated total confiscation of computer> equipment that is only suppected of containing illegal information seems a> bit much. Besides, as the EFF has said, the legal costs of even proscuting> kids (hackers) for exploration and adventure is something most tax paying> citizens would blast is very waistful. If business and government can't> protect themselves against children playing around in the networks then> tough. The government does not take way a child's bike for a traffic> violation even though damage to property and lives are very much a reality.> The EFF, I think, is just trying to bring some sanity to the situation.>> Sorry about the ranting. I think that it is a GOOD THING that, in your> words, the "EFF was originally started to defend hackers against> OVER-ZEALOUS law enforcers." OVER-ZEALOUS is a BAD THING in absolute terms.> Clipper seems to me to be over-zealous, because it gives absolute power to> government law enforcement agencies. Even I can easily imagine each> government law enforcement agency forming independant super secret groups> that do nothing but snoop around the net examining and acting on any> information they see. Well said, Howard! Saved me a lot of typing! > Thanks very much for your time.>> Howard>> At 11:54 AM 2/18/94 -0500, Dorothy Denning wrote:> >I helped with the defense of one of the major cases in the beginning -> >Craig Neidorf. Later I went and interviewed some of the people in law> >enforcement who were working hacker cases. What I discovered was that> >whereas there were indeed a few cases that were mismanaged, the vast> >majority of the cases were handled extremely well in accordance with> >the deeds done. Unfortunately, that side of it never got out, so readers> >on the net never heard about anything other than the few bad cases. And> >even then, some of the "facts" presented were wrong.> >> >Dorothy Please quote us some of these '"facts"'. If you are talking about generalUsenet chatter, well, of course some facts are wrong. That's Usenet. Itappears to me, however, that you imply that EFF and similar organizationshave been actively disseminating misinformation. If that is indeed thegist, please defend this assertion. > I may have seen your name in some of the books and articles over the past> few years. Many of the errors that I'm speaking of were those in the late> eighties. Clifford Stolls story and the "Great Hacker Crackdown". It wasn't> just the errors of over-zealousness. Clifford Stoll's story had nothing to do with the EFF and related hackercases you are referring to, nor with Operation Sundevil. Stoll's bookdealt with the case of a German spy working for the KGB. Maybe it's timeyou did a re-read? > Getting law enforcement to pay> attention also was nearly impossible at times too. It still is. It seems as> if the government agencies have no foot soldiers and can only drop the bomb> when brought into potential computer crime cases. I don't think any of us will accept that as a valid excuse. If theproblem is manpower, perhaps they should hire more cops, or better yet,stop trying to prosecute people for consensual, victimless, andperpetrator-as-sole-victim crimes. If the problem is funding, seeprevious sentence. If the problem is ignorance of technical topics, thereare such things as books and classes. > And I don't blame the government. I blame the inherent anarchy of computers> and computing. Electronic computing by its very nature is uncontrollable.> Trying to control computing technologies is just like trying to control> people's minds or trying to control people's writings. Absolutely. > When you try to> control computing its only the unknowing who are hurt. The informed> computer community will know how to neutralize Clipper with other public> domain encryption standards like PGP and RIPEM. And maybe the public domain> stuff is not as tough as Clipper, none of this is really the point for me. The use of PD crypto, or any non-EES crypto, could easily be outlawed.This is NOT a valid assurance, no matter how much the Administration likesto pretend it is. > I've seen how misunderstanding computing technologies can be the ruin of> information structures and information systems. Computers are not well> understood yet. After ten years of implementation, personal computers are> just starting to be understood by institutions and organizations. It will> be twenty years more before the general public begins to have a feel for> what computers and computing can truly do. At the same time computing has> gone from the horse'n buggy to the jet plane by comparison. And tomorrow,> users will be flying at light speed in outer space by comparison. Dec's> Alpha chip and IBM/Apple/Motarola's PowerPC will put supercomputing speeds> on the desktop. The speed of light speed limit, which was supposed to have> kicked in by now, does not seem to be slowing chip engineers down in the> least. Every eighteen months chip cycle speeds double and chip prices go> down by half. Humankind will have access to practically unlimited computer> power early in the twenty-first century. Remember Television. How proud> are we of our low resolution video standard now. There is no need to rush> any encryption technology into place as a standard right now. That's a very rousing statement, and one I fully agree with. > Most computer users don't know how to truly use what computing power they> have now. And worse, Clipper seems to establish a process which trys to> limit some aspect of the unlimitable right now. As time goes on,> governments will make it a habit of putting limits in place and fewer> citizens will even notice those limits. Yes, and the worst danger is that limits placed on future technology don'tjust limit what we predict is coming; they limit all the new things wehaven't thought of yet, for generations, maybe forever. > And once again human kind world> wide will experience government inefficiency and bureaucracy without even> having to thinking about it. When will governments learn they can't limit> the mind, NOR CAN GOVERNMENTS LIMIT TOOLS OF THE MIND. Governments are only> successful when they educate their people about GOOD THINGS; i.e. unlimited> computing access. Our government seems to be showing off this encryption> standard as a politically timed event for some crime bill, rather than> focusing political energy on the huge education task at hand. Here I'll have to differ with you: govt. that is truly efficient isdangerous. Witness Hitler's regime. Don't confuse interference withinefficiency. A non-interfering govt. that is inefficient is desirable.Personally I don't think any govt. is effective or successful ateducation, only at propagandizing in the name of education. The functionof govt. is to physically protect (and, if you are not a fan ofunregulated free markets, to ensure competition, prevent monopoly, and afew other such functions.) Private education is almost universally moreeffective that govt.-run education. IMNERHO. > The Clipper chip would be almost a petty thing if it weren't for the way in> which the FBI and NSA seem to be involved behind the scenes. I'd probably> be content to sit and watch this whole thing blow over if it weren't for> the FBI and NSA's involvement. Those two organizations could, and probably> have started wars. The NSA is really scary. Everything I've ever read about> the NSA shows it to be completely structured around secrecy. The Secret> Service, the FBI, and the CIA have had plenty of light blasting through> their cobwebs and catacombs. The NSA is a polished black sphere of solid> granite by comparison. Throughout history organizations that form around> secrecy always spoil and rot from the inside out. The government will have> its Clipper protected secrets and everyone else's Clipper protected secrets> too. Something smells fishy to me. Hell! This stinks to high heaven...> Sorry, my nose kind of got out of control there. Yes, No Such Agency's involvement is what makes the scheme dangerous,because NSA has a lot of weight to throw around, and skeleton keys to thechambers of the highest (phrases like "national security" and "terroristthreat" tend to open plenty of metaphorical doors.) If Clipper had beencooked up entirely by Clinton and Gore, it would be a laugh, since as aproduct it is doomed. As an NSA-sponsored govt. standard, it is very mucha threat. > The Clipper chip standard could itself be a very GOOD THING. Solid data and> voice security for everyone. Designed, established and implemented by the> government for the good of the public. Promoted and sold to the tax paying> citizens of country by our elected leaders... That's how things should> work! Eh...I'd disagree, personally. Perhaps the Skipjack algorithm is secure(which I personally doubt very seriously), but the Clipper system is abust, and it is not the place of our govt. to be selling us products.That's what Viacrypt and PKP/RSADSI are for. I certainly don't feel likepaying AGAIN for something developed with my tax dollars. > But the process by which this encryption standard is being> implemented may continue on for hundreds of years. A process of a> government hastily volunteering a broad technology standard this early in> the computing age is probably not a wise thing. A process that involves> secret and semi-secret law enforcement agencies behind the scenes feels,> looks and smells like a very BAD THING.>> Howard White> PC Technology Coordinator> Northeastern University> Information Services> 360 Huntington Ave> 275 Richards Hall> Boston, MA 02115> Phone:840-3881 or Temp. 373-2206> FAX: 373-5121 Gotta agree with that. I think everyone at EFF agrees with that,regardless what one Clipper apologist or another has to say about the matter. --Stanton McCandlish * mech@eff.org * Electronic Frontier Found. OnlineActivistF O R M O R E I N F O, E - M A I L T O: I N F O @ E F F . O R GO P E N P L A T F O R M O N L I N E R I G H T SV I R T U A L C U L T U R E C R Y P T O --Stanton McCandlish * mech@eff.org * Electronic Frontier Found. OnlineActivistF O R M O R E I N F O, E - M A I L T O: I N F O @ E F F . O R GO P E N P L A T F O R M O N L I N E R I G H T SV I R T U A L C U L T U R E C R Y P T O WT02-B12-102IA087-000631-B022-129http://res2.resnet.upenn.edu:80/cis590/reading.132.html 130.91.195.242 19970122065108 text/html 19958HTTP/1.0 200 OKDate: Wed, 22 Jan 1997 06:51:07 GMTServer: Apache/1.1.1Content-type: text/htmlContent-length: 19786Last-modified: Tue, 22 Nov 1994 06:32:54 GMTNIST Fed. Info. Processing Standard for EES (Clipper/Skipjack) [From the NIST Computer Security Bulletin Board] FEDERAL INFORMATIONPROCESSING STANDARDS PUBLICATION 185 1994 February 9 U.S. DEPARTMENT OF COMMERCE/National Institute of Standards and Technology ESCROWED ENCRYPTION STANDARD CATEGORY: TELECOMMUNICATIONS SECURITY U.S. DEPARTMENT OF COMMERCE, Ronald H. Brown, SecretaryNATIONAL INSTITUTE OF STANDARDS AND TECHNOLOGY,Arati Prabhakar, Director Foreword The Federal Information Processing Standards Publication Series ofthe National Institute of Standards and Technology (NIST) is theofficial series of publications relating to standards andguidelines adopted and promulgated under the provisions of Section111(d) of the Federal Property and Administrative Services Act of1949 as amended by the Computer Security Act of 1987, Public Law100-235. These mandates have given the Secretary of Commerce andNIST important responsibilities for improving the utilization andmanagement of computer and related telecommunications systems inthe Federal Government. The NIST, through the Computer SystemsLaboratory, provides leadership, technical guidance, andcoordination of Government efforts in the development of standardsand guidelines in these areas. Comments concerning Federal Information Processing StandardsPublications are welcomed and should be addressed to the Director,Computer Systems Laboratory, National Institute of Standards andTechnology, Gaithersburg, MD 20899. James H. Burrows, DirectorComputer Systems Laboratory Abstract This standard specifies an encryption/decryption algorithm and aLaw Enforcement Access Field (LEAF) creation method which may beimplemented in electronic devices and used for protectinggovernment telecommunications when such protection is desired. Thealgorithm and the LEAF creation method are classified and arereferenced, but not specified, in the standard. Electronic devicesimplementing this standard may be designed into cryptographicmodules which are integrated into data security products andsystems for use in data security applications. The LEAF is used ina key escrow system that provides for decryption oftelecommunications when access to the telecommunications islawfully authorized. Key words: Cryptography, Federal Information Processing Standard,encryption, key escrow system, security. FIPS PUB 185 Federal InformationProcessing Standards Publication 185 1994 February 9 Announcing the Escrowed Encryption Standard (EES) Federal Information Processing Standards Publications (FIPS PUBS)are issued by the National Institute of Standards and Technology(NIST) after approval by the Secretary of Commerce pursuant toSection 111(d) of the Federal Property and Administrative ServicesAct of 1949 as amended by the Computer Security Act of 1987, PublicLaw 100-235. Name of Standard: Escrowed Encryption Standard (EES). Category of Standard: Telecommunications Security. Explanation: This Standard specifies use of a symmetric-keyencryption (and decryption) algorithm (SKIPJACK) and a LawEnforcement Access Field (LEAF) creation method (one part of a keyescrow system) which provides for decryption of encryptedtelecommunications when interception of the telecommunications islawfully authorized. Both the SKIPJACK algorithm and the LEAFcreation method are to be implemented in electronic devices (e.g.,very large scale integration chips). The devices may beincorporated in security equipment used to encrypt (and decrypt)sensitive unclassified telecommunications data. Decryption oflawfully intercepted telecommunications may be achieved through theacquisition and use of the LEAF, the decryption algorithm andthe two escrowed key components. One definition of "escrow" means that something (e.g., a document,an encryption key) is "delivered to a third person to be given tothe grantee only upon the fulfillment of a condition" (Webster'sSeventh New Collegiate Dictionary). The term, "escrow", forpurposes of this standard, is restricted to this dictionarydefinition. A key escrow system, for purposes of this standard, is one thatentrusts the two components comprising a cryptographic key (e.g.,a device unique key) to two key component holders (also called"escrow agents"). In accordance with the above definition of"escrow", the key component holders provide the components of a keyto a "grantee" (e.g., a law enforcement official) only uponfulfillment of the condition that the grantee has properlydemonstrated legal authorization to conduct electronic surveillanceof telecommunications which are encrypted using the specific devicewhose device unique key is being requested. The key componentsobtained through this process are then used by the grantee toreconstruct the device unique key and obtain the session key whichis then used to decrypt the telecommunications that are encryptedwith that session key. The SKIPJACK encryption/decryption algorithm has been approved forgovernment applications requiring encryption of sensitive butunclassified data telecommunications as defined herein. Thespecific operations of the SKIPJACK algorithm and the LEAF creationmethod are classified and hence are referenced, but not specified,in this standard. Data for purposes of this standard includes voice, facsimile andcomputer information communicated in a telephone system. Atelephone system for purposes of this standard is limited to asystem which is circuit switched and operating at data rates ofstandard commercial modems over analog voice circuits or which usesbasic-rate ISDN or a similar grade wireless service. Data that is considered sensitive by a responsible authority shouldbe encrypted if it is vulnerable to unauthorized disclosure duringtelecommunications. A risk analysis should be performed under thedirection of a responsible authority to determine potential threatsand risks. The costs of providing encryption using this standardas well as alternative methods and their respective costs should beprojected. A responsible authority should then make a decision,based on the risk and cost analyses, whether or not to useencryption and then whether or not to use this standard. Approving Authority: Secretary of Commerce. Maintenance Agency: Department of Commerce, National Institute ofStandards and Technology. Applicability: This standard is applicable to all Federaldepartments and agencies and their contractors under the conditionsspecified below. This standard may be used in designing andimplementing security products and systems, which Federaldepartments and agencies use or operate or which are operated forthem under contract. These products may be used when replacingType II and Type III (DES) encryption devices and products owned bythe government and government contractors. This standard may be used when the following conditions apply: 1. An authorized official or manager responsible for datasecurity or the security of a computer system decides thatencryption is required and cost justified as per OMB Circular A-130; and 2. The data is not classified according to Executive Order12356, entitled "National Security Information," or to itssuccessor orders, or to the Atomic Energy Act of 1954, as amended. However, Federal departments or agencies which use encryptiondevices for protecting data that is classified according to eitherof these acts may use those devices also for protectingunclassified data in lieu of this standard. In addition, this standard may be adopted and used by non-FederalGovernment organizations. Such use is encouraged when it providesthe desired security. Applications: This standard may be used in any unclassifiedgovernment and commercial communications. Use of devicesconforming to this standard is voluntary for unclassifiedgovernment applications and for commercial security applications. Implementations: The encryption/decryption algorithm and the LEAFcreation method shall be implemented in electronic devices (e.g.,electronic chip packages) which are protected against unauthorizedentry, modification and reverse engineering. Implementations whichare tested and validated by NIST will be considered as complyingwith this standard. An electronic device shall be incorporatedinto a cryptographic module in accordance with FIPS 140-1. NISTwill test for conformance with FIPS 140-1. Conformingcryptographic modules can then be integrated into securityequipment for sale and use in a security application. Informationabout devices that have been validated, procedures for testingequipment for conformance with NIST standards, and informationabout approved security equipment are available from the ComputerSystems Laboratory, NIST, Gaithersburg, MD 20899. Export Control: Implementations of this standard are subject toFederal Government export controls as specified in Title 22, Codeof Federal Regulations, Parts 120 through 131 (InternationalTraffic of Arms Regulations - ITAR). Exporters of encryptiondevices, equipment and technical data are advised to contact theU.S. Department of State, Office of Defense Trade Controls for moreinformation. Patents: Implementations of this standard may be covered by U.S.and foreign patents. Implementation Schedule: This standard becomes effective thirtydays following publication of this FIPS PUB. Specifications: Federal Information Processing Standard (FIPS 185),Escrowed Encryption Standard (EES) (affixed). Cross Index: a. FIPS PUB 46-2, Data Encryption Standard. b. FIPS PUB 81, Modes of Operation of the DES c. FIPS PUB 140-1, Security Requirements for CryptographicModules. GLOSSARY: The following terms are used as defined below for purposes of thisstandard: Data - Unclassified voice, facsimile and computer informationcommunicated over a telephone system. Decryption - Conversion of ciphertext to plaintext through the useof a cryptographic algorithm. Device (cryptographic) - An electronic implementation of theencryption/decryption algorithm and the LEAF creation method asspecified in this standard. Digital data - Data that have been converted to a binaryrepresentation. Encryption - Conversion of plaintext to ciphertext through the useof a cryptographic algorithm. Key components - The two values from which a key can be derived(e.g., KU1 ~ KU2). Key escrow - The processes of managing (e.g., generating, storing,transferring, auditing) the two components of a cryptographic keyby two key component holders. LEAF Creation Method - A part of a key escrow system that isimplemented in a cryptographic device and creates a Law EnforcementAccess Field. Type I cryptography - A cryptographic algorithm or device approvedby the National Security Agency for protecting classifiedinformation. Type II cryptography - A cryptographic algorithm or device approvedby the National Security Agency for protecting sensitiveunclassified information in systems as specified in section 2315 ofTitle 10 United States Code, or section 3502(2) of Title 44, UnitedStates Code. Type III cryptography - A cryptographic algorithm or deviceapproved as a Federal Information Processing Standard. Type III(E) cryptography - A Type III algorithm or device that isapproved for export from the United States. Qualifications: The protection provided by a security product orsystem is dependent on several factors. The protection provided bythe SKIPJACK algorithm against key search attacks is greater thanthat provided by the DES algorithm (e.g., the cryptographic key islonger). However, provisions of this standard are intended toensure that information encrypted through use of devicesimplementing this standard can be decrypted by a legally authorizedentity. Where to Obtain Copies of the Standard: Copies of this publicationare for sale by the National Technical Information Service, U.S.Department of Commerce, Springfield, VA 22161. When ordering,refer to Federal Information Processing Standards Publication 185(FIPS PUB 185), and identify the title. When microfiche isdesired, this should be specified. Prices are published by NTIS incurrent catalogs and other issuances. Payment may be made bycheck, money order, deposit account or charged to a credit cardaccepted by NTIS. Federal InformationProcessing Standards Publication 185 1994 February 9 Specifications for the ESCROWED ENCRYPTION STANDARD 1. INTRODUCTION This publication specifies Escrowed Encryption Standard (EES)functions and parameters. 2. GENERAL This standard specifies use of the SKIPJACK cryptographic algorithmand a LEAF Creation Method to be implemented in an approvedelectronic device (e.g., a very large scale integration electronicchip). The device is contained in a logical cryptographic modulewhich is then integrated in a security product for encrypting anddecrypting telecommunications. Approved implementations may be procured by authorizedorganizations for integration into security equipment. Devicesmust be tested and validated by NIST for conformance to thisstandard. Cryptographic modules must be tested and validated byNIST for conformance to FIPS 140-1. 3. ALGORITHM SPECIFICATIONS The specifications of the encryption/decryption algorithm(SKIPJACK) and LEAF Creation Method 1 (LCM-1) are classified. TheNational Security Agency maintains these classified specificationsand approves the manufacture of devices which implement thespecifications. NIST tests for conformance of the devicesimplementing this standard in cryptographic modules to FIPS 140-1and FIPS 81. 4. FUNCTIONS AND PARAMETERS 4.1 FUNCTIONS The following functions, at a minimum, shall be implemented: 1. Data Encryption: A session key (80 bits) shall be used toencrypt plaintext information in one or more of the following modesof operation as specified in FIPS 81: ECB, CBC, OFB (64), CFB (1,8, 16, 32, 64). 2. Data Decryption: The session key (80 bits) used toencrypt the data shall be used to decrypt resulting ciphertext toobtain the data . 3. LEAF Creation: A Family Key (e.g., KF-1) shall be used tocreate a Law Enforcement Access Field (LEAF) in accordance with aLEAF Creation Method (e.g., LCM-1). The security equipment shallensure that the LEAF is transmitted in such a manner that the LEAFand ciphertext may be decrypted with legal authorization. Noadditional encryption or modification of the LEAF is permitted. 4.2 PARAMETERS The following parameters shall be used in performing theprescribed functions: 1. Device Unique Identifier (UID): The identifier unique toa particular device and used by the Key Escrow System. 2. Device Unique Key (KU): The cryptographic key unique toa particular device and used by the Key Escrow System. 3. Cryptographic Protocol Field (CPF): The field identifyingthe registered cryptographic protocol used by a particularapplication and used by the Key Escrow System (reserved for futurespecification and use). 4. Escrow Authenticator (EA): A binary pattern that isinserted in the LEAF to ensure that the LEAF is transmitted andreceived properly and has not been modified, deleted or replaced inan unauthorized manner. 5. Initialization Vector (IV): A mode and applicationdependent vector of bytes used to initialize, synchronize andverify the encryption, decryption and key escrow functions. 6. Family Key (KF): The cryptographic key stored in alldevices designated as a family that is used to create a LEAF. 7. Session Key (KS): The cryptographic key used by a deviceto encrypt and decrypt data during a session. 8. Law Enforcement Access Field (LEAF): The fieldcontaining the encrypted session key and the device identifier andthe escrow authenticator. 5. IMPLEMENTATION The Cryptographic Algorithm (i.e., SKIPJACK) and a LEAF CreationMethod (e.g., LCM-1) shall be implemented in an electronic device(e.g., VLSI chip) which is highly resistant to reverse engineering(destructive or non-destructive) to obtain or modify thecryptographic algorithm, the UID, the KF, the KU, the EA, the CPF,the operational KS, and any other security or Key Escrow Systemrelevant information. The device shall be able to beprogrammed/personalized (i.e., made unique) after mass productionin such a manner that the UID, KU (or its components), KF (or itscomponents) and EA fixed pattern can be entered once (and onlyonce) and maintained without external electrical power. The LEAF and the IV shall be transmitted with the ciphertext. Thespecifics of the protocols used to create and transmit the LEAF,IV, and encrypted data shall be registered and a CPF assigned. TheCPF (and the KF-ID, LCM-ID) shall then be transmitted inaccordance with the registered specifications. Various devices implementing this standard are anticipated. Theimplementation may vary with the application. The specificelectric, physical and logical interface will vary with theimplementation. Each approved, registered implementation shallhave an unclassified electrical, physical and logical interfacespecification sufficient for an equipment manufacturer tounderstand the general requirements for using the device. Some ofthe requirements may be classified and therefore would not bespecified in the unclassified interface specification. The device Unique Key shall be composed of two components (each aminimum of 80 bits long) and each component shall be independentlygenerated and stored by an escrow agent. The session key used toencrypt transmitted information shall be the same as the sessionkey used to decrypt received information in a two-way simultaneouscommunication. The Lead Creation Method (LCM), the CryptographicProtocol Field (CPF), and the Family Key Identifier (KF-ID) shallbe registered in the NIST Computer Security Object Register. This standard is not an interoperability standard. It does notprovide sufficient information to design and implement a securitydevice or equipment. Other specifications and standards will berequired to assure interoperability of EES devices in variousapplications. Specifications of a particular EES device must beobtained from the manufacturer. The specifications for the SKIPJACK algorithm are contained in theR21 Informal Technical Report entitled "SKIPJACK" (S), R21-TECH-044-91, May 21, 1991. The specifications for LEAF Creation Method1 are contained in the R21 Informal Technical Report entitled "LawEnforcement Access Field for the Key Escrow Microcircuit" (S).Organizations holding an appropriate security clearance andentering into a Memorandum of Agreement with the National SecurityAgency regarding implementation of the standard will be providedaccess to the classified specifications. Inquiries may be maderegarding the Technical Reports and this program to Director,National Security Agency, Fort George G. Meade, MD 20755-6000,ATTN: R21. --Stanton McCandlish * mech@eff.org * Electronic Frontier Found. OnlineActivistF O R M O R E I N F O, E - M A I L T O: I N F O @ E F F . O R GO P E N P L A T F O R M O N L I N E R I G H T SV I R T U A L C U L T U R E C R Y P T O WT02-B12-103IA087-000631-B022-162http://res2.resnet.upenn.edu:80/cis590/reading.133.html 130.91.195.242 19970122065126 text/html 6505HTTP/1.0 200 OKDate: Wed, 22 Jan 1997 06:51:28 GMTServer: Apache/1.1.1Content-type: text/htmlContent-length: 6334Last-modified: Tue, 22 Nov 1994 06:32:55 GMTRe: CPSR Clipper Petition /rsp [one more round it is Denning -> Rotenberg -> Denning .. djf] From: denning@cs.cosc.georgetown.edu (Dorothy Denning)Subject: Re: CPSR Clipper Petition /rspTo: farber@central.cis.upenn.edu Dave, I don't know if you want to continue the "Rotenberg/Denning debate" onInteresting People, but this was my response to Marc. Dorothy--------The following comments are in response to responses posted in RISKS 15.50on my earlier comments: >From Marc Rotenberg:>> The NSA is responsible for foreign signal interception. It has no legal> authority to conduct wire surveillance. What are the NSA's "national> security" interests in domestic wire surveillance?>I do not believe that NSA has any particular interest in domestic wiresurveillance. I expect their concern is that if a product with a verystrong algorithm such as SKIPJACK were to be manufactured without keysbeing escrowed, then such products would be very attractive on theforeign black market (presumably, such products would not beexportable) where they could interfere with foreign intelligence.>> The FBI made certain claims that cryptography was impeding criminal> investigation conducted by wiretap. CPSR investigated the FBI's claims by> filing a Freedom of Information Act suit to obtain the relevant documents.> The documents provided to us by the Department of Justice revealed that none> of the FBI field officers had encountered any obstacles. The Department of> Justice has just informed us that they provided to us all relevant documents> concerning the Clipper proposal.>In testimony before the Computer Systems Security and Privacy AdvisoryBoard (CSSPAB) at NIST, James Kallstrom of the FBI said that encryptionwas styming the effort in more than three but less than ten of ongoingcases. The FBI does not give details of ongoing investigations, so thisinformation would not be available through FOIA. > There is one reported case where cryptography made it difficult for law> enforcement to obtain evidence. That case concerned reading the contents of a> file on a hard disk after it was seized.>> If this is the problem that the Clipper proposal is intended to solve, then> the key escrow scheme must be extended to every single encrypted file -- not> just encrypted communications -- everywhere in the world.>I've heard of 3 cases now where encrypted files could not be decrypted,but law enforcers seem to be much more concerned about communicationsthan stored files. Clipper does not address file encryption.>> An FBI legislative proposal now under consideration at the White House would> mandate a Clipper-like scheme. That proposal is backed by fines up to $10,000> per day and jail time.>Everything I've seen has said Clipper is voluntary. Quoting from the standard:"This standard does not mandate the use of escrowed encryption devices byFederal government agencies, the private sector or other levels of government."Dept. of Commerce, NIST, Docket No. 930659-4017, RIN 063-AB19, Approvalof FIPS 185, Escrowed Encryption Standard (EES).>> > I support this objective. Unfortunately, it is not> > possible for most of us to be fully informed of the> > national security implications of uncontrolled> > encryption. For very legitimate reasons, these cannot> > be fully discussed and debated in a public forum.>> This assertion has never been supported by evidence. It has been used simply> to stifle criticism.>Certain information relating to foreign intelligence operations isclassified. Are you saying that decisions should not be based onclassified information or that foreign intelligence information shouldnot be classified?>> CPSR did not participate in the inter-agency policy review. Our position from> the very beginning is that these decisions must be made openly.>As part of the inter-agency review, the CSSPAB was asked to sponsorhearings on the proposal. These were held in June. The testimony thatwas presented was given to the government. Marc gave a presentationat those hearings, as did David Banisar of CPSR. Several people inthe government who have been participating in the inter-agency reviewwere present at the hearings. There have been several other forumsas well, including one sponsored by CPSR last June. Again, severalpeople participating in the inter-agency review were present. > > In the absence of understanding> > the national security issues, I believe we need to> > exercise some caution in believing that we can> > understand the full implications of encryption on> > society.>> This premise, if accepted, would mean that people in the United States would> have no right to express political views when the government claimed "national> security." Certainly, there are matters of national security that must be I did not mean to suggest that people should not express their views. Beingcautious is different from being silent. As followup to what I said in RISKS, I'd like to respond to another ofMarc's comments, made in reference to the 5 of us who reviewed SKIPJACK. > Dorothy endorsed the proposal before she joined the "review" team. The> group that she refers to, a White House task force, has an interesting> history. The majority of cryptographers asked to participate> declined. I believe that approximately half accepted. My support of Clipper is contingent on it providing a very high levelof protection, including protection against compromises or abuses ofkeys. The main reason I agreed to be a reviewer was to make sure thatthe system was in fact secure. I believe the others share my concern.Before I supported Clipper, I already knew quite a bit about how thewhole system was going to be structured, so I felt confident that thegoal of high security would be achieved. Nothing I have seen so farhas changed my assessment. However, if as a result of our completereview, I come to the conclusion that the risks of Clipper are notacceptable, I will withdraw my support. Dorothy WT02-B12-104IA087-000631-B022-197http://res2.resnet.upenn.edu:80/cis590/reading.134.html 130.91.195.242 19970122065211 text/html 654HTTP/1.0 200 OKDate: Wed, 22 Jan 1997 06:52:12 GMTServer: Apache/1.1.1Content-type: text/htmlContent-length: 484Last-modified: Tue, 22 Nov 1994 06:32:56 GMTClipper: Love your country, don't trust its government Date: Wed, 23 Feb 1994 11:31:11 -0800From: David Honig <honig@ruffles.ICS.UCI.EDU>Subject: Clipper: Love your country, don't trust its government [... Further comment after noting the CIA story:] So, you can buy a high ranking CIA person (who ran the *counter*intelligencebranch for 2 years) for a measly $1.5 million. I wonder how much a pair ofClipper-key-escrow agency people will cost? -- WT02-B12-105IA087-000631-B022-230http://res2.resnet.upenn.edu:80/cis590/reading.135.html 130.91.195.242 19970122065237 text/html 4574HTTP/1.0 200 OKDate: Wed, 22 Jan 1997 06:52:35 GMTServer: Apache/1.1.1Content-type: text/htmlContent-length: 4403Last-modified: Tue, 22 Nov 1994 06:32:57 GMTWhite House Wiretap Bill - CyberWire Dispatch CyberWire Dispatch//Copyright (c) 1994// Jacking in from the Budget Busting Port: The White House today began floating its version of the controversialdigital wiretap bill that requires all communications systems to be madewiretap ready. The bill has teeth. It gives the Feds the right to shutdown any telephone, cable or computer network that fails to give lawenforcement what it wants: Easy access to any and all conversations. Barnone. The new bill, a copy of which was obtained by Dispatch, is a "new andimproved" version of the fatally flawed FBI digital wiretap bill thatatrophied on Capitol Hill during the Bush Administration. That bill was inflames before the ink dried on the draft copies. It mandated compliancefrom industry within 120 days of passage ("fucking impossible," onetelephone executive said at the time) and required you and me to pay formaking the FBI's job easier. "No fucking way," was the general consensus,from industry as well as a wellspring of privacy and civil libertiesgroups. The Clinton policy wonks, however, seem to be twisted students of history.They've bought off on the general principle of the bill, but sought to takethe sting out of it. Here's what those brilliant Thirtysomethingworkaholics have decided: They'll allow telephone companies to pay"reasonable costs" for all software and equipment upgrades to make thishappen. Then these phone companies can send the bill to the Feds, andUncle Same will pay them back all "reasonable costs" for the wiretapaccess. Brilliant scheme, right? Except, what's wrong with this picture? First,there's absolutely no definition of reasonable cost. Second, although thegovernment pays for it, where the hell does the government get its funds?That's right: Joe and Jane Taxpayer. Or perhaps Clinton will simply cut the appropriations budget for theHeadstart Program? Or how about trimming a few Cruise missiles from theprocurement list? After all, as Dispatch has reported, someone is going tohave to pony up more than $1 billion for all this. Talk about a budgetbuster. Three Years or Yer Out====================== If the bill passes, and it must first find a sponsor, industry will have 3years to comply with its mandates. But the heavy lifting is left to theswitch manufacturers and equipment makers. Once they get their acttogether, all this software and hardware is turned over to the carriers toinstall. But they have to hustle: No grace period. Three years, max. Andjust for comparison sake, it's taken the phone companies more than 7 yearsto code in equal access dialing, a job that was supposed to take three. If that wiretap deadline isn't met, the Feds can actually shut down thetelephone network, a cable system or even computer networks likeCompuServe. That aspect of the bill is "unconstitutional," says JerryBerman, director of Washington office for the Electronic FrontierFoundation. "Injunction power over communications of the U.S. is a priorrestraint and far too broad under the First Amendment," he said. And if those sexy digital calling features such as call forwarding or ISDNapplications foil the Feds *at all* they can demand that those services be*shut down* until they are brought into compliance. Oh yeah, and while allthat complying is going on, the telephone companies get kicked in the assto the tune of $10,000 per day. That's the motivation factor. Senator Patrick Leahy said Congress "wants to ensure that theAdministration's law enforcement goals are met." However, that can't beplayed off other concerns. "We can't jeopardize the legitimate concerns ofbusiness by empowering the attorney general to have the final say in howfar and how fast technology advances," he said. Of course, there's the National Security Agency to deal with here too, butnobody's saying a damn thing about them. The NSA, however, had a directhand in helping craft this bill. The White House meets Thursday with industry officials to break the news tothem. The Administration will trot out the FBI to give its usually dog andpony show rap that "we need to stop child pornographers" so pass this bill.White House meetings with privacy and civil liberty groups takes place onFriday. Stay tuned... Meeks out... WT02-B12-106IA087-000631-B022-269http://res2.resnet.upenn.edu:80/cis590/reading.136.html 130.91.195.242 19970122065258 text/html 3912HTTP/1.0 200 OKDate: Wed, 22 Jan 1997 06:52:58 GMTServer: Apache/1.1.1Content-type: text/htmlContent-length: 3741Last-modified: Tue, 22 Nov 1994 06:32:58 GMTPossibly compromised account Date: Thu, 24 Feb 94 13:08:50 -0500From: shap@viper.cis.upenn.edu (Jonathan Shapiro)To: farber@central.cis.upenn.eduCc: interesting-people@eff.orgSubject: Possibly compromised account This is to alert you to the possibility that Dorothy Denning's loginmay have been compromised. In a recent mailing to the "interesting people" list, a party allegingto be Dorothy Denning made a number of statements in support of theSkipJack initiative that were erroneous or deliberately misleading.The suspect in question makes remarkably subtle use of misdirection totwist the facts of the case. This is not consistent with the sort ofintegrity one expects from Dorothy's statements. In order that you will be able to spot future mailings from thisunknown party, I will point them out. [Suspect] I expect their [the NSA's] concern is that if a product with a very strong algorithm such as SKIPJACK were to be manufactured without keys being escrowed, then such products would be very attractive on the foreign black market (presumably, such products would not be exportable) where they could interfere with foreign intelligence. Note the subtle misdirection embedded in the words "I suspect." Theauthor wishes you to believe that the stated position is the NSAposition, and is distracting attention from the fact that they aresupporting the opinion by promulgating it. The position described is ludicrous. It says that the focus marketfor SkipJack-derived systems is characterized as follows: 1) Customer is a criminal or terrorist. 2) Customer trusts the NSA, and all organizations that NSA collaborates with, either officially or covertly, legally or otherwise. 3) Aside from the fact that they are a criminal or a terrorist, customer is basically law abiding, and therefore will not use some other encryption algorithm as a substitute or layered on top of SkipJack. 4) Customer is smarter than your average turnip, which is why we need to tap their phones in order to catch them. No question that I'ld choose SkipJack for all of my illegal and/orterrorist activities. I'll hop right out and buy one. > An FBI legislative proposal now under consideration at the White > House would mandate a Clipper-like scheme. That proposal is > backed by fines up to $10,000 per day and jail time. [Suspect] Everything I've seen has said Clipper is voluntary. Quoting from the standard: "This standard does not mandate the use of escrowed encryption devices by Federal government agencies, the private sector or other levels of government." Note that the suspect has not responded to the issue at hand.Standards are not legally binding, so it would hardly matter if theNIST standard mandated SkipJack. FBI legislative proposals, on theother hand, stand a disturbing chance of becoming law. [Suspect] Before I supported Clipper, I already knew quite a bit about how the whole system was going to be structured, so I felt confident that the goal of high security would be achieved. Nothing I have seen so far has changed my assessment. I encourage you all to take a few minutes to browse the CPSR and/orEFF FTP archives. It has some fascinating material obtained from theallegedly secure contractor whose job is to produce the keys. Dorothy Denning's reputation is one of integrity. Clearly, thecomments above could not have originated with her. It's an interesting question, however, to ask who is employing thesuspect. Jonathan SkipJack. Because We're Not Listening. WT02-B12-107IA087-000631-B022-304http://res2.resnet.upenn.edu:80/cis590/reading.137.html 130.91.195.242 19970122065319 text/html 4775HTTP/1.0 200 OKDate: Wed, 22 Jan 1997 06:53:21 GMTServer: Apache/1.1.1Content-type: text/htmlContent-length: 4604Last-modified: Tue, 22 Nov 1994 06:32:59 GMTWhile it is much like a advertisement, it is of interest AT&T SecretAgent 3.0 From: darneke@attmail.com (David R Arneke)Date: 24 Feb 94 10:59:05 GMTSubject: AT&T SecretAgent 3.0 FOR MEDIA INQUIRIES:David Arneke, AT&T Secure Communications Systems910 279-7680 (office)910 273-5687 (home)!darneke (ATTMAIL) or david.arneke@att.com (Internet) AT&T ADDS RSA SECURITY TECHNOLOGY TO SECRETAGENT (TM) SOFTWARE GREENSBORO, North Carolina -- AT&T has added RSA securitytechnology to its SecretAgent software in an upgrade that makes theprogram more versatile, easier to use and faster. Other major new capabilities in AT&T SecretAgent Version 3.0include: -- User-transparent support of RSA and DSA public keys. Userscan generate RSA keys or DSA keys and communicate signed and encryptedmessages with other SecretAgent 3.0 users regardless of their choiceof public key algorithms. -- Cross-platform compatibility among MS-DOS, Windows,Macintosh and various UNIX operating systems. Information secured onone operating system can be processed transparently on any of theothers. -- Mail-enabled operation through the widely supportedVendor-Independent Messaging (VIM) interface. -- Significantly faster implementation of DES encryption andDSA signing and validation. Version 3.0 adds the RSA cryptosystem for digital signaturesand key management to SecretAgent's capabilities, which alreadyincluded DES encryption, the NIST Digital Sig- nature Algorithm (DSA)and the federal Secure Hash Standard (SHS) for data integrity. For encryption and DSA signatures, a variant of theDiffie-Hellman protocol is used for key exchange. "AT&T SecretAgent 3.0 Software gives users a more powerfularray of capabilities in an extremely fast and efficient way," saidWilliam A. Franklin, software security products manager, AT&T SecureCommunications Systems. With its unique combination of standards, SecretAgent 3.0software provides solutions to the security requirements of a widevariety of business and government users. "Some customers require only one set of capabilities --government users, for example, are required to use federal standardsonly," Franklin said. "Some businesses prefer RSA technology, but others need RSAfor electronic data interchange with other commercial businesses andgovernment standards for dealing with the government." Users can select either RSA, SHS and DES or DSA, SHS, DES andDiffie-Hellman for signing and encrypting. On reception, the programdetects which security algorithms have been used so the recipient of amessage doesn't have to be concerned about which technology the senderused. Mail-enabled operation also makes security user-friendly.Messages can be created, signed, encrypted and mailed all withoutleaving SecretAgent 3.0 software. Documents also can be signed,encrypted and transmitted as mail attachments. DES encryption is 50 percent faster than in the originalversion of AT&T SecretAgent Software. Digital signature speed is also improved. DSA signingand validation are performed in approximately 150 milliseconds eachon a 486/33M Hz personal computer. AT&T SecretAgent Software was developed for AT&T byInformation Security Corporation of Deerfield, Illinois. The program operates independently of word processingprograms, enabling it to safeguard such diverse data as text files,spreadsheets and databases. SecretAgent 3.0 software encrypts and decrypts files fortransmissions or storage, even files stored on a shared network harddisk. Single-copy suggested retail price is $329.95 for the DOS andWindows versions, $359.95 for the Mac version and $399.95 for the UNIXversion. Volume discounts and site/enterprise licensing areavailable. Recommended PC configuration includes 640 KB RAM (256 KBrequired) and hard disk. The Windows version of SecretAgent 3.0 software will beavailable March 15. The DOS version will follow on April 1, theSPARCstation UNIX version on April 15 and the Mac version on May 1. A software upgrade to allow the program to accept the federalgovernment's TESSERA PCMCIA card and DATAKEY Sig- naSURE smart cardwill be available April 1. A triple-DES software capability also willbe available April 1. To order or to get more information, customers can call theAT&T Secure Communications Customer Service Center, 1 800 203-5563. ###### Product names are trademarks of their respective companies. WT02-B12-108IA087-000631-B022-338http://res2.resnet.upenn.edu:80/cis590/reading.138.html 130.91.195.242 19970122065339 text/html 3715HTTP/1.0 200 OKDate: Wed, 22 Jan 1997 06:53:39 GMTServer: Apache/1.1.1Content-type: text/htmlContent-length: 3544Last-modified: Tue, 22 Nov 1994 06:33:00 GMTrelative costs of breaking Clipper Posted-Date: Fri, 25 Feb 1994 18:28:21 -0500Path:netnews.upenn.edu!dsinc!ub!news.kei.com!sol.ctr.columbia.edu!howland.reston.ans.net!europa.eng.gtefsd.com!MathWorks.Com!transfer.stratus.com!galt.sw.stratus.com!cmeFrom: cme@galt.sw.stratus.com (Carl Ellison)Newsgroups:alt.2600,alt.activism,alt.activism.d,alt.politics.datahighway,alt.privacy,alt.privacy.clipper,alt.security.pgp,comp.org.eff.talkSubject: relative costs of breaking ClipperDate: 24 Feb 1994 20:37:24 GMTOrganization: Stratus Computer, Marlboro MALines: 62Distribution: inetNntp-Posting-Host: galt.sw.stratus.comXref: netnews.upenn.edu alt.2600:2451 alt.activism:63526alt.activism.d:12618 alt.politics.datahighway:1741 alt.privacy:12435alt.privacy.clipper:2769 alt.security.pgp:9346 comp.org.eff.talk:28131Apparently-To: farber@pcpond.cis.upenn.edu In article <CLqD6B.EIo@nrtpa22.bnr.ca> kpm@n8pph56.nt.com (Keith Mancus) writes:>>In article <199402232157.QAA26990@eff.org>, mech@eff.org (Stanton McCandlish)>writes, quoting NIST:>>|> They found that the algorithm provides>|> significant protection and that it will be 36 years until the cost>|> of breaking the EES algorithm will be equal to the cost of breaking>|> the current Data Encryption Standard. > This is meaningless. Could someone please make a more meaningful>comparison of EES with Triple DES or IDEA? DES is clearly out of date.>Oh, I forgot, we're not allowed to see the EES. :-) You don't need to see EES for this "expert computation". Processor speeds double every 1.5 years (thanks to chip technologyimprovements -- also affecting speed of Wiener's chips). Brute force attack of Clipper's 80-bit keys takes 2^(80-56) times asmany trials. If you want to wait until chip technology makes that asfast as current DES breaking, you need to wait (80-56)*1.5 years. Triple DES (of the form ECB|ECB|ECB) with three independent keys has3*56 bits of key and it will take (3*56-80)*1.5 years before you canbreak triple-DES in the same time you break Clipper today. IDEA has a 128-bit key, so it will take (128-80)*1.5 years beforeyou can break IDEA in the same time as you could break Clipper today. If you want brute force protection, of course, you can use my DES|TRAN|nDES|TRAN|DES (call it DTnDTD) suggestion from a day or two ago (on sci.crypt) and get ((n+2)*56-80)*1.5years lead on Clipper -- practical for n up to about 500, given today'smessage sizes. Summary: to break X in the same time (cost) as breaking Clipper today, you need to wait: X time DES - 36 years IDEA 72 years triple-DES 132 years (DTnDTD, n=16) 1392 years Meanwhile, I would *far* prefer single DES over Clipper, to protect againstorganized crime attacks on my privacy. I don't believe OrgCrime would beable to build a Wiener machine (or better) and get known plaintext from mytraffic without a huge ramp-up time in staffing and research -- butstealing keys, bribing escrow agents, etc., is something OrgCrime isalready very skilled at. -- Carl M. Ellison cme@sw.stratus.com RIPEM MD5OfPublicKey: 39D9860686A9F075A9A83D49589C677A Stratus Computer Inc. TEL: (508)460-2783 55 Fairbanks Boulevard ; Marlborough MA 01752-1298 FAX: (508)624-7488 WT02-B12-109IA087-000631-B022-367http://res2.resnet.upenn.edu:80/cis590/reading.139.html 130.91.195.242 19970122065410 text/html 26740HTTP/1.0 200 OKDate: Wed, 22 Jan 1997 06:53:59 GMTServer: Apache/1.1.1Content-type: text/htmlContent-length: 26568Last-modified: Tue, 22 Nov 1994 06:33:01 GMTSection-by-section Analysis of the 1994 draft of the Digital Telephony legislation by EFF Staff [ people I have sent this to found it very interesting, I hope you do also .. djf] Section-by-section Analysis of the 1994 draft of the Digital Telephonylegislation Mike GodwinEFF TITLE >A BILL >To ensure continued law enforcement electronic surveillance access to thecontent of wire and electronic communications and call setup informationwhen authorized by law, to improve communications privacy protection, andfor other purposes. The "other purposes" are, apparently, the correction of a drafting errorin ECPA that led to an anomaly in 18 USC 2511. See Section 4 below. SECTION 2 >SEC. 2. PURPOSE. The purpose of this Act is to clarify and define theresponsibilities of common carriers, providers of common carrier supportservices, and telecommunications equipment manufacturers to provide theassistance required to ensure that government agencies can implementcourt>orders and lawful authorizations to intercept the content of wire andelectronic communications and acquire call setup information underchapters 119 and 206 of title 18 and chapter 36 of title 50. Chapter 119 is the communications-interception chapter, commonly called"Title III."Chapter 206 is the pen-register/trap-and-trace chapter. Title 50 includesinterception provisions of the Foreign Intelligence Surveillance Act. Note that Chapter 121 of Title 18, the stored-communications chapter ofthe U.S. criminal code, is not mentioned. It may, however, be affected bysome of the amendments suggested in the Digital Telephony bill. >Otherwise,>except for the provisions in section 4, nothing in this Act is intendedto>alter any provision contained in the Federal electronic surveillance, penregister, or trap and trace statutes, or those of any state or otherjurisdiction. In particular, nothing herein is intended to enlarge orreduce the government's authority to lawfully intercept the content ofcommunications or install or use pen register or trap and trace devices,or to increase or decrease any criminal penalties for unlawfullyintercepting the content of communications or installing or using penregister or trap and trace devices, or to alter the provisions regardingservice provider assistance, payment for assistance, causes of action,civil liability, or good faith defenses. This is essentially a deceptive statement about the effect of the Act.Although 18 USC 2518(4) allows applicants for authorization orders torequest that the order "direct that a provider of wire or electroniccommunication service ... furnish the applicant forthwith with allinformation, facilities, and technical assistance necessary to accomplishthe interception...", this provision has not widely been interpreted tohold that service providers must actively create solutions to interceptionproblems if those solutions do not already exist. The FBI analysis saysgovernment agencies "have been reluctant to pursue contempt or other legalremedies to resolve this issue." The reason for this reluctance, in myopinion, is that the language of 2518(4) does not unequivocally imposesuch a burden on providers, and the government stands a good chance oflosing any fight in which it claims that such a burden does exist. Thus, the FBI's solution is to create a *new* and *routine* obligation oncommon carriers (but not small-scale providers) to generate technicalsolutions to interception and "call setup" problems created by currentcommon-carrier networks. Moreover, this Act would require that commoncarriers make manpower available on a 24-hour basis to handleinterceptions and the capture of call-setup information in the event of awiretap or pen-register/trap-and-trace order. The FBI analysis asserts without quantification that "since the mid-1980s,technological impediments have frustrated, in whole or in part, theexecution of a number of court orders." But among the "technologicalimpediments," apparently, has been the reluctance or inability of commoncarriers to provide the kind of assistance that lawenforcement--specifically, guaranteed ability to capture communicationscontents and "call setup" information. The Act and the FBI analysis consistently use the language of"clarification" in reference to the amendments contained in the Act, butof course the vastly expanded authority of the Attorney General and theFCC to supervise and punish common carriers is nothing if not "expandedauthority." This Act also creates many new legal obligations for commoncarriers, "support services," and telecom equipment manufacturers. >The Act is further intended to improve communications privacy protectionfor cordless telephones, certain radio-based data communications andnetworks, communications transmitted using certain privacy-enhancingmodulation techniques, and to clarify the lawfulness of quality controland service provision monitoring of electronic communications. These are all addressed in Section 4 of the Act. This section correctsfour anomalies under the current statutes: 1) It brings cordlesstelephones under the protection of Title III. 2) With respect to radiocommunications it creates Title III protection for "an electroniccommunication" that is transmitted via radio. 3) It corrects an apparentomission by adding radio communications that use "modulation techniques"for privacy to the interception penalty provisions of 18 USC 2511(4).4) It corrects a drafting error in ECPA by adding "electroniccommunication" to a clause in 18 USC 2511 (2)(a)(i). >SEC. 3. COMMON CARRIER ASSISTANCE >(a) _New section_. Chapter 109 of title 18, United States Code, isamended by adding the following new section: >"Sec. 2237. Common carrier assistance to government agencies.""(a) Assistance requirements. Common carriers shall be required toprovide forthwith, pursuant to court order or lawful authorization, thefollowing capabilities and capacities in order to permit the governmentto>conduct electronic surveillance and pen register and trap and traceinvestigations effectively: Note that Chapter 109 is not part of Title III; instead, it's a chapterincluding various penalty provisions for interference in the execution oflawful searches and seizures and for violating the Constitutionallymandated requirements for such procedures. The chapter is does not amountto a statutory scheme--it's basically a collection of somewhat relatedindividual search-and-seizure statutes. Why isn't this Act part of Title III? Perhaps because it uses a differentdefinition of "intercept" than is used in the wiretap statute. Seediscussion below. This Section of the Act outlines and specifies just what the governmentwants the phrase "information, facilities, technical assistance" in 18 USC2518 to mean. Note that a major component of these obligations is therequirement that common carriers *create* new information and facilitiesand devise new means of technical assistance. The FBI analysis makes clear that the drafters of this Act developed awish list in consultation with other federal, state, and locallaw-enforcement agencies. Although the FBI analysis states that "TheGovernment intentionally eschewed setting any technical standards becauseit does not desire to 'dictate' particular technological solutions, it isapparent that the government hopes to gain the authority to dictate*functional* solutions. Given the penalties for noncompliance and otherenforcement powers this Act creates, "dictate" is not too strong a verbfor the kind of prerogative the government is seeking. >"(1) The ability to execute expeditiously and simultaneously within acommon carrier's system all court orders and lawful authorizations for theinterception of wire and electronic communications and theacquisition>of call setup information related to the facilities or services ofsubscribers of such common carrier; Note that in this iteration of the Act, there is a new emphasis on "callsetup information," which is, basically, origination and destinationinformation for wire or electronic communications. It has been claimed bylaw enforcement that such current features as call forwarding often thwarttheir ability to implement wiretaps, pen registers, or traps and traces.This Act, if passed, would require common carriers to redesign callingfeatures if necessary to be ble to provide "call setup" information, or,in the alternative, to cease providing calling features that thwarted thecapture of such transactional information. It is unclear how such a requirement would play out in cases wherecommunications are transmitted using both common carriage networks andenhanced service providers. On its face, the statute may require that acommon carrier be able, for example, to tell not only which subscriber issending e-mail over the phone lines to the CompuServe Packet Network, butalso where that e-mail's ultimate destination is. The FBI analysis stresses that common carriers can perform a capacityanalysis, based on their prior records of assisted intercepts, etc., todetermine how much wiretap capacity to provide in order to minimize thecosts of compliance. The FBI claims that "a number of court orders andauthorizations were not fully executed, or were not even sought" becauseof "capacity shortfalls, such as insufficient 'port' capacity in thecellular mobile switching offices." The FBI analysis states that "at anyparticular time, a number of Federal, state, and local government agenciesmay be competing" for capacity, and that "it is critical that there besufficient capacity to accommodate completely the concomitant needs of allgovernment agencies." >"(2) the ability to intercept the content of communications and acquirecall setup information concurrent with the transmission of thecommunication to or from the subscriber's facility or service that is thesubject of the court order or lawful authorization, to the exclusion ofany wire or electronic communication or call setup information of anyother subscriber, notwithstanding the mobile nature of the facility orservice that is the subject of the court order or lawful authorization orthe use by the subscriber who is the subject of the court order or lawfulauthorization of any features offered by the common carrier; This section requires that common carriers, including cellular and anyother mobile-phone service, be able to single out individualcommunications and capture both contents and call-setup information, thatthey be able to do this "live," or else immediately after thetransmission, with a preference for the former. This is the meaning of"concurrent." The FBI analysis justifies this requirement in terms of "minimization" ofintrusion on the communications of innocent parties; of course, therequirement would enhance the efficiency and speed with which thegovernment could effect a wiretap. >"(3) the ability to intercept the content of communications and acquirecall setup information unobtrusively and with a minimum of interferencewith any subscriber's telecommunications service; and No strange clicking on the line, in other words. >"(4) the ability to receive, in a generally available format, theintercepted content of communications and acquired call setup informationat a location identified by the government distant from the facility thatis the subject of the interception, from the interception access point,and from the premises of the common carrier (except where emergency orexigent circumstances such as those described in 18 U.S.C. 2518(7),2518(11)(b), or 3125, or in 50 U.S.C. 1805(e), necessitate monitoring atthe common carrier's premises). Not only must communications and call-setup info be captured "live" orimmediately post-transmission, but it also must be routable to a remote,designated government-operated location. Whether the routing is done bythe carrier or the government is unclear. The exceptions to this "routability requirement" occur when a criminal orintelligence emergency pre-empts the normal process of seeking an order,or when there is an attempt by the person committing an offense to thwartinterception by changing facilities. These types of situations areprovided for under current law. >"(b) Systems security. The government shall notify a common carrier ofany interception of wire or electronic communications or any acquisitionof call setup information that is to be effected within the premises ofsuch common carrier pursuant to court order or lawful authorization. Afternotification, such common carrier shall designate an individual orindividuals to activate such interception or acquisition forthwith. Suchindividual(s) shall be available at all times to activate suchinterceptions or acquisitions. Such interceptions or acquisitions effectedwithin the premises of a common carrier may be activated only by theaffirmative intervention of such individual(s) designated by such commoncarrier. The FBI analysis justifies this "drafting" of personnel as a way ofmollifying common carriers who don't want non-personnel handling theirequipment or operating their facilities. Of course, this section alsomeans that a common carrier must budget for such personnel to be at theservice of law enforcement for on-premises intercepts and call-setupcaptures. >"(c) Compliance date. To the extent that common carriers providingservice within the United States currently cannot fulfil the requirementsset forth in subsection (a) of this section, they shall fulfil suchrequirements within three years from the date of enactment of this Act. The time limit for compliance has not changed since the last iteration ofthe Act. Note that only large-scale communications providers are included in thescope of this version of the Act. The FBI analysis states that PBXs,computer-network providers, and other entities that do not qualify ascommon carriers are not to be obligated by the passage of this act to addthese new capabilities, but will be obligated to cooperate under thegeneral provisions of 18 USC 2518(4) to the extent possible. *Noteespecially that this distinction undercuts the claim that the governmentis merely "clarifying" a pre-existing obligation under 18 USC 2518(4)--ifthat were true, these clarifications would apply to *all* "providers ofwire or electronic communications services" and not just "commoncarriers."* >"(d) Cooperation of support service providers and equipmentmanufacturers. Common carriers shall consult, as necessary, in a timelyfashion with appropriate providers of common carrier support services andtelecommunications equipment manufacturers for the purpose of identifyingany services or equipment, including hardware and software, that mayrequire modification so as to permit compliance with the provisions ofthis Act. A provider of common carrier support services or atelecommunications equipment manufacturer shall make available to acommon>carrier on a timely and priority basis, and at a reasonable cost, anysupport service or equipment, including hardware or software, which maybe>required so as to permit compliance with the provisions of this Act. This section imposes an obligation on common carriers to instruct supportservices and equipment providers that they need "wiretap-friendly"services and equipment, and it imposes an obligation on the service andequipment providers to comply. Note that the statute does not itself outline remedies for noncomplianceby support services and equipment providers. The FBI analysis, however,states that the Attorney General "may apply for an order, such as a writof mandamus" mandating the compliance of such entities. >"(e) Enforcement. The Attorney General shall have authority to enforcethe provisions of subsections (a), (b), (c), and (d) of this section. TheAttorney General may apply to the appropriate United States District Courtfor an order restraining or enjoining the provision of service of anycommon carrier who violates subsection (a), (b), (c), or (d) of thissection. The District Courts shall have jurisdiction to issue suchrestraining order or injunction. The Attorney General may also request theFederal Communications Commission to assist in enforcing the provisions ofthis Act. The "may apply" language implies that this is not an exhaustive list ofthe remedies available to the Attorney General, who is granted general"authority to enforce." In the first version of this Act, enforcement authority was to be given tothe FCC; in the second version, enforcement was the responsibility of theAttorney General and the DOJ. This section apparently combines the best ofboth worlds, empowering either the FCC or the AG to enforce the Act'sprovisions. >"(f) Penalties. Any common carrier that violates any provision ofsubsection (a) of this section shall be subject to a civil penalty of$10,000 per day for each day in violation. The Attorney General may filea>civil action in the appropriate United States District Court to collect,and the United States District Courts shall jurisdiction to impose, suchpenalties. After consultation with the Attorney General, the FederalCommunications Commission may also impose regulatory sanctions or finesotherwise authorized by law. Essentially, this section allows non-compliant common carriers to bechallenged on two fronts. >"(g) Consultation. The Attorney General is encouraged to consult with theFederal Communications Commission and common carrier representatives andto utilize common carrier standards bodies, associations, or other suchorganizations to discuss details of the requirements, such as thoserelated to capacity, in order to facilitate compliance with the provisionsof this Act. This language apparently is merely precatory; apparently, the AttorneyGeneral need not consult with the FCC or the other entities mentioned here. >"(h) Funding. Notwithstanding any other provision of law, the FederalCommunications Commission shall implement promptly methods and proceduresthat allow each common carrier to be remunerated by theFederal>Government for all reasonable costs incurred in the course of complyingwith the requirements of this Act. We may reasonably anticipate that there would be significant litigation onthe issue of remuneration for "reasonable costs." >"(i) Definitions. -- As used in this Section --((1) 'common carrier' means any person or entity engaged as a commoncarrier for hire, as defined by section 3(h) of the Communications Act of1934, and includes a commercial mobile service or interconnected service,as defined in section 6002(b) of Public Law 103-66;((2) 'provider of common carrier support services' means any person orentity who provides services to a common carrier that are integral toprocessing, directing, forwarding, or completing telephone calls orelectronic communication transmissions;((3) 'wire communication' shall have the same meaning as set forth insubsection 2510(1) of title 18, United States Code;((4) 'electronic communication' shall have the same meaning as set forthin subsection 2510(12) of title 18, United States Code;((5) 'intercept' shall have the same meaning as set forth in subsection2510(4) of title 18, United States Code, except that with regard to acommon carrier's transmission of a communication encrypted by asubscriber, the common carrier shall not be responsible for ensuringthe>government agency's ability to acquire the plaintext of thecommunications>content, unless the encryption was provided by the common carrier and thecommon carrier possesses the information necessary to decrypt thecommunication; Normally, "intercept" means capture the contents of a communication. 18USC 2510(4). But the government here is exempting common carriers fromproviding the plaintext versions of encrypted communications that wereencrypted be the subscriber through some method other than an encryptionservice offered by the common carrier and to which the carrier retains theencryption keys or some equivalent capability to decrypt thecommunications. Interestingly, this definition seems to gut the meaning of the definitionin 18 USC 2510(4), which focuses only on the content of the communication."Interception" legally means "capturing the content" in Title III. Ifyou're not capturing the content, it's not, strictly speaking, aninterception according the statutory definition. >(6) 'concurrent with the transmission of the communication,' as used insection 3(a)(2) of this Act, means contemporaneous with the transmission;but it shall include, with regard to electronic communications, theability of a government agency to acquire such communications at theconclusion of the transmission, and, with regard to call set upinformation, the ability to acquire such information either before,during, or immediately after the transmission of the communication; The FBI analysis states that law enforcement's preference is for suchinformation to be captured *before* transmission. >(7) 'call set up information' shall mean the information generated whichidentifies the origin and destination of a wire or electroniccommunication placed to, or received by, the facility or service that isthe subject of a court order or lawful authorization, includinginformation associated with any telecommunication systemdialing>or calling features or services; and This provision would create an immensely powerful tool for message trafficanalysis, which has significance wholly independent of the ability tocapture the content of communications. The government's prerogative to capture such transactional information isconditioned on a much lower standard of proof than that forwiretaps--rather than making a showing of probable cause, the governmentneed only "certify" to the issuing magistrate that "the information likelyto be obtained by such installation and use is relevant to an ongoingcriminal investigation." 18 USC 3123. >(8) 'government' means the Government of the United States and any agencyor instrumentality thereof, the District of Columbia, any commonwealth,territory or possession of the United States, and any state or politicalsubdivision thereof authorized by law to conduct electronic surveillance." This simply makes clear that the prerogative to require these new servicesfrom common carriers extends to all levels of law enforcement, and notjust to the federal law-enforcement and intelligence agencies. >SEC. 4. COMMUNICATIONS PRIVACY IMPROVEMENT AND MONITORING CLARIFICATION. >Chapter 119 of title 18 is amended by making the following changes: (1)Cordless telephones.>(a) _Definitions_. - Section 2510 of title 18, United States Code, isamended ->(1) in paragraph (1), by striking ", but such term does not include" andall that follows through "base unit"; and((2) in paragraph (12), by striking subparagraph (A) and redesignatingsubparagraphs (B) through (D) as subparagraphs (A) through (C),respectively.>(b) _Penalty_. - Section 2511 of title 18, United States Code, is amended->(1) in subsection (4)(b)(i), by inserting "a cordless telephonecommunication that is transmitted between a cordless telephone handsetand>the base unit," after "cellular telephone communication,"; and((2) in subsection (4)(b)(ii), by inserting "a cordlesstelephone>communication that is transmitted between a cordless telephone handsetand>the base unit," after "cellular telephone communication,". In the early days of cordless telephones, it was easy for the radiotransmissions between handsets and base units to be intercepted byscanners and, occasionally, by ordinary transistor radios. Congress didnot want to felonize such trivially easy interceptions. Current cordlessphone technology, however, makes such interceptions more difficult,according to the FBI analysis, and therefore it makes sense to extendwiretap protections to cordless phones. Note that this would resolve a long-standing anomaly in the protectionsoffered by Title III. >(2) Radio based data communications.>Section 2510(16) of title 18, United States Code, is amended by strikingthe word "or" at the end of subparagraph (D) and inserting an "or" at theend of subparagraph (E) and adding the following new subparagraph:>"(F) an electronic communication;". This adds "electronic communications" (such as e-mail or datacommunications) to the class of radio communications whose privacy isprotected by Title III. The FBI analysis states that this amendment isdesigned to make clear that data communications over radio are alsoprotected under Title III. >(3) Penalties for monitoring radio communications that are not scrambled,encrypted, or non-public.>Section 2511(4)(b) of title 18, United States Code, is amended bydeleting the phrase "or encrypted, then--" and inserting the following:"", encrypted, or transmitted using modulation techniques whose essentialparameters have been withheld from the public with theintention>of preserving the privacy or such communication, then--". This amendment adds a penalty for modulation-protected communications,which are already defined as not "readily accessible to the generalpublic" under the current language of 18 USC 2510(16)(B). >(4)Technical correction.>Section 2511(2)(a)(i) of title 18, United States Code, is amendedby>striking out "used in the transmission of wire communication" andinserting in lieu thereof "used in the transmission of a wire orelectronic communication.". This simply corrects a drafting error left over from the ElectronicCommunications Privacy Act, by adding the term "electronic communications"to those communications that a provider can intercept or disclose in thecourse of protecting its service. The amended section already included thelanguage "provider of wire or electronic communications service," butseemed to allow only the interception and disclosure of "wirecommunications." WT02-B12-110IA087-000631-B022-408http://res2.resnet.upenn.edu:80/cis590/reading.140.html 130.91.195.242 19970122065436 text/html 19665HTTP/1.0 200 OKDate: Wed, 22 Jan 1997 06:54:36 GMTServer: Apache/1.1.1Content-type: text/htmlContent-length: 19493Last-modified: Tue, 22 Nov 1994 06:33:02 GMTHow to MacPGP: You can get the PGP FAQ in four parts from Netcom also, in /pub/gbe. -=Xenon=- <qwerty@netcom.com> Note: Don't try to get MacPGP from the ftp site soda.berkeley.edu, sinceit is mislabelled as being a Mac BinHex file, but it happens to alsobe Unix gzipped, without being labelled as such (no .gz at the end). They arebeing slow about fixing this. -----BEGIN PGP SIGNED MESSAGE----- Hey Mac user you're sending e-mail on "postcards" if you don't have PGP.You heard about it in the news; here's.... How to MacPGP:Version 2.5 (Feb. 7, '94) PGP will encrypt files so not even crazy people with supercomputers candecrypt them. You write e-mail on a word processor, encrypt it using asomeone's public key, and send it off. They use their private key todecrypt it. Public keys are just that; give yours out freely. Once a personencrypts a message with your public key, not even they can read it again.Only you, using your private key. Phil Zimmerman's PGP is the grassrootsalternative to the Clipper Chip, which gives the government your secretkey. I will send the PGP FAQ and this guide to anyone who sends mail toqwerty@netcom.com with Subject "Bomb me!". [Non-Mac users: READ THIS, and the "PGP FAQ" by Gary B. Edstrom (availableon alt.security.pgp or ftp to netcom.com in /pub/gbe in parts aspgpfq*.asc)! A beginner's guide like this one by Out and About<an50928@anon.penet.fi> called "DOS PGP Guide" exists (ftp to ftp.eff.orgin /pub/EFF/Policy/Crypto as pgpstart.tutorial). Answers to questions (notin the FAQ) are available on the Usenet group alt.security.pgp. If youdon't have Usenet, mail questions to alt.security.pgp@news.cs.indiana.edu(or @anon.penet.fi) and ask for e-mailed replies. There are versions forDOS (and friendly add-on interfaces), Windows, Unix, VAX/VMS, Atari ST,Amiga, OS/2, Archimedes and others. Get "The Big Dummy's Guide to theInternet" as shown below.] Get a Unix e-mail account (student or commercial) with internet access, anda modem. GET A COPY OF THE FREE MAC PROGRAM STUFFIT EXPANDER (you NEED it,not just BinHex!). Log into your e-mail account. If you are stuck in amenu-driven place, figure out how to "escape to Unix" which will give you a$ or % prompt. Welcome to the internet. Let's find PGP. Type 'telnetarchie.internic.net', login as 'archie', and type 'prog macpgp2.3'. A listof sites around the world having PGP will appear. Type 'bye'. What it gaveme was, Host soda.berkeley.edu (128.32.149.19)Last updated 09:50 4 Nov 1993 Location: /pub/cypherpunks/pgp FILE -rw-r--r-- 320168 bytes 08:09 3 Jul 1993 macpgp2.3.cpt.hqx.gz Host isy.liu.se (130.236.1.3)Last updated 08:14 3 Nov 1993 Location: /pub/misc/pgp/2.3A FILE -rw-r--r-- 422851 bytes 10:58 19 Sep 1993 macpgp2.3.cpt.hqx This archie server is fast, rarely overloaded, but limited. Another isarchie.sura.net. Trying this site may fail but gives a list of other sites(and a hint to try 'qarchie' at this site). Do archies at night (same forftp). You want a macpgp2.3 that ends in .hqx (or try leaving out the .gzwhen you do 'get' below, OR use 'binary' instead of 'ascii' below, then'gunzip macpgp2.3.cpt.hqx.gz' in your account). Hqx (BinHex) is a way tocode Mac stuff as text. The .cpt is a Mac compression method, as are .sitor .sea. The lists from other servers will be longer. I will use the abovemacpgp2.3.cpt.hqx at site isy.liu.se as an EXAMPLE. Type 'ftp isy.liu.se', login as 'anonymous' and use an e-mail address asthe password. For fun type 'ls -l'. You are in their hard disk's maindirectory and this is what's on it. Lines starting with 'd' are directoriesthat you can move into using 'cd' ('cd ..' to backup). (During ftp use 'getfilename "|more"' if you want to read a text file called "filename"; 'q' tostop). Based on the archie search, type 'cd /pub/misc/pgp/2.3A', and again'ls -l'. There it is! Type 'ascii', 'get macpgp2.3.cpt.hqx', and wait; itis being transferred to your account. When you get the ftp> prompt type'bye'. Back to e-mail and the hard part. Type 'ls -l' to see it. Find out how to DOWNLOAD a text file from your account to your desktop.[Try 'kermit', 'set file type text', 'send macpgp2.3.cpt.hqx', and initiatea receive in your software (set to do kermit transfers). Or 'szmacpgp2.3.cpt.hqx' (with software set to zmodem)]. Drag this file onto theicon of Stuffit Expander. MacPGP2.3 will appear. In your account 'rmmacpgp2.3.cpt.hqx' will remove it. You naughty thing. PGP on another Mac. Print the documentation. It isindeed cryptic. Better is the help feature of MacPGP2.3 itself, which isalso printable. Start PGP. Make yourself a public/private key pair with'Generate key', select '1024' ("slow" is only key generation), leave the'17' alone, and enter a name. Your secret key is really a long file thatyou will never have to manually type in, but you have to remember a "passphrase" to use it (and keep others from using it if they steal your secretkey). Check 'Show pass phrase' and enter a very memorable, very obscuresentence. Don't use all normal words! Make up tricks like "Pile?driver" or"Here1we2go3you2stupid1bozo." Type away as requested to make some randomnumbers. Wait. You can see your public key with 'View keyring' onpubring.pgp. DON'T FORGET YOUR PASS PHRASE! Writing it down is better thana slight chance of forgetting it. Sign your own key to prevent others from changing its ID: 'Certify key',select pubring.pgp, select your own key, and again your own key. This isalso how you sign other people's public keys [then extract it as shownbelow to send to them, so they can add ('Add keys') your signature to theirpublic key]. Once you have a circle of friends who have signed each other'skeys, you have a trusted network. If someone mails you a key signed bysomeone in this network, you can better trust it. There is no way forsomeone to forge your friend's signature on that key unless they stole yourfriend's secret key AND knows its pass phrase. [You need the public key ofa friend to verify ('Check signatures') a signature they have placed on akey.] Write some e-mail on a word processor and save it ('Save As') to thedesktop as TEXT ONLY (ascii) and close its window. Do 'Encrypt/Sign' on thefile. Double click on the public key you want to encrypt it with (for nowyour own) and hit 'OK'. Check 'Treat source as text', 'Produce output inASCII format', and hit 'OK'. A file ending in .asc will be made. Don't letthe icon fool you; this is a simple text file that you can open with a wordprocessor. Do this. You will see, -----BEGIN PGP MESSAGE----- Version: 2.3 Lines of random looking text characters here. -----END PGP MESSAGE----- This text (lines included) can be sent by e-mail to anyone on any computerrunning PGP. But since it is encrypted with your public key, let's pretenda friend made it and sent it to you. Toss the original. In PGP, do'Open/decrypt', and choose the .asc file. Enter your pass phrase so PGP canuse your secret key. A text file, the decrypted message, will appear. [TheSystem 7 Control Panel "defaultappliction" by L. D'Oliveiro will allow adouble-click to open text files to the word processor of your choice (ftpto ftp.luth.se in /pub/mac/system/controlpanels)]. When you receive a PGPmessage, it will have e-mail headers, but PGP will ignore (and edit out!)anything outside the PGP header and footers. Shortcut: write text in a word processor, copy it to the clipboard and havePGP encrypt it THERE ('Clipboard' button in 'Encrypt/sign' dialog box),then paste it into e-mail. This also works for decryption, allowing you topaste the decrypted text anywhere. The finder also has 'Show Clipboard', oryou can check 'Decrypt to screen only' but I do NOT recommend this feature(fails if lines >80 characters, and crashes during saves). There is a nastybug in MacPGP2.3 which causes a crash if you use the Clipboard to check asigned message and you don't have the public key to check it with. If youget mail from someone who's key you don't have, don't use the Clipboardfeature! [You can just paste small text blocks into e-mail. Your software shouldalso have a "send" feature to autotype LARGE text files to the screen. Thisis what I use, but it can be tricky AND there may be no error control(characters may get lost, ruining the message). If lines get cut wrong,turn off word-wrapping in your account or software. More reliable is toupload a file ('rz'; or 'kermit', 'set file type text', 'receive') andinclude it in e-mail (in Unix 'mail', '~r filename' as a line in e-mail, oruse 'mail -s "Hi there!" name@site < filename'). You can view text fileswith 'more filename', 'q' to stop. Flow control should be 'hardware' (insoftware or modem setup string). If you RECEIVE long e-mail, use the"capture" feature of your software when you view it, OR save it to a fileand download it. Making windows tiny lets text scroll faster. Ask questionson comp.dcom.modems.] Checking 'Encrypt and sign' also SIGNS a message you are encrypting.Signatures are a trick, in that they are ENCRYPTED with your secret key,meaning a message must be from you (unaltered) since only your public keycan decode them. If you want to SIGN NON-encrypted text, use the menu item'Sign Only' and check 'Append clear signature'. A text file will appearcontaining your readable e-mail between the header and footers of thesignature. Anyone can check that this message is from you and is unaltered(copy to Clipboard, then 'Open/Decrypt'), if they have your public key. [Problem with signing NON-encrypted messages: If you don't cut lines toabout 75 characters BEFORE signing, the carriage returns added on uploading(by Unix or your software) will spoil the signature! For this I useDrop*TextBreak by Robert Gibson (ftp to sumex-aim.stanford.edu in /info-mac/text as drop-text-break.hqx). Another problem: certain characters maybe altered upon uploading text. Don't use smart quotes (curly symbols for 'and ") or control characters. E-mailing a message to yourself will revealproblems (use a text comparison utility). This ONLY concerns "clearsigning"of NON-encrypted messages.] To send your public key to a friend do 'Extract key' with 'aciify' checked,and name it "My public key". A text file of your public key will appear: -----BEGIN PGP PUBLIC KEY BLOCK----- Version: 2.3 About 8 lines of random looking characters here. -----END PGP PUBLIC KEY BLOCK----- When you get a friend's public key, get it to your desktop (paste intoblank document and save as TEXT ONLY). Do 'Add keys', select the file, andselect pubring.pgp to add it to your public key ring. Try this with my key.('Fingerprint key' will give you a short string of characters unique tothat key, for verbal confirmation of key origins.) There is also a fingerserver for public keys. Do 'finger keyword@wasabi.io.com' to fetchsomeone's public key, where "keyword" is part of his name or e-mailaddress. Now you can encrypt text files with their public key to send to them. Youcan also send non-text files (ANY Mac file) by using 'Treat source as a Macfile' and 'Produce output in ASCII format'. You will again get PGP textblock to send. To decrypt this, it is the same as before. Presently MacPGPwont let you select a Macintosh folder full of stuff, so use a compressionprogram (Stuffit Lite or Compact Pro, shareware) to put items into onearchive file (PGP itself compresses files so make NON-compressedarchives). [To encrypt a file on your hard disk only, you can use the menu item'Conventional Encryption' (and even create "self-decrypting" Mac files)with 'Treat source as Mac file' checked. However the pass phrase in thiscase is ITSELF the key used to encrypt the file, so you must be VERYcareful in typing it and remembering it (and why not use the drag-and-droputility Curve Encrypt by Will Kinney instead, even though it doesn'tcompress files like PGP does, it can do multiple files at once; fromripem.msu.edu in pub/crypt/other/curve-encrypt-idea-for-mac ascurve_encrypt.sea.hqx). I prefer to just encrypt such files with my publickey, again checking only 'Treat source as Mac file". The result of these isnot a text file!] When you have PGP up and running, with a few signatures on your key, sendyour public key to a keyserver. You can find most anyone's key on theseservers. See the "PGP FAQ" and the blurb in the PGP documentation fordetails. (There are people who will plop your public key onto thekeyservers, even if you send it in e-mail and especially if posted toUsenet. Be happy with your key first. You can still add new signatures toyour key on the servers by adding your the signed key to any server.) [Bug: if you are sent a PGP message by e-mail (ascii text-format), and youdon't end the name of this text file on your Mac with .asc, PGP will askyou if you want to replace it. If you say yes and give it another name, itmay fail to immediately update the finder views. You wont be able to seethe output file (ignore the temporary files ending in .$01 and such), butyou CAN see it in the 'Open' dialog of a word processor. Three solutions:add .asc (or just a period!), enter a new name while you are STILL in thedecryption options dialog box (not possible if you use the drag-and-dropfeature of System 7), or LET IT OVERWRITE THE ORIGINAL TEXT FILE (you looseany text outside the PGP message). This is not a problem with binary PGPmessages, which normally end in .pgp but don't have to.] Realize that a PGP message contains readily recovered information aboutwhich public key encrypted it and which private key signed it. On creatinga new key pair with an anonymous nickname and using an anonymous remailer(send blank mail to help@anon.penet.fi or read about remailers in the PGPFAQ), this information is removed. A commercial Unix account is good too,as e-mail errors wont route to your LOCAL system administrators. Netcom(408-554-UNIX) even lets you keep your real name private (but call by phoneor the sites you have telnetted in from are told). A different trick is toclearsign your message, then encrypt the signed message with the person'spublic key. Now who signed it isn't told to anyone except that person. Notealso that sending a floppy with no return address is much more secure thanusing anonymous remailers on the Word Wide Wiretap, er... internet. Another trick is to HIDE your use of encryption. Stego by Romana Machado(ftp to sumex-aim.stanford.edu in /info-mac/cmp) will hide text as theleast significant bit in a Mac PICT file, but this increases the size of amessage by 8-24 times. I prefer to type a message in a word processor, cutit out, encrypt it within the Clipboard, paste it back, save it as a realword processor file, then BinHex that (using the Drag and Drop utilityhqxer1.1 by John Stiles: ftp to sumex-aim.stanford.edu in /info-mac/cmp),and finally have my software autotype the file into e-mail. This is fast,and it's business as usual sending BinHex encoded Mac files. This way PGPis simply a Clipboard utility that adds encryption to a word processor. Onreceiving such a file, download it, drag it onto Stuffit Expander, andagain use PGP as a Clipboard utility to decrypt it. [You may need to put'set escape=~' into a file called .mailrc, if your Unix system doesn't usethe normal tilde (~) escape character for e-mail, to avoid stripping anylines out of BinHex files!] You can set many defaults by editing the text file config.txt. 'TextMode =on' checks 'Treat source as text'. 'Recycle_Passwords = on' means you onlyhave to type a pass phrase once per PGP session (but get it right the firsttime!). 'Armor = on' checks 'Produce output in ascii format'. 'ClearSig =on' checks 'append clear signature'. 'Verbose = 0' sets Quiet Mode, which Iprefer. You can always uncheck them; they are only defaults. I do NOTrecommend setting 'showpass = on' which checks 'show pass phrase', since itleaves it on the screen! Just check 'Show pass phrase' manually to avoidthis. Read the manual and the Usenet groups alt.security.pgp, alt.privacy andtalk.politics.crypto. If MacPGP ever freezes hold down the option, command,and escape keys to force it to quit. Get a program to erase data from yourhard disk after you "empty" the Trash and a replacement for the Trashitself (FlameFile by Josh Goldfoot does both; ftp to mac.archive.umich.eduin /mac/util/security as flamefile1.38.cpt.hqx). Get "The Big Dummy's Guideto the Internet" by Adam Gaffin and Joerg Heitkoetter (ftp to ftp.eff.orgin /pub/Net_info/Big_Dummy, as the text file bigdummy.txt). Get "AnonymityFAQ" (ftp to rtfm.mit.edu, in /pub/usenet/news.answers/net-anonymity, infour parts) and "Privacy and Anonymity FAQ" (in/pub/usenet/news.answers/net-privacy, in three parts) by L. Detweiler. Ifyou find PGP hard to use, live with it; new versions will arrive. I knownothing about non-Mac PGP. Go figure; don't ask me. I don't care about you.I just want more people to use PGP so I can hide my wonderfully importantmessages in the noise of your boring ones ;-). [If you get tired of the tiny scrollable list of keys when you select apublic key for encryption, open a COPY of MacPGP2.3 with ResEdit (ftp toftp.apple.com in /dts/mac/tools/resedit as resedit-2-1-1.hqx) and openDLOG, #129, set 'MiniScreen' in the menu bar to the size of your screen,and resize the little window to make it taller. Double click on it, thenmove the buttons to the bottom, after dragging a rectangle around them toselect them. Make the selection box taller now too. Quit. Now you will geta full-sized scrollable box which shows many more keys at once. Do NOTdistribute this modified form of MacPGP.] Note that PGP is very controversial, both legally (patent rights and exportlaws) and politically (as a tool it empowers individuals to ensure theirown right to privacy). Despite this it is becoming the standard encryptor.It may change the world. Comments on when and where I should post this and suggestions as to contentare invited. I see too many "How do I get PGP?" inquiries needing realanswers, and too many copies of PGP added to unused novelty collections.POST THIS EVERYWHERE. Please do not alter it. (Copyright Xenon, 1994). -=Xenon=- <qwerty@netcom.com or slower, na48138@anon.penet.fi> My key (remove the '-' and 'space' from the lines, added on signing thisdocument):- -----BEGIN PGP PUBLIC KEY BLOCK-----Version: 2.3 mQCPAizgA+EAAAEEAMzQAf9ff0q9tVD5oBxtVlPYAito4RBM+hJvX4irXzYgJWsAFhc4b/RfLcbGQVHwm0Q74cp/KhijXqGeLE2Tk62x04u1mjfBevoOHUltOOWxrIbUy6ros1cThAzVL03lkh6OHR3DbfUJWld9WtmamGWFGHYvt1WSagSzG6zrQn1RABEBAAG0BVhlbm9uiQCVAgUQLPj9XgSzG6zrQn1RAQEvhwP8Cpm7gxR1mkgnGA8TPHXovyjiUKpoXJlbMizz/yKzIHfPXDqKq9bcEz15mS5t7Jl9ZFBKs+n39D79lbB5ZLcn2qKuT5f+A9+++3bCcFlqRQqoHMzRfhIPCDYY5XNDLpR+vsUadxrC8N200qpvLvpLWb7LQ+hXkrskvFwpJErIS1Y==bZeo- -----END PGP PUBLIC KEY BLOCK----- -----BEGIN PGP SIGNATURE-----Version: 2.3 iQCVAgUBLVXY2wSzG6zrQn1RAQHp+AP/es/qePyEsvYMnx9UKwTznW/9KtIKyAnfE2MgShWMq38IfJoyNK1eIt61pt1OR6TfWosxyeD8hZQBacq6uCCm0v9uHPgEkl2dWfM38bM/1GDCZV2XdmADjemJF6A2JDtGrRtwOP2FO/Ql64nThBVJFjGr0Uyj3WsWel1CN7u8REs==dcOs-----END PGP SIGNATURE----- WT02-B12-111IA087-000631-B023-30http://res2.resnet.upenn.edu:80/cis590/reading.141.html 130.91.195.242 19970122065502 text/html 5090HTTP/1.0 200 OKDate: Wed, 22 Jan 1997 06:55:01 GMTServer: Apache/1.1.1Content-type: text/htmlContent-length: 4919Last-modified: Tue, 22 Nov 1994 06:33:04 GMTRon Rivest's response to Dorothy Denning Newsday editorial Please note I have no easy way to authenticate the validity of this notesince it is not crypto signed. Also please note I am happy to give bothsides (and there may be more than just two) of this discussion. But alsoplease don't yell at me if you don't like what you read. Yell at the sender(cc or bcc me) and/or send me a rebuttal. I will attempt to not forwardthings I consider liabilious, in bad taste or just grossly in-accurate ANDOBVIOUSLY things sent to me that are not of interest to IP. Dave Date: Fri, 25 Feb 94 16:24:20 ESTFrom: rivest@theory.lcs.mit.edu (Ron Rivest)To: denning@cs.cosc.georgetown.eduSubject: Newsday Editorial Hi Dorothy -- Thanks for sending me a copy of your editorial. But I find thereasoning you present misleading and unpersuasive. First, you argue that the clipper chip will be a useful lawenforcement tool. Given the small number of currently authorizedwiretaps per year (under 1000) and the ease of using alternativeencryption technology or superencryption, it seems plausible to methat law enforcement could expect at most ten "successful" clipperwiretaps per year. This is a pretty marginal basis for claiming thatclipper will "block crime". Second, you seem to believe that anything that will "block crime" musttherefore be a "good thing" and should therefore be adopted. This isnot true, even if it is not subject to government abuse. For example,a system that could turn any telephone (even when on-hook) into anauthorized listening microphone might help law enforcement, but wouldbe unacceptable to almost all Americans. As another example, tatooinga person's social security number on his or her buttocks might helplaw enforcement, but would also be objectionable. Or, you couldrequire all citizens to wear a bracelet that could be remotely queried(electronically, and only when authorized) to return the location ofthat citizen. There are all kinds of wonderfully stupid things onecould do with modern technology that could "help" law enforcement.But merely being of assistance to law enforcement doesn't make aproposal a good thing; many such ideas are objectionable andunacceptable because of the unreasonably large cost/benefit ratio(real or psychological cost). The clipper proposal, inmy opinion, is of exactly this nature. Third, you seem unnecessarily polly-annish about our government and thepotential for abuse. The clipper proposal places all trust for itsmanagement within the executive branch; a corrupt president coulddirect that it be used for inappropriate purposes. The unspecifiednature of many of the associated procedures leaves much room tospeculate that there are "holes" that could be exploited by governmentofficials to abuse the rights of American citizens. Even if theproposal were modified to split the trust among the various branchesof government, one might still reasonably worry about possible abuse.Merely because you've met the current set of representatives ofvarious agencies, and feel you can trust them, doesn't mean that suchtrust can be warranted in their successors. One should build ininstitutional checks and balances that overcome occasional morallapses in one or more office holders. Fourth, your discussion of "searching your home and seizing yourpapers" is misleading. You seem to imply that because law enforcementcan be issued a warrant to search your home, that we should adoptclipper. Yet this analogy only makes sense if individuals wererequired to deposit copies of their front door keys with thegovernment. I can build any kind of house I wish (out of steel, forexample), and put any kind of locks on it, and wire up any kind ofintrusion detectors on it, etc. The government, armed with a searchwarrant, is not guaranteed an "easy entry" into my home at all. Theappropriate analogical conclusion is that individuals should be ableto use any kind of encryption they want, and the government should beallowed (when authorized, of course) to try and break theirencryption. Finally, you argue (elsewhere, not in this editorial) that the decisionrests in part on "classified" information. Such an argument only makessense if there is a specific law-enforcement situation that makes suchclassified information timely and relevant. (E.g., if there was acurrent investigation as to whether the Department of the Treasury hadbeen infiltrated by organized crime.) The use of "classified information"is otherwise generally inappropriate in discussing communications policythat will last over decades. This hardly covers all of the relevant issues, but it covers thepoints that came immediately to mind in reading your editorial... Cheers, Ron P.S. Feel free to pass along, quote, or otherwise re-distribute this... WT02-B12-112IA087-000631-B023-64http://res2.resnet.upenn.edu:80/cis590/reading.142.html 130.91.195.242 19970122065520 text/html 1700HTTP/1.0 200 OKDate: Wed, 22 Jan 1997 06:55:18 GMTServer: Apache/1.1.1Content-type: text/htmlContent-length: 1529Last-modified: Tue, 22 Nov 1994 06:33:05 GMTPGP-voice, hmm where is the Clipper chip? From: grady@netcom.com (Grady Ward) It looks like PGP-voice is going to happen sooner than later. Posted on sumex-aim.stanford.edu is a demo version of 2Way Talkera utility that permits full-duplex conversations with any otherMacintosh on an AppleTalk network. This includes WANS connectedwith modems and Apple Remote Access. And it works without requiring *any* additional hardware since Macsnowadays have microphones as well as speakers built in. Implementing full public key controlled conversations is now just amatter of exchanging RSA keys and doing IDEA on the AppleTalk packetson the fly. Technically trivial. It's almost here, folks. For more information: 2 Way Computing, Inc.3400 La Jolla Village Drive Suite 400San Diego, CA 92122.Voice (619) 452-3888 FAX (619) 452-3077AppleLink: Leslie2Way or CRAIGTWOWAYAmerica Online: Leslie2WayInternet: 2Way@cerf.net 2Way Talker Pricing Information: Retail Price- $79.95 This is turning out even better and more available to the masses thanI thought it would... with V.fast modems and PowerPCs this is *really*going to be great. --Grady Ward | compiler of Moby lexicons: | finger grady@netcom.com+1 707 826 7715 | Words, Hyphenator, Part-of-Speech | for more information(voice/24hr FAX) | Pronunciator, Thesaurus | 15 E2 AD D3 D1 C6 F3 FCgrady@netcom.com | and Language; all royalty-free | 58 AC F7 3D 4F 01 1E 2F WT02-B12-113IA087-000631-B023-98http://res2.resnet.upenn.edu:80/cis590/reading.143.html 130.91.195.242 19970122065539 text/html 2596HTTP/1.0 200 OKDate: Wed, 22 Jan 1997 06:55:39 GMTServer: Apache/1.1.1Content-type: text/htmlContent-length: 2425Last-modified: Tue, 22 Nov 1994 06:33:06 GMTA Push for Surveillance Software (fwd) From: mikemck@mrc.com Here are some choice excerpts from the headlinearticle of the NY Times Business section, 2/28. A Push for Surveillance Software by John Markoff In the age of computer communications and digital telephonecalls, the American people must be willing to give up a degree ofpersonal privacy in exchange for safety and security, the head ofthe Federal Bureau of Investigation said. In an interview on Friday, Louis J. Freeh (note: is it reallypronounced Free?), the FBI director, defended proposed legislationthat critics say would turn the nation's telephone network intoa vast surveillance system. He said taxpayers would be asked topay up to half a billion dollars to develop and deploy thenecessary network software. The administration wants to impose new technology thatwould enable law-enforcement agents to gather a wealth of personalinformation by monitoring citizens' calling patterns and creditcard transactions over the telephone network - and over thetwo-way cable television networks being planned by cable andphone companies. The system would go well beyond current wire-tapping technology, because much of the information could begleaned without the police or FBI actually having to eavesdropon specific voice or electronic-mail conversations. "The costs are high, but you have to do a cost-benefitanalysis," said Mr. Freeh, who insisted that fighting terroristsand criminals was the governments intention - not playingBig Brother to the citizenry. ... The administration is trying to line up congressionalsupport for the legislation, called Digital Telephony andCommunications Privacy Improvement Act of 1994, before having itformally introduced. ... ____________________________________________________________ There's much more but I don't have a scanner handy. Ican't believe how quickly this appalling threat has developed.The government always veils its expansion of powers as a needfor increased security: the War on Drugs, criminals, terrorists.What I'm really surprised by is that they foresee the endpointof freely available information technology, a diminishing needfor centralized government. If the net contributes to the end of centralized control,it's easy to extrapolate who the target terrorists are goingto be. mikemck@mrc.com WT02-B12-114IA087-000631-B023-133http://res2.resnet.upenn.edu:80/cis590/reading.144.html 130.91.195.242 19970122065558 text/html 6787HTTP/1.0 200 OKDate: Wed, 22 Jan 1997 06:55:58 GMTServer: Apache/1.1.1Content-type: text/htmlContent-length: 6616Last-modified: Tue, 22 Nov 1994 06:33:07 GMTCLIPPER NEWS --- A brief note on the fact that Senator Leahy has decided to hold hearings on Clipper Chip! From: jberman@eff.org Jerry BermanDate: Mon, 7 Mar 1994 19:09:22 -0500Subject: Leahy to hold hearings on Clipper Chip! Dear Friends on the Electronic Frontier: I have some good news to share with you. Senator Leahy just sent me aletter indicating that he *will* be scheduling hearings on theAdministration's Clipper Chip proposal. I would like to thank all of youwho sent us messages to forward to him urging hearings. I'm sure thatstack of messages we printed out made a significant impact on the Senator-- the stack was over seven inches tall! (We look forward to the day whenno trees will have to be sacrificed in the furtherance of democracy!) And if you haven't written a message to Rep. Cantwell yet about herproposed amendment to the Export Control Act, please do so and forward itto cantwell@eff.org. This is an address we set up to enable us to collectmessages in support of her bill. We have been printing out messages anddelivering them each week -- so far we've received over 4500 letters ofsupport. For more information on the Cantwell bill, send a message tocantwell-info@eff.org. Thanks again. We'll let you know as soon as the Clipper hearing gets scheduled. Sincerely, Jerry BermanEFF Executive Director -.-.-.-.-.-.-. forward from Sen. Leahy -.-.-.-.-.-.-.-.-.-. United States SenateCommittee on the JudiciaryWashington, DC 20510 March 1, 1994 Mr. Jerry BermanExecutive DirectorElectronic Frontier Foundation1001 G Street, Suite 950 EastWashington, DC 20001 Dear Jerry, Thank you for forwarding to me the many thoughtful and informative messagesyou received over the Internet regarding the Administration's recentapproval of an escrowed encryption standard, known as the Clipper Chip. Many of the messages urge Congress to hold hearings to review theAdministration's Clipper Chip standard. In fact, I intend to hold ahearing before the Judiciary Subcommittee on Technology and the Law, whichI chair, to consider the important issues raised by the Clipper Chip. Iwill let you know when a date for the hearing is scheduled. Thank you again. Sincerely, /s/ PATRICK J. LEAHYUnited States Senator PJL/jud-.-.-.-.-.-.-.-.-.-.-.-.-.-.-.-.-.-.-.-.-.-.-.-.-. JOIN EFF!!========== EFF's work as a civil liberties organization in Washington has been verysuccessful, but the realization of our goals of freedom and privacy onlinecan only come with the active and vocal participation of the entire onlinecommunity. Now that you have personally experienced both the threat of theloss of your privacy and the power having won the first battle, won't youtake that next step and become a member of EFF? By joining EFF, you will help us to expand our reach to educate and involvean even greater number of people in the shaping of these critical issues.Your tax-deductible donation will tie you into the EFF information networkand support our public policy and legal work. As a member, you will beguaranteed timely the timely information and mechanism you need to respondon these issues. Our voices in unity *do* make a difference. -------- 8< ------- cut here ------- 8< -------- MEMBERSHIP IN THE ELECTRONIC FRONTIER FOUNDATION================================================ Print out in monospaced (non-proportional) font and mail to: Membership Coordinator Electronic Frontier Foundation 1001 G Street, NW, Suite 950 East, Washington, DC 20001 SIGN ME UP! I wish to become a member of the Electronic Frontier Foundation. I enclose: ___ Regular membership -- $40 ___ Student membership -- $20 * Special Contribution I wish to make an additional tax-deductible donation in the amount of $__________ to further support the activities of EFF and to broaden participation in the organization. PAYMENT METHOD: ___ Enclosed is a check or money order payable to the Electronic Frontier Foundation. ___ Please charge my: ___ MasterCard ___ Visa ___ American Express Card Number: _____________________________________________ Expiration Date: _________________________________________ Signature: _______________________________________________ NOTE: We do not recommend sending credit card information via email! YOUR CONTACT INFORMATION: Name: __________________________________________________________ Organization: __________________________________________________ Address: _______________________________________________________ _______________________________________________________ Phone: _____________________ FAX: _____________________ BBS: _____________________ BBS Name: ____________________ E-mail addresses: ______________________________________________ ______________________________________________ PREFERRED CONTACT ___ Electronic: Please contact me via the Internet address listed above. I would like to receive the following at that address: ___ EFFector Online - EFF's biweekly electronic newsletter (back issues available from ftp.eff.org, pub/EFF/Newsletters/EFFector). ___ Online Bulletins - bulletins on key developments affecting online communications. NOTE: Traffic may be high. You may wish to browse these publications in the Usenet newsgroup comp.org.eff.news (also available in FidoNet, as EFF-NEWS). ___ Paper: Please contact EFF through the US Mail at the street address listed above. NOTE: Paper documents available upon request. "Networks & Policy" Newsletter automatically sent via US Mail. PRIVACY POLICY EFF occasionally shares our mailing list with other organizations promotingsimilar goals. However, we respect an individual's right to privacy andwill not distribute your name without explicit permission. ___ I grant permission for the EFF to distribute my name and contact information to organizations sharing similar goals. [This form from eff.org 3/7/94 Cantwell--please leave this line on the form!] The Electronic Frontier Foundation is a nonprofit, 501(c)(3) organizationsupported by contributions from individual members, corporations andprivate foundations. Donations are tax-deductible. WT02-B12-115IA087-000631-B023-166http://res2.resnet.upenn.edu:80/cis590/reading.145.html 130.91.195.242 19970122065642 text/html 1041HTTP/1.0 200 OKDate: Wed, 22 Jan 1997 06:56:31 GMTServer: Apache/1.1.1Content-type: text/htmlContent-length: 871Last-modified: Tue, 22 Nov 1994 06:33:08 GMTEntertainment tonight (well two nights from now) -- clipper vs Denning v. Barlow on AOL 3/10 9 pm CLIPPER CHIP DEBATEThursday, March 10, 9 pm eastern Dorothy Denning, cryptologist and chair of the computer science departmentat Georgetown University, will debate John Perry Barlow, cognitivedissident and co-founder of the Electronic Frontier Foundation, in the TIMEOdeon on America Online this Thursday at 9 pm. Philip Elmer-DeWitt, TIMEsenior writer, and Robert Pondiscio, TIME public affairs director, willmoderate. The floor will be open to questions from the audience. You need an America Online account to participate. Call America Online at703-448-8700 to subscribe. --Philip Elmer-DeWitt ped@panix.com ped@well.comTIME Magazinephiliped@aol.com Read TIME on America Online, where we get paid to take abuse. WT02-B12-116IA087-000631-B023-210http://res2.resnet.upenn.edu:80/cis590/reading.146.html 130.91.195.242 19970122065707 text/html 17608HTTP/1.0 200 OKDate: Wed, 22 Jan 1997 06:57:06 GMTServer: Apache/1.1.1Content-type: text/htmlContent-length: 17436Last-modified: Tue, 22 Nov 1994 06:33:09 GMTBralow/Denning debate on AOL 3/10/94 8:49:41 PM Opening "Chat Log 3/10/94 CLIPPER" for recording. OnlineHost : Good evening and welcome to the Time Online Odeon! Tonight welook from both sides at the Clipper Chip, a semiconductor device that theNational Security Agency developed and wants installed in every telephone,computer modem and fax machine. OnlineHost : In his article in the current issue of TIME, PhilipElmer-DeWitt writes: "The chip combines a powerful encryption algorithmwith a ''back door'' -- the cryptographic equivalent of the master key thatopens schoolchildren's padlocks when they forget their combinations. A''secure'' phone equipped with the chip could, with proper authorization,be cracked by the government. OnlineHost: "Law-enforcement agencies say they need this capability to keeptabs on drug runners, terrorists and spies. Critics denounce the Clipper --and a bill before Congress that would require phone companies to make iteasy to tap the new digital phones -- as Big Brotherly tools that willstrip citizens of whatever privacy they still have in the computer age. OnlineHost: "Lined up on one side are the three-letter cloak-and-daggeragencies -- the NSA, the CIA and the FBI -- and key policymakers in theClinton Administration (who are taking a surprisingly hard line on theencryption issue). Opposing them is an equally unlikely coalition ofcomputer firms, civil libertarians, conservative columnists and a strangebreed of cryptoanarchists who call themselves the cypherpunks." RPTime: Lined up on our stage tonight are John Perry Barlow, Dr. DorothyDenning and Philip Elmer-DeWitt. Barlow is co-founder of the ElectronicFrontier Foundation, which promotes freedom in digital media. A recognizedcommentator on computer security, he is arguing against the Clipper ChipDr. Denning is the chairperson of the Computer Science Department atGeorgetown University. A leading expert on cryptography and data security,she favors the adoption of the Clipper Chip. Philip Elmer-DeWitt, TIME'stechnology editor will lead the questioning of our guests. Audiencequestions may be sent up using the Interact with Host function....Phil? PhilipED: Dr. Denning, could you *briefly* make the case for why we needthe key escrow encryption system. DDenning: The government needs a new encryption standard to replace DES.They came up with a very strong algorithm called SKIPJACK. In making thatavailable, they didn't want to do it in a way that could ultimately proveharmful to society. So they came up with the idea of key escrow so that ifSKIPJACK were used to conceal criminal activity, they would be able to getaccess to the communications. PhilipED: THanks. Mr. Barlow, could you briefly make the case *against*Clipper. We'll see if I can be brief. We oppose Clipper in large partbecause of the traffic analysis which it makes possible. We believe that itis in the functional nature of the chip as designed to greatly enhance theability of government to observe who we are calling, when, and from where,all fairly automatically and centrally. We also oppose Clipper because ofthe many way in which we believe the escrow system could be compromised, bypeople and institutions both inside and outside of government. PhilipED: Dr. Denning, what about John's contention that Clipper makes iteasier to detect calling patterns. DDenning: I don't buy this. First off, for law enforcement to access anycommunications, they need a court order. Even if the communications areencrypted. Second, with a court order, they can get access to call setupinformation and find out what other lines the subject of the investigationis talking to. This is of much more use than anything in the encryptedstream. PhilipED: John, is Dorothy right that you need a court order for call setup info? Barlow1: Dorothy, the government asked for and received over 100,000calling records last year without a court order. I see nothing in theClipper documents which indicates that they would require a court order toget this kind of information, which each chip would make readily availableto the entire network. DDenning: You need a court order to do implement pen registers and dialednumber recorders in order to find out who is talking to whom. Barlow1: Furthermore, my faith in court orders has been eroded by 30 yearsof government wiretap abuse. PhilipED: Aren't we talking about three different hurdles here, one for awiretap... Barlow1: But that's only with the present system where putting a penregister on a line requires physical entrance to a phone company site. PhilipED: One for a pen register (to track calling patterns in real time)and one for phone records. RPTime: Let's take a question from the audience... How would you guaranteethat this facility will never be misused? If you can't make that guarantee,why should a democratic society, with a prohibition against priorrestraint, consent to this? John Barlow? Barlow1: There are three different sources of information, as you say. Butthere are not three "hurdles." That sounds like a question for Dorothy. Idon't think we should, obviously. RPTime: Dr. Denning? DDenning: First of all, there has been no evidence of widespread abuse ofwiretaps since passage of the 1968 and 1978 wiretap statutes. Second, thereare a lot of security mechanisms going into it to protect against abuse.Third, it will provide much greater protection against illegal wiretapsthan we have now, since almost all phone conversations are in the clear. Itwill make virtually all illegal wiretaps impossible. Fourth, if for somereason it doesn't provide adequate protection, we can destroy the keydatabases and everyone will have absolute privacy against governmentwiretaps. I don't think our society will tolerate that kind of abuse. PhilipED: John, isn't Dorothy right that you're better off with compromisedencryption than none? Barlow1: Gee, where to begin... First of all, there was plenty of abuseafter 1968. Remember Watergate, Dorothy? Second, I believe that Clipper inthe Net will dramatically *enhance* certain powers of... DDenning: I was talking specifically about wiretap abuses. And there hasn'tbeen any evidence since the 1978 law. Barlow1: surveillance over current technical abilities. One of the reasonsthat wiretap hasn't been more abused is the bureaucratic overhead ofcurrent practices. Make it so that it doesn't require 50 agents to conducta wire tap and you'll see a lot more of it. And Watergate included quite anumber of wiretap violations. Indeed, the burglers were caught trying toinstall one. As to the assertion that we can always back up and destroy thedatabases if we don't like it, I can't imagine that someone as bright asyourself would believe that this is possible. Technology and power ratchetinto positions which almost never retract without a complete change in thesystem of authority RPTime: Care to respond Dr. Denning? DDenning: Clipper would prevent the watergate burglars from gettinganywhere since they wouldn't have a court order. Clipper will not makewiretaps cheaper or easier. Wiretaps are becoming more diffiults. And therewill always be more agents involved becasue they have to follow exactingprocedures, including minimization (throw out all conversations that arenot specific to the crime at hand). Barlow1: Dorothy, they were from the *Government* remember? I can't imaginethat Nixon wouldn't have been able to find a sympathetic ear from somebodyat NIST and somebody else at Treasury. Further, you're not talking aboutthe truly insidious element of this, which is dramatically improved trafficanalysis. Content is less important than context, and most agents willsupport this. RPTime: Another question from the audience. JCMaille asks... Does thegovernment have a constitutional right of access to my personalcommunications? Dr. Denning, why don't you go first? DDenning: The Supreme Court ruled that wiretaps with a court order areConstitutional. At one time, communications were not even protected underthe 4th Amendment. The government could wiretap without a court order! Nowa court order is required. PhilipED: To put the question another way, do citizens have a right to usepowerful encryption? DDenning: Right now there are no laws preventing the use of any encryption.Clipper is voluntary. You can still use something else. RPTime: We have to apologize. John Barlow has temporarily lost his connection... PhilipED: Dr. Denning, in your opinion... would a law outlawing powerfulencryption be unconstitutional? DDenning: I don't think so. But that doesn't mean it will happen. RPTime: John Barlow is back with us. Sorry for the interruption! Barlow,Denning just said she didn't think a law banning powerful encryption wouldbe unconstitutional What do you say? Hi folks. Don't know what happened.Gald to be back Gald indeed! Barlow1: Actually, I believe that our current export embargoes are aviolation of the 1st Amendment which specify speech without regard to themanner of speech. If we could restrict manner of speech, it would beconstitutional to require that everyone speak English. Which of course itisn't PhilipED: John, can you make the case why ordinary law-abiding citizensneed powerful encryption? Barlow1: Because it is in the nature of digitally networked communicationsto be quite visible. Everytime we make any sort of transaction in a digitalenvironment, we smear our fingerprints all over Cyberspace. If we are tohave any privacy in the future, we will need virtual "walls" made ofcryptography. RPTime: Another audience question... Isn't this like the gun argument? Ifguns are outlawed only criminals will have guns? Well, if clipper isstandardized, won't criminals be the ones NOT using it? RPTime: Dr. Denning? If Clipper becomes the de facto standard, then it willbe the chief method of encryption. That would be what you'd get at RadioShack. What criminals use will depend on what is readily available and whattheir cohorts are using. Both parties of a conversation have to use thesame thing. Criminals also talk to a lot of people outside their immediatecircle - e.g., to buy goods and services. Also, they can be quite stupid attimes. But the main thing is that criminals will not be able to takeadvantage of the SKIPJACK algorithm as a way of concealing theirconversations. This is the whole point. It is not to catch criminals. It isto allow people access to a really high quality algorithm in a way thatsomeone cannot use it to conceal criminal activity. Barlow1: The gun analogy is excellent up to a point. I can't for the lifeof me imagine why we would think that even a stupid criminal would useClipper if something else were available. And when I talk to people in theadministration their big hobgoblin is the "nuclear-armed" terrorist. Anyfanatic smart enough to assemble and detonate a nuclear device is going tobe smart enough to download PGP from a bulletin board somewhere. Also, I'dlike to point out that the gun analogy doesn't go the whole distance.Crypto is by its nature a purely *defensive* technology. You can't shootpeople with it. PhilipED: Speaking of PGP, Dr. Denning, is that encryption system secure,in your opinion? DDenning: I don't know of anyone who's been able to break the IDEAalgorithm that it uses. RPTime: Back to the audience for a question from Steve HW.. This is for Dr.Denning. What is the evidence of harm if the Clipper proposal is notadopted? DDenning: The harm would be to the government. They would not be able touse it and would have to resort to something less secure. Also, Clipper ispart of a larger project to make hardware available for encryption anddigital signatures. This will be used, for example, in the Defense MessageSystem. The goverment needs a new standard. I personally believe thatmaking really powerful encryption like SKIPJACK available without keyescrow could be harmful to society. Wiretaps have been essential forpreventing and solving many serious crimes and terrorist activities. Barlow1: Why on earth would the government have to use something else ifthey failed to get the rest of rest of us to buy into this folly? Hey, theyare already using SKIPJACK. It's a government algorithm and has been in usefor a... DDenning: CPSR and others are asking the government to drop Clipper. Barlow1: long time. There are plenty other algorithms which we can usewhich are truly protected... unless of course, this is only the first stepin a process which will outlaw other forms of crypto. And I believe that itmust be. Makes absolutely no sense otherwise. EFF is not asking theGovernment to drop Clipper, though we would vastly prefer they did. We'remerely asking that no steps be taken to require it either by law orpractice...as, for example, would be the case if you had to use a Clipperchip to file your tax return. PhilipED: Dr. Denning, do you think this is the "first step in a process tooutlaw crypto"? DDenning: No I do not. The government has not been using SKIPJACK to myknowledge. The Clipper initiative represents the first time that thegovernment has put one of their really good algorithms out there in theunclassified arena. They are trying to do this in a way that won't backfireagainst the public. Other NSA developed algorithms are not available forpurchase by the public. Barlow1: I appreciate their willingness to make some of that cryptoresearch available to a public which has paid so much for it, but I'mafraid that I would never trust an algorithm which was given to me by anygovernment. And I certainly don't trust a classified algorithm likeSkipjack, even without a back door which everyone can see. I think I'llstick to systems which have been properly vetted to be clear of suchcompromises, like RSA. I hope others will do likewise and that RSA willbecome the standard which Clipper shouldn't be. RPTime: Time for one more question from our audience... To John Barlow.Isn't society becoming increasingly vulnerable to concertedcriminal/terrorist disruption, requiring *stronger* law enforcement tools? Barlow1: Gee. I don't know. It's a scary world. However, I'm willing totake my chances with the few terrorists and drug lords there are out thererather than trusting government with the kind of almost unlimitedsurveillance power which Clipper and Digital Telephony would give them.It's a touch choice. But when you look at the evil perpetrated bygovernment over this century in the name of stopping crime, it far exceedsthat done by other organized criminals. RPTime: Dr. Denning, hasn't remote listening technology enhanced policeabilities to eavesdrop to the point... where the loss of a few wire tapswon't mean much? DDenning: No. They need to get the cooperation of the service providers toimplement a wiretap. The loss of some wiretaps could be costly indeed. Asan example, wiretaps were used to help solve a case that involved plans bya Chicago gang from shooting down a commercial airliner. There have been 2cases where they helped save the lives of kids who were going to bekidnaped for the making of a snuff murder film. They helped solve a casewhere a man's house was going to be bombed. I could go on. If we takeJohn's arguments about law enforcement to their logical conclusion, we'djust get rid of law enforcement. I think it's better to have it. The peoplein law enforcement hate it as much as the rest of us when some member ofthe community does something wrong. And they correct it, design newprocedures and laws where necessary, and go on. Barlow1: Oh, please. I'm not proposing eliminating police. I'm opposinggiving them unlimited powers. Also,these are the same cases cited over andover by everyone from you to Judge Freeh. Surely, we aren't going tofundamentally change the balance of power in this country because of thesetwo (undocumented, to my knowledge) stories. DDenning: Clipper is not going to change the balance of power. It does notgive law enforcement any additional authority to do wiretaps. Barlow1: Well, this is where we basically disagree, Dorothy. If we couldcontinue the same level of LE capacity we presently have, I'd have noobjection. But I believe, for reasons I'm not sure we have the bandwidth todiscuss here, that we are talking about dramatically enhancing theirabilities. For one thing, we would greatly reduce the bureaucratic overheadinvolved in wiretap, which is what keeps it under 900 cases nationwide atthe present. RPTime: And that will have to be the last word on the matter for tonight... DDenning: The overhead of a wiretap is more likely to increase, not decrease. PhilipED: Not quite! Maybe not! ;-) RPTime: THAT will be the final word! Barlow1: Well, let's get together and talk, Dorothy. RPTime: TIME thanks Dr. Dorothy Denning and John Perry Barlow for beingwith us tonight... along with Philip Elmer-DeWitt. Thank you all, andgoodnight! Thank you both. This was very interesting. DDenning: Thank you for the opportunity to be here! WT02-B12-117IA087-000631-B023-253http://res2.resnet.upenn.edu:80/cis590/reading.147.html 130.91.195.242 19970122065725 text/html 17200HTTP/1.0 200 OKDate: Wed, 22 Jan 1997 06:57:27 GMTServer: Apache/1.1.1Content-type: text/htmlContent-length: 17028Last-modified: Tue, 22 Nov 1994 06:33:10 GMTEFFector Online 07.05: Privacy Coalition Against FBI Bill letter to the White House and letter to the Director of the FBI ========================================================================= ________________ _______________ _______________ /_______________/\ /_______________\ /\______________\ \\\\\\\\\\\\\\\\\ \ ||||||||||||||||| / //////////////// \\\\\\\\\\\\\\\\\/ ||||||||||||||||| / //////////////// \\\\\\_______/\ ||||||_______\ / //////_____\ \\\\\\\\\\\\\ \ |||||||||||||| / ///////////// \\\\\\\\\\\\\/____ |||||||||||||| / ///////////// \\\\\___________/\ ||||| / //// \\\\\\\\\\\\\\\\ \ ||||| / //// \\\\\\\\\\\\\\\\/ ||||| \//// =========================================================================EFFector Online Volume 07 No. 05 Mar. 11, 1994 editors@eff.orgA Publication of the Electronic Frontier Foundation ISSN 1062-9424 Subject: DPSWG Coalition's Digital Telephony Letter to White House On March 9, the Digital Privacy and Security Working Group sent the followingletter to the Administration calling into question the procedures by whichthe FBI's Digital Telephony "Wiretap Bill" draft is being examined, andexpressing harsh criticism of the would-be legislation. The DPSWG is acoalition of privacy and civil liberties organizations, tradeassociations, and industry leaders, coordinated by the Electronic FrontierFoundation. March 9, 1994 The President William J. ClintonThe White HouseWashington, D.C. 20500 The Vice President of the United StatesUnited States SenateWashington, D.C. 20510 Dear Mr. President and Mr. Vice President: Telecommunications carriers and other members of the Digital Privacy andSecurity Working Group are keenly aware of the concerns raised by theAdministration regarding the ability to intercept communicationstransmitted over advanced commu nications networks. We are concerned, however, about the nature of the process upon which theAdministration has embarked to address these issues. Seeking immediateindustry reaction to the FBI's draft legislation and congressional passageof such legislation shortly thereafter is troubling. It suggestscurtailment of public debate and of congressional deliberation. Given theinterest of the public in these matters and their complexity, it isessential that there be a full public debate on these issues. Industry is currently cooperating with appropriate authorities to avoidfuture problems and to expand existing capacities. This is not to say thatthere have not been some transitional concerns particularly upon theintroduction of new technologies that have grown greatly in popularity. But,whenever transitional problems have arisen, industry representatives haveworked with law enforcement officials to resolve them. The FBI's actions are especially troubling in light of our view thatlegislation is not needed to accomplish the agency's goals. We still seeno evidence that current law enforcement efforts are being jeopardized bynew technologies. Nor are we convinced that future law enforcementactivities will be jeopardized given industry cooperation. We still believe that continued cooperation by government and industrywithin the working relationship that has emerged from the 1992 QuanticoJoint Government Industry Group will resolve "the digital telephonyproblem" and preserve the government's current authorities. Thediscussions have succeeded in identifying specific problems and have begunthe process of generating concrete, cost-effective solutions. This processhas facilitated a more robust exchange of technical information andan identification of possible new equipment and police tactics needed toachieve law enforcement goals. Nevertheless, we are prepared to work withthe Congress and the Administration to attempt to resolve the legitimateconcerns of law enforcement. The signatories to this letter cannot overemphasize how critical it is thatany new initiatives in this area preserve the public's confidence in theprivacy of information carried over the public switched network. Less thana decade after enactment of the Electronic Communications Privacy Act of1986, the nation can ill afford to undercut customer privacy expectations.Indeed, on the eve of the National Information Infrastructure's deployment,preserving customer confidence is all the more important. Privacyprotection is not a secondary interest here. Survey after survey performed by Professor Alan Westin and others havedemonstrated the public's concern with privacy and the security of theircommunications. We all must seek to maximize those interests and assurethe public that their communications are protected. Sincerely yours, Apple Computer, Inc.AT&TAmerican Civil Liberties UnionBusiness Software AllianceCellular Telecommunications Industry AssociationComputer Business Equipment & Manufacturers AssnDigital Equipment CorporationElectronic Frontier FoundationElectronic Messaging AssociationGTE CorporationInformation Industry AssociationInformation Technology Association of AmericaIris Associates, IncMcCaw CellularMCI Communications CorporationPeople for the American WaySoftware Publishers AssociationSun Microsystems Federal, Inc.Trusted Information SystemsUnited States Telephone Association cc: Louis Freeh, Director, Federal Bureau of Investigation John Podesta, Office of the President Michael Nelson, Office of the Vice President Senator Patrick Leahy Senator Ernest Hollings Representitive Don Edwards Representative Edward Markey Subject: Letter of DPSWG to FBI Dir. Freeh on Wiretap Bill's Privacy Threat On March 11, the Digital Privacy and Security Working Group sent theletter below to FBI Dir. Louis Freeh as a followup to the March 9 letter tothe Administration, detailing the DPSWG's criticisms of the FBI's proposedDigital Telephony bill, and raising serious privacy questions. EFF andthe DPSWG feel that the Digital Telephony scheme, coupled with theAdministration's Clipper Chip plan, could turn the future NationalInforamation Infrastructure into a nationwide surveillance network.It is clear that law enforcement needs and wants do not requiresuch overly-broad legislative action, and the possible gain to lawenforcement is vastly outweighed by the massive threat to citizen privacy.The DPSWG is a coalition of privacy and civil liberties organizations, tradeassociations, and industry leaders, coordinated by the Electronic FrontierFoundation. March 11, 1994 By Hand DeliveryMr. Louis FreehDirectorFederal Bureau of InvestigationWashington, D.C.Dear Director Freeh: This letter is a follow-up to our letter of March 9, 1994 to PresidentClinton and Vice President Gore (a copy is attached). While we do notbelieve that new legislation is needed to accomplish the FBI's goals, wetake this opportunity to more specifically raise some of the questions thatshould be answered in pursuing any digital telephony legislation. Thedraft that the White House has given us for comment is overly broad, andit is our hope that this letter will assist in narrowing the scope of anylegislation.While we have additional, important questions and concerns, this lettersets forth our primary concerns. (1) Should digital telephony legislation reach "call setup information" independently of a "Title III" search warrant? The New York Times of February 28, 1994 quotes you as stating, "My realobjective is to get access to the content of telephone calls." The billshould therefore be limited to content of communications and incidentalcall setup or transactional data. Legislation should apply to "call setup information" only when thatinformation is incident to a warrant issued for wire, oral, or electroniccommunications as set forth in 18 U.S.C. $ 2518. Extending the legislation'sscope beyond the acquisition of content (pursuant to a warrant undersection 2518) to the independent acquisition of call setup informationraises many issues that require examination. For example, currently thelegal standard for obtaining transactional data is a certification (viasubpoena or statement to a judge) that the sought-after data is relevant toan ongoing criminal investigation. In the era of personal communicationsservices ("PCS") and of the information highway, transactional data willreveal far more about individuals than it has in the past. In fact, in somecases it may be equivalent to content information. This transactional datacertainly could make it possible to build a detailed model of an individual'sbehavior and movements. The net result could be government dictating toindustry that it create a surveillance-based system that will allow federal,state, and local government to use a service provider's electroniccommunication facilities to conduct minute-by-minute surveillance ofindividuals. As long as they have an IRS or other administrative subpoena or a lawenforcement agent willing to certify that the sought-after data isrelevant to an ongoing criminal investigation, law enforcement officialscould demand that they be notified at some remote location every timecertain individuals communicate by telephone, and their location at thetime, as well as every database they connect to and when they log on andoff. In short, law enforcement officials could insist on instantaneouslyknowing the existence of every single electronic communication (but notits content). The enormous potential for abuse and threat to personal privacy suggeststhat, if transactional data were to be covered by digital telephonylegislation, it should be incidental to a "Title III" wiretap warrant. Thiswould not limit in any way law enforcement's access to trap and trace, penregister, or call billing information under current law or practice. This isparticularly true given that there has been no case made thatdemonstrates any current or potential difficulty in getting this non-contentinformation under current practices. The technology in fact has madethese type of services much easier for law enforcement to use and access.Additional legislation is simply not necessary to obtain this data. (2) What is covered? The obligation to isolate the content of communications must be reasonablyrelated to the service provider's telecommunications services. It wouldbe unreasonable for the FBI to demand any person involved with thecommunication to furnish it with access to that communication. Forexample, most providers, including local telephone companies, usuallyneed to isolate communications for purposes of billing and maintenance. Itis appropriate for the FBI to seek their assistance in interceptingcommunications on their networks only when the requests are reasonablyrelated to the telecommunications services they provide. Therefore, the question is not necessarily who is covered, but whattelecommunications services are covered. For example, the legislationshould reflect the fact that, in reselling services, even local telephonecompanies sometimes are unable in those instances to furnish call setupinformation regardless of whether it is incident to the acquisition of acommunication's content. (3) What will be the requirements placed upon service providers and what will be the standard of compliance that will be applied? Legislation should carefully define the obligations of service providers.This is not the case with the FBI's current draft of proposed legislation.These obligations are vague and subject to considerable interpretation.Service providers and manufactures must have flexibility to adoptprocedures that reasonably comply with the specific functional performancerequirements of law enforcement. This is particularly true where, as here, compliance requires anassessment of future needs and interoperability requirements. Thereis a difference between compliance and a guarantee, and legislation mustreflect that difference. Carriers should be required to provide reasonablecooperation and that cooperation should be measured by a standard ofreasonable compliance. In installing new software or equipment under this statute, a serviceprovider must be able to reasonably assess future demands by lawenforcement. Other industries subject to regulation at least know, forexample, the temperature at which they must maintain the specimens, theemission standard they must satisfy, or the type of safety restraintequipment they must install and the date by which they must have itinstalled in vehicles. Service providers cannot be held to an absolutestandard of compliance where they are using and delivering newtechnologies to the public and the demands of law enforcement are notclearly specified. This applies to both capability and capacity. Lawenforcement must be specific in its requirements for capacity andcapability from each service provider. (4) What is expected of commercial mobile service providers? It is not a foregone conclusion that mobility in a digitizedtelecommunications environment will degrade or otherwise impede thelaw enforcement community's ability to effectively execute court-approved wiretap orders. Wireless carriers are committed to assisting law enforcement agencies tosuccessfully wiretap and intercept voice communications. To accomplishthis goal, the wireless industry understands that available excess portcapacity is needed in all switches throughout the nation. While it may bereasonable for federal and state law enforcement agencies to acquire thecontents of wireless communications pursuant to "Title III" warrantsthrough additional port capacity, it would be prohibitively expensive torequire that every one of the nation's switches be connected to the FBI toenable it to acquire such information on a "real time" basis at remotelocations. Connecting every one of the nation's switches to the FBI, moreover,would increase exponentially the risk of unauthorized access to wirelesscommunications. Further, the proliferation of fraudulent use of wirelesstelephones through such techniques as "cloning" and "tumbling" ESNs(electronic serial numbers) poses additional questions with respect toprivacy and the ability of law enforcement to properly execute court-approved wiretap orders. (5) What are the responsibilities of manufacturers and suppliers, if any? The FBI wishes manufacturers of telecommunications equipment and providersof support services to fall within the scope of the legislation. But,would service providers be held liable for software or hardware thatis not available from vendors? Why? How would the obligations beenforced against foreign manufacturers? What would be the liability of adomestic carrier that relies upon foreign manufacturers? What are thetrade implications of having domestic manufacturers export equipmentdesigned for governmental surveillance? (6) How, and during what period, are costs to be recovered to ensure that there is a direct relationship between the costs reasonably incurred by covered entities and the government's requirements? Government should pay for what it needs, which will help focus attentionupon the facilities that truly need upgrading. If the government does notpay for upgrades or facilities, then the service providers should not beheld responsible. The FBI appears to have accepted the concept thatgovernment should pay for the costs of compliance but has so farunderestimated these costs and proposed an arbitrary three-year limit oncost reimbursement. Government compensation should be ongoing withindustry's compliance. * * * We trust you find our comments helpful. We remain prepared to work withyou, Congress, and others to attempt to resolve the legitimate concerns oflaw enforcement. Sincerely yours, [signed] Jerry Berman (202) 347-5400 [signed] Ronald Plesser (202) 861-3969Enclosurecc: John Podesta, Office of the President Michael Nelson, Office of Science & Technology Policy Senator Joseph Biden Senator Ernest Hollings Senator Patrick Leahy Representative Jack Brooks Representative John Dingell Representative Don Edwards Representative Edward Markey WT02-B12-118IA087-000631-B023-278http://res2.resnet.upenn.edu:80/cis590/reading.148.html 130.91.195.242 19970122065742 text/html 8668HTTP/1.0 200 OKDate: Wed, 22 Jan 1997 06:57:42 GMTServer: Apache/1.1.1Content-type: text/htmlContent-length: 8497Last-modified: Tue, 22 Nov 1994 06:33:11 GMT Panel discussion on cryptography policy -- Pugwash Panel From: jporten@sas.upenn.edu (Jeffrey A. Porten) Newsgroups: alt.org.pugwash Subject: Panel discussion on cryptography policy Date: 12 Mar 1994 05:50:57 GMT Organization: University of Pennsylvania Lines: 143 Message-ID: <2lrl81$48k@netnews.upenn.edu> NNTP-Posting-Host: mail.sas.upenn.edu X-Newsreader: TIN [version 1.2 PL2] Panel discussion on cryptography Dr. Peter Tygar Cryptography transforms plaintext into cyphertext -- normal text into a format that is unreadable. This is done through a key, the computer equivalent of a secret decoder ring. Cryptography is essential for military operations; crucial elements of the Allied victory in Europe and Japan were due to cryptographic breakthroughs against the German Enigma system and the Japanese Purple system, including winning the Battle of Midway. Truman formed the National Security Agency after WWII; for years it was said that that stood for "no such agency." Funded better than CIA, works to monitor international communications. NSA issued a call for public encryption standards, and IBM's Lucifer was adopted as the Data Encryption Standard in 1976 for ten years; an extension was reluctantly approved for five years. Encryption is still not widely available on the Internet, but it is slowly being deployed through data communications. DES is widely believed to be too insecure to use -- hardware advances eventually outstrip the algorithm's security. The NSA developed a new system called Skipjack, details of which are kept secret by the NSA. Skipjack uses a larger key and is theoretically more secure, but since the standards are not known it is impossible to verify. Skipjack is being made available through "black box" implementation -- a sealed hardware chip that makes it impossible to see the algorithm. (Intel claims the ability to reverse engineer the chip.) Skipjack can be broken through a key-escrow system, which stores keys for each chip in government repositories. With the government key, the user key can be deciphered. Two agencies share the repositories, and both must give access before the key can be broken. Another form of cryptography is called public-key cryptography, which has two keys for cyphertext -- a public key which is used for encryption, and a private key that is used for decryption. The RSA algorithm is an example of this. The system is slower than single-key systems. Cryptographic algorithms are included on the not-for-export list, which precludes international trade in commercial encryption. The government has been unwilling to relax this prohibition, but has indicated a willingness to allow export of Clipper. It is unclear how well the international community would accept a cryptographic key that could be broken by the US government. Dr. Thomas Longstaff Longstaff is a member of the Computer Emergency Response Team, which focuses on security issues on the Internet. As a DARPA-funded group, they can't take a position on Clipper, but since they concentrate on Internet they have been able to remain neutral. CERT was recently involved in an alert where user passwords were frequently stolen and used for break-ins. Since there is no host-to-host encryption standard, passwords are sent around as cleartext across links that are easily monitored. It is very difficult to put encryption on the Internet, since it surpasses national boundaries. Most algorithms have found their way overseas, but strictly speaking an American cannot provide the system. Unless you deliberately encrypt a message, your e-mail is sent as cleartext. Some standards to change that are underway, such as the government-funded Privacy Enhanced Mail. Unfortunately, the tools are difficult to install and it has not been widely adopted. A grassroots effort called Pretty Good Privacy has been distributed since the author did not know about the export laws -- it's now been taken over by a group in Finland and can be found on many platforms. RSA holds a lock on all public-key uses, so it can't be used without a licensing fee -- all in all, it's hard to use any encryption on Internet. Cryptography is mostly used by college students, security professionals, and criminals. International law enforcement agencies are struggling with criminals who have PCs that produce essentially unbreakable codes. An unpublished study tracked crypto use, and found that all uses were by students and people using e-mail for unauthorized business use. Clipper algorithms may find their way onto the net. Older algorithms can still be of use, since the sheer volume of encrypted traffic if widely used would preclude cracking the entire stream to find the desired cleartext. David Sobel Clipper is the first battle over the design of the information infrastructure and the security safeguards it will include. The underlying principle will lay the groundwork for the future information environment. Health care is an excellent example of the need for privacy, since any centralized system will have electronic transmission as a centerpiece of the plan. Fundamental questions of what sort of society do we want to have, and what values will guide the development of the National Information Infrastructure? This is a political issue of surveillance and wiretapping; 80% of those polled are opposed to Clipper and the concept of the government having the absolute ability to conduct surveillance. Within recent history the government has shown inability to responsibly conduct these investigations without abuse. The NSA specifically was found to have conducted widescale illegal investigations of the communications of American citizens. Congress debated in 1987 who should take responsibility for civilian computer security; it was decided that the NSA, a secret organization, was inappropriate for this work. NSA was given control of military tech, and National Institute for Standards and Technology given the civilian side. NIST proposed a digitial signature standard on 1991, which was later found to have been developed by NSA, despite deliberate firewall set up by Congress by Computer Security Act of 1987. Again with the Clipper chip, the NSA has overstepped its bounds and is providing major thrust behind civilian security policy. NSA operates without the oversight of civilian agencies. Since the algorithm is classified, it can't be checked for strength -- worse still, there is major cause for concern in basing our communications infrastructure on classified technology. Clipper goes against the values of the First Amendment. There must be concern when the government attempts to regulate the means of our communication. The Fourth Amendment protects against unreasonable searches and seizures; the FBI argues that cryptography will make investigation difficult, but the Constitution's intent is to make investigation of citizens difficult and subservient to our rights. Forcing people to divulge keys as a precondition of communication is a violation of Fifth Amendment rights. The ability to wiretap did not exist at the time of the drafting of the Constitution -- there were no wires to tap, and hence communication was private. A technological development made it easier for investigations to take place from the time of the development of the telephone until today -- encryption returns privacy to the status quo intended by the Founding Fathers. Further, no government agency has ever documented that encryption has made their work more difficult. On average, 900 wiretap warrants are issued per year; the government is arguing that telecommunications infrastructure must be redesigned to protect 900 wiretaps per year against a speculative danger. =-=-=-=-=-=-=-=-=-=-=-=-=-=-=-=-=-=-=-=-=-=-=-=-=-=-=-=-=-=-=-=-=-=-=-=-=-=-= For help information, send email NetNews Filtering Server with word 'help' in message body netnews@db.stanford.edu =-=-=-=-=-=-=-=-=-=-=-=-=-=-=-=-=-=-=-=-=-=-=-=-=-=-=-=-=-=-=-=-=-=-=-=-=-=-= WT02-B12-119IA087-000631-B024-10http://res2.resnet.upenn.edu:80/cis590/reading.149.html 130.91.195.242 19970122065840 text/html 44709HTTP/1.0 200 OKDate: Wed, 22 Jan 1997 06:58:16 GMTServer: Apache/1.1.1Content-type: text/htmlContent-length: 44537Last-modified: Tue, 22 Nov 1994 06:33:12 GMTCu Digest, #6.23 Computer underground Digest Thu Mar 10, 1994 Volume 6 : Issue 23 ISSN 1004-042X Editors: Jim Thomas and Gordon Meyer (TK0JUT2@NIU.BITNET) Archivist: Brendan Kehoe (He's Baaaack) Acting Archivist: Stanton McCandlish Shadow-Archivists: Dan Carosone / Paul Southworth Ralph Sims / Jyrki Kuoppala Ian Dickinson Copita Editor: Sheri O'Nothera CONTENTS, #6.23 (Mar 10, 1994)File 1--Time Magazine on ClipperFile 2--Some Thoughts on Clipper (by Jim Bidzos)File 3--Dennings' Newsday piece is Convincing (Re CuD #6.20)File 4--Re: Newsday Clipper Story (CuD 6.19)File 5--Newsday's Encryption and Law Enforcement (Re: CuD 6.19)File 6--DOS is not dead yet. . . .File 7--Response to Frisk (Re CuD 6.19)File 8--Re: "Hackers" Whack Harding (CuD 6.19)File 9--"Porn Press Release" from EFF is a Hoax Cu-Digest is a weekly electronic journal/newsletter. Subscriptions areavailable at no cost electronically. CuD is available as a Usenet newsgroup: comp.society.cu-digest Or, to subscribe, send a one-line message: SUB CUDIGEST your nameSend it to LISTSERV@UIUCVMD.BITNET or LISTSERV@VMD.CSO.UIUC.EDUThe editors may be contacted by voice (815-753-0303), fax (815-753-6302)or U.S. mail at: Jim Thomas, Department of Sociology, NIU, DeKalb, IL60115, USA. Issues of CuD can also be found in the Usenet comp.society.cu-digestnews group; on CompuServe in DL0 and DL4 of the IBMBBS SIG, DL1 ofLAWSIG, and DL1 of TELECOM; on GEnie in the PF*NPC RTlibraries and in the VIRUS/SECURITY library; from America Online inthe PC Telecom forum under "computing newsletters;"On Delphi in the General Discussion database of the Internet SIG;on RIPCO BBS (312) 528-5020 (and via Ripco on internet);and on Rune Stone BBS (IIRGWHQ) (203) 832-8441.CuD is also available via Fidonet File Request from1:11/70; unlisted nodes and points welcome. EUROPE: from the ComNet in LUXEMBOURG BBS (++352) 466893; In ITALY: Bits against the Empire BBS: +39-461-980493 FTP: UNITED STATES: etext.archive.umich.edu (141.211.164.18) in /pub/CuD/ aql.gatech.edu (128.61.10.53) in /pub/eff/cud/ EUROPE: nic.funet.fi in pub/doc/cud/ (Finland) nic.funet.fi ftp.warwick.ac.uk in pub/cud/ (United Kingdom) COMPUTER UNDERGROUND DIGEST is an open forum dedicated to sharinginformation among computerists and to the presentation and debate ofdiverse views. CuD material may be reprinted for non-profit as longas the source is cited. Authors hold a presumptive copyright, andthey should be contacted for reprint permission. It is assumed thatnon-personal mail to the moderators may be reprinted unless otherwisespecified. Readers are encouraged to submit reasoned articlesrelating to computer culture and communication. Articles arepreferred to short responses. Please avoid quoting previous postsunless absolutely necessary. DISCLAIMER: The views represented herein do not necessarily represent the views of the moderators. Digest contributors assume all responsibility for ensuring that articles submitted do not violate copyright protections. Date: Sun, 6 Mar 1994 14:13:18 -0500From: Dave Banisar <banisar@WASHOFC.CPSR.ORG>Subject: File 1--Time Magazine on Clipper Time Magazine, March 14, 1994 TECHNOLOGY WHO SHOULD KEEP THE KEYS? The U.S. government wants the power to tap into every phone, fax andcomputer transmission BY PHILIP ELMER-DEWITT ... (general background) ... (general info on techo advances) Thus the stage was set for one of the most bizarre technology-policybattles ever waged: the Clipper Chip war. Lined up on one side are the three-letter cloak-and-dagger agencies -- the NSA, the CIA and the FBI -- and keypolicymakers in the Clinton Administration (who are taking a surprisinglyhard line on the encryption issue). Opposing them is an equally unlikelycoalition of computer firms, civil libertarians, conservative columnists anda strange breed of cryptoanarchists who call themselves the cypherpunks. At the center is the Clipper Chip, a semiconductor device that the NSAdeveloped and wants installed in every telephone, computer modem and faxmachine. The chip combines a powerful encryption algorithm with a ''backdoor'' -- the cryptographic equivalent of the master key that opensschoolchildren's padlocks when they forget their combinations. A ''secure''phone equipped with the chip could, with proper authorization, be cracked bythe government. Law-enforcement agencies say they need this capability tokeep tabs on drug runners, terrorists and spies. Critics denounce the Clipper-- and a bill before Congress that would require phone companies to make iteasy to tap the new digital phones -- as Big Brotherly tools that will stripcitizens of whatever privacy they still have in the computer age. In a Time/CNN poll of 1,000 Americans conducted last week by YankelovichPartners, two-thirds said it was more important to protect the privacy ofphone calls than to preserve the ability of police to conduct wiretaps. Wheninformed about the Clipper Chip, 80% said they opposed it. The battle lines were first drawn last April, when the Administrationunveiled the Clipper plan and invited public comment. For nine monthsopponents railed against the scheme's many flaws: criminals wouldn't usephones equipped with the government's chip; foreign customers wouldn't buycommunications gear for which the U.S. held the keys; the system for givinginvestigators access to the back-door master codes was open to abuse; therewas no guarantee that some clever hacker wouldn't steal the keys. But in theend the Administration ignored the advice. In early February, after computer-industry leaders had made it clear that they wanted to adopt their ownencryption standard, the Administration announced that it was putting the NSAplan into effect. Government agencies will phase in use of Clipper technologyfor all unclassified communications. Commercial use of the chip will bevoluntary -- for now. It was tantamount to a declaration of war, not just to a small group ofcrypto-activists but to all citizens who value their privacy, as well as totelecommunications firms that sell their products abroad. Foreign customerswon't want equipment that U.S. spies can tap into, particularly sincepowerful, uncompromised encryption is available overseas. ''Industry isunanimous on this,'' says Jim Burger, a lobbyist for Apple Computer, one oftwo dozen companies and trade groups opposing the Clipper. A petitioncirculated on the Internet electronic network by Computer Professionals forSocial Responsibility gathered 45,000 signatures, and some activists areplanning to boycott companies that use the chips and thus, in effect, handover their encryption keys to the government. ''You can have my encryptionalgorithm,'' said John Perry Barlow, co-founder of the Electronic FrontierFoundation, ''when you pry my cold dead fingers from my private key.'' ... (history of Public Key encryption). ... (history of PGP) Rather than outlaw PGP and other such programs, a policy that wouldprobably be unconstitutional, the Administration is taking a marketingapproach. By using its purchasing power to lower the cost of Clippertechnology, and by vigilantly enforcing restrictions against overseas salesof competing encryption systems, the government is trying to make itdifficult for any alternative schemes to become widespread. If Clippermanages to establish itself as a market standard -- if, for example, it isbuilt into almost every telephone, modem and fax machine sold -- people whobuy a nonstandard system might find themselves with an untappable phone butno one to call. That's still a big if. Zimmermann is already working on a version of PGPfor voice communications that could compete directly with Clipper, and if itfinds a market, similar products are sure to follow. ''The crypto genie isout of the bottle,'' says Steven Levy, who is writing a book aboutencryption. If that's true, even the nsa may not have the power to put itback. Reported by David S. Jackson/San Francisco and Suneel Ratan/Washington Date: Tue Mar 8 12:07:47 1994>From jim@RSA.COMSubject: File 2--Some Thoughts on Clipper (by Jim Bidzos) SOME THOUGHTS ON CLIPPER, NSA, AND ONE KEY ESCROW ALTERNATIVE In a recent editorial, Dr. Dorothy Denning of Georgtown Universityargued in support of the U.S. government's proposed Clipper Chip, asecurity device that would allow law enforcement to decipher thecommunications of users of such devices. Dr. Denning attempts to argue that Clipper is necessary for lawenforcement agencies to be able to do their job. I'm not going toargue that one; there are plenty of people who can argue thatcompromising privacy for all citizens in order to aid law enforcementis a bad idea more effectively than I, particularly in the Clippercase, where the arguments from law enforcement are dubious at best.(The current justification is inadequate; there may be better reasons,from a law enforcement perspective, but we haven't heard them yet.) Without doubt, law enforcement and intelligence are huge stakeholdersin the debate over encryption. But every individual and corporation inthe U.S. must be included as well. Are NSA's actions really in thebest interests of all the stakeholders? Are there alternatives to thecurrent key escrow program? If one steps back and looks at what has happened over the last fewyears, one might well question the government's approach with Clipper,if not its motivation, for dealing with this problem. (I believe itmay even be possible to conclude that Clipper is the visible portionof a large-scale covert operation on U.S. soil by NSA, the NationalSecurity Agency.) Over a number of years, through their subversion ofthe Commerce Department (who should be championing the causes of U.S.industry, not the intelligence agencies), NSA has managed to put manyU.S. government resources normally beyond their control, both legallyand practically, to work on their program of making U.S. andinternational communications accessible. The first step was the MOU (Memorandum of Understanding) between theCommerce Department's National Institute of Standards and Technology(NIST) and the Defense Department's NSA. This document appears tocontravene the provisions of the Computer Security Act of 1987, theintent of which was to give NIST control over crypto standards-makingfor the unclassified government and commercial sectors. The MOUessentially gave NSA a veto over any proposals for crypto standards byNIST. By using the standards making authority of NIST, NSA is attempting toforce the entire U.S. government to purchase Clipper equipment sinceonly NIST-standard equipment may be purchased by government agencies.This purchasing power can then be used to force U.S. manufacturers tobuild Clipper products or risk losing government business. (GSA iscurrently questioning NSA's authority to control government-wideprocurement, and should continue to do so.) This of course not onlysubsidizes Clipper products, but could make Clipper a de factostandard if the costs associated with alternatives are too high.These costs to industry, of ignoring Clipper, come in the form of lostgovernment market share, costly support for multiple versions ofincompatible products, and non-exportability of non-Clipper products. It also appears that NSA is desperately seeking a digital signaturestandard that would force users to take that signature capabilitywrapped up with a Clipper chip. If this is the case, as it appears tobe, then NSA has is trying to use what is probably the most powerfulbusiness tool of the information age as a means to deny us itsbenefits unless we subsidize and accept Clipper in the process. Thiswould, if true, be an unprecedented abuse of government power toinfluence U.S. industry and control individual privacy. (Clipper ispart of a chip called Capstone, which is where their proposed digitalsignature standard would be used.) The overall cost of these policies is unknown. We only know that NSAhas spent a considerable amount of money on the program directly.Other costs are not so obvious. They are: - A burdened U.S. industry, which will have to build multiple productsor more expensive products that support multiple techniques; - A low-intensity "trade war" with the rest of the world overencryption; - Lost sales to U.S. companies, since international buyers will surelygo to non-U.S. suppliers for non- Clipper encryption, as may buyers inthe U.S.; - Potential abuses by government and loss of privacy for all citizens. Does NSA truly believe they can displace other methods with Clipper?With over three million licensed, documented RSA products, thetechnology they feel threatened by, in use in the U.S. today? Notlikely; therefore, they have already decided that these costs areacceptable even if they only delay the inevitable, and that U.S.industry and U.S. taxpayers should bear these costs, whatever theyare. This policy was apparently developed by unelected people whooperate without oversight or accountability. Does the White Housereally support this policy? It has been reported that NSA is attempting to gain support fromforeign governments for escrow technology, especially if "localcontrol" is provided. Even if NSA can convince their sisterorganizations around the world to support key escrow (by offeringClipper technology with a do-your-own-escrow option), will these otherorganizations succeed in selling it to their government, industry andcitizens? Most countries around the world have much stronger privacylaws and a longer history of individual privacy than the U.S. WHY AGAIN WHEN IT DIDN'T WORK THE FIRST TIME? Many seem to have forgotten or are not aware that the Clipper programis not new, and it's also not the first time NSA has attempted toforce communications security on U.S. industry that it couldcompromise. In the mid-80's, NSA introduced a program called theCommercial COMSEC Endorsement Program, or CCEP. CCEP was essentiallyClipper in a black box, since the technology was not sufficientlyadvanced to build lower-cost chips. Vendors would join CCEP (with theproper security clearances) and be authorized to incorporateclassified algorithms into communications systems. NSA had proposedthat they themselves would actually provide the keys to end-users ofsuch systems. The new twist is access by key escrow. To see how little things have changed, consider this quote: "...RSAData Security, Inc. asserts that since CCEP-2 is not published andtherefore cannot be inspected by third parties, the NSA could put a'trap door' in the algorithm that would enable the agency to inspectinformation transmitted by the private sector. When contacted, NSArepresentative Cynthia Beck said that it was the agency's policy notto comment on such matters." That was in 1987. ("The Federal Snags inEncryption Technology," Computer and Communications Decisions, July1987, pp. 58-60.) To understand NSA's thinking, and the danger of their policies,consider the reply of a senior NSA official when he was asked by areporter for the Wall Street Journal if NSA, through the CCEP program,could read anyone's communications: "Technically, if someone boughtour device and we made the keys and made a copy, sure we could listenin. But we have better things to do with our time." (The Wall StreetJournal, March 28, 1988, page 1, column 1, "A Supersecret Agency FindsSelling Secrecy to Others Isn't Easy," by Bob Davis.) Another NSAofficial, in the same Journal story, said "The American Public has noproblem with relying on us to provide the technology that prevents theunauthorized launch of nuclear weapons. If you trust us to protectagainst that, you can trust us to protect private records." Rememberthat the Cold War was still on at that time. Law enforcement and intelligence gathering are certainly impeded bythe use of cryptography. There are certainly legitimate concerns thatthese interests have. But is the current approach really the way togain support from industry and the public? People with a strongmilitary and intelligence bias are making all the decisions. Thereseem to be better ways to strike a balance. AN ALTERNATIVE PROPOSAL One approach would be to have NIST develop a standard with threelevels. The first level could specify the use of public-key for keymanagement and signatures without any key escrow. There could be a"Level II" compliance that adds government key escrow to messagepreparation. "Level III" could be key escrow controlled by the user,typically a corporation. Would this work? The first level, meetingthe standard by itself, would back up the government's claim that keyescrow is voluntary; if I want privacy and authentication without keyescrow, then I can have it, as the government has claimed I can.Actions speak louder than words. Why would any vendors support Level II? There would be severalreasons. They would find a market in the government, since thegovernment should purchase only Level II products. (I would certainlylike our public servants to use key escrow, just as I want workproduct paid for by my corporation to be accessible. Of course, anyonecan buy Level I products for home and personal use.) So thegovernment can still influence the private sector by buying onlyproducts that include Level II compliance. Also, Level II productswould be decontrolled for export. This way the market can decide;vendors will do what their customers tell them to. This satisifiesthe obvious desire on the part of the government to influence whathappens with their purchasing power. Level III would allow any user to insert escrow keys they control intothe process. (Level II would not be a prerequisite to Level III.) Mycompany may want key escrow; I, as an individual, may want to escrowmy keys with my attorney or family members; a standard supportingthese funtions would be useful. I don't necessarily want or need thegovernment involved. NIST already knows how to write a FIPS that describes software andhardware implementations, and to certify that implementations arecorrect. This approach cetainly isn't perfect, but if the administration reallybelieves what it says and means it, then I submit that this is animprovement over a single key escrow FIPS foisted on everyone by NSA,and would stand a much better chance of striking a workable balancebetween the needs of the government and the right of individuals toprivacy. Therefore, it RISKS much less than the current plan. The real problem with the way NSA works is that we don't find out whatthey're really doing and planning for decades, even when they'rewrong. What if they are? In the 60's and 70's, the CIA was out of control, and the Congress,after extensive hearings that detailed some of the abuses of power bythe CIA, finally moved to force more accountability and oversight. Inthe 80's and 90's, NSA's activities should be equally scrutinized by aconcerned Congress. Date: Thu, 3 Mar 1994 11:59:00 GMTFrom: chris.hind@MAVERICKBBS.COM(Chris Hind)Subject: File 3--Dennings' Newsday piece is Convincing (Re CuD #6.20) I dunno, but I think the Encryption and Law Enforcement letter byDorothy Denning has convinced me that the Clipper Chip is safe.Multiple people hold the keys to tapping the line and it has thestrongest encryption method created so far. I believed CUD earlierthat it was bad for the US, but now I see its advantages as long asthey don't outlaw other forms of encryption its okay with me. I mean,its not like Big Brother can't tap into our line right now with usknowing it! This technology isn't really new, its just a bit moresophisticated and thats what scares us. Please tell me if I'm wrong!As well as encryption, the clipper chip should also be modified togive superior compression so more information can be sent over thelines and during disaster they wouldn't be down. And as for theDigital Telephony Bill, simple PGP encryption will scramble databeyond recognition since it uses powerful public-key encryption. Sure,this security might catch some, but some criminals they'll never beable to catch anyways since they'll have the money to pay for evenmore powerful encryption. I usually don't change my opinions easily soit makes me wonder how many other people on the net have changed theiropinions also. Date: Mon, 28 Feb 1994 13:25:25 -0500 (EST)From: The Advocate <cudigest@mindvox.phantom.com>Subject: File 4--Re: Newsday Clipper Story (CuD 6.19) > Newsday, Tuesday, February 22, 1994, Viewpoints> The Clipper Chip Will Block Crime> By Dorothy E. Denning Before We go any further, let your old friend the Advocate join thegreek chorus, of people singing their personal respect and admirationfor Dr Denning. Her work in the Neidorf case was without par and hercommitment to issues in Cyberspace are intellectually rigorous andpassionate. It thus doubly pains me when such an old and respectedfriend seems to have gone astray. > Hidden among the discussions of the information highway is a fierce> debate, with huge implications for everyone. It centers on a tiny> computer chip called the Clipper, which uses sophisticated coding to> scramble electronic communications transmitted through the phone> system. Just like other systems already in use for military and governmentor commercial transactions. >> The Clinton administration has adopted the chip, which would allow> law enforcement agencies with court warrants to read the Clipper codes> and eavesdrop on terrorists and criminals. But opponents say that, if or agencies with corrupt motives to spy on virtually every transactiontelephonic or datic that moves on the information highway. future expansion of network systems will allow easy access to virtuallyall data, without regard, and with intrusion, without detection. > this happens, the privacy of law-abiding individuals will be a risk.individuals and corporations. > They want people to be able to use their own scramblers, which the> government would not be able to decode. WOuld not be able to decode? no, would not be able to decode withoutspending some money. Dr Denning forgets that we spend an estimated$27 Billion dollars per year on the NSA, an agency devoted entirelyto signals interception, decryption and analysis. THis same agencyhas been involved in the Clipper developement and has refused to makeany of it's files available and has instead crowded the field withclassified segments. > If the opponents get their way, however, all communications on the> information highway would be immune from lawful interception. In a Hardly. It merely means that interception would require eithermore detailed de-crpyption efforts or attack at sources oftransmission or reception. These same complaints are repackaged complaints about miranda rights,the exclusionary rule and every other legal reform of this century. > world threatened by international organized crime, terrorism, and rogue> governments, this would be folly. In testimony before Congress, Donald International organised crime? you mean like the Mafia, whom theCIA helped set up? and who work routinely as government agents? Terrorism? in this country of 250 million people less the 15 peopleper year die on average from terrorist activities. considering50,000 americans die every year on the roads, someone needs to gettheir priorities re-aligned. Rogue governments? like the libyans, or Iraq and iran? how will clipperharm a foreign government? not to mention these countries are allpaper tigers. the last time we dealt with traq, i seem to recallwe waxed their army without breaking a sweat. i am not worried. > Delaney, senior investigator with the New York State Police, warned> that if we adopted an encoding standard that did not permit lawful> intercepts, we would have havoc in the United States. But don forgets that his standard allows un-lawful intercepts. lets look at this word havoc. that means a state of chaos or confusion.If i go to anacostia on a friday night, i would say havoc exists. if igo into a DC school by day, i could say havoc exists. when LA burnedlast year havoc ran rampant, and certainly this had little to dowith the lack of a proper data encryption standard. The operationof the polis has little to do with the effectiveness of our secretpolice. >> Moreover, the Clipper coding offers safeguards against casual> government intrusion. It requires that one of the two components of Not neccesarily. Although Dr denning and a team of independentscientists reviewed the clipper standard, they are not specialistsin code breaking. I do not know how immune clipper is to corruptiononce partial knowledge is attained. knowledge of header blocks,and access to partial keys and key fragments may make closure ofthe cryptic circle a simpler proposition then her analysis indicated. > a key embedded in the chip be kept with the Treasury Department and the The dept that brought us the Secret service and the ATF? i don't thinkso. > other component with the Commerce Department's National Institute of> Standards and Technology. Any law enforcement official wanting to who work hand in glove with the NSA?she forgets a single compromised official may be able to subvertthe entire system as mr Ames so easily demonstrated last week. > wiretap would need to obtain not only a warrant but the separate> components from the two agencies. This, plus the superstrong code and> key system would make it virtually impossible for anyone, even corrupt> government officials, to spy illegally. I think this is optimism in action. > But would terrorists use Clipper? The Justice Department haswould Clipper stop terrorism? Seriously can anyone guaranteethat this technology will end terrorism? will clipper enddrug trafficking? > their calls with their own code systems. But then who would have> thought that the World Trade Center bombers would have been stupid> enough to return a truck that they had rented? Considering the people who bomber the world trade center were keystoneterrorists, i would hardly hold them up as examples. I would look at people like Carlos the Jackal, THe Red Army,Black September, Islamic Jihad, etc...These are highly sophisticated, well trained killers, and far moreeffective and dangerous. > Court-authorized interception of communications has been essential> for preventing and solving many serious and often violent crimes, for all the crime and violence in our society, i doubt law enforcementis doing a good job. what we see is another band-aid on serious socialproblems. > including terrorism, organized crime, drugs, kidnaping, and political> corruption. The FBI alone has had many spectacular successes that> depended on wiretaps. In a Chicago case code-named RUKBOM, they> prevented the El Rukn street gang, which was acting on behalf of the> Libyan government, from shooting down a commercial airliner using a> stolen military weapons system. Dr Dennings faith is touching here. The El Rukns were done inin part because the government compromised their lawyer. And alsohad several agents inside the organization. Please a better examplemust be out there. > To protect against abuse of electronic surveillance, federal> statutes impose stringent requirements on the approval and execution> of wiretaps. Wiretaps are used judiciously (only 846 installed> wiretaps in 1992) and are targeted at major criminals. and how many wiretaps are installed il-legally? considering during thegulf war the FBI was wire-tapping the homes of arab-americansi wonder how well they use the legal process. also if we are talking 846 wiretaps, and say, 200 hours of tapefrom each, we are talking about 200,000 hours of conversation.i am certain that the NSA has the facility to de-crypt this numberof calls. And if they don't why don't they? they must listen toforeign conversations, and i am sure the russians are not soaccomodating as to use clear voice signaling. > Now, the thought of the FBI wiretapping my communications appeals to> me about as much as its searching my home and seizing my papers.> But the Constitution does not give us absolute privacy from> court-ordered searches and seizures, and for good reason. Lawlessness> would prevail. But the constitution does not forbid me from keeping safes, orcryptic records or speaking in navajo, either. Dr Denning must havefar less faith in the body politic then I do. besides if you wantto see lawlessness, look at the beltway on friday afternoon. > Encoding technologies, which offer privacy, are on a collision> course with a major crime-fighting tool: wiretapping. Now the wiretapping is a minor crime fighting tool. for all the law enforcementpersonnell we have, and all the cases brought each year, less then 1%involve wiretapping to start with. these same complaints have beenmade about facsimile transmission, computer data, cell phonesand cars. technology changes and law enforcement adapts. this is thefirst time, i have ever seen law enforcement try to cripple a technologybefoe it becomes prevalent. ASk yourself a question Dr Denning. Cars are used in crime, criminalsoften escape from the police. why shouldn't all cars be restrictedto 35MPH, by design so the police can always capture and pursue?fast cars, like the ferrari have not brought chaos to our society.why should cryptography? > Clipper chip shows that strong encoding can be made available in a way> that protects private communications but does not harm society if it> gets into the wrong hands. Clipper is a good idea, and it needs how will clipper prevent the wrong hands from getting strong encoding?will only outlaws have strong crypto? > support from people who recognize the need for both privacy and> effective law enforcement on the information highway. sure we need law enforcement on the info highway, but i don'tneed a trooper in the back seat to listen to me talk tomy girlfirend as we drive. i just need a trooper to watch forspeeders and drunk drivers. Dr Denning was part of the clipper review team, and as suchmay be psychologically and emotionally committed to the project.I hope her earlier effort shave not clouded her ability to conduct adispassionate social and policy analysis. Also Louis Freeh was interviewed by John Markoff in an article intodays NYT about the return of the Digital Telephony Standard.Freeh said "If we are to have a peaceful and orderly society,people will have to sacrifice a little privacy". I couldn'tbelieve this. Didn't jefferson say something on the lines ofthose who sacrifice liberty for a little peace deserve neither?or was that heinlein? The other interesting factoid to counter all the discussion onTerrorism, Nuclear death threats and Drug Dealing, is thatAldrich Ames was arrested last week in the biggest spy scandalthis century since the Rosenbergs. Ames who was the CIA chief ofCounterIntelligence/Soviet-Eastern Division was as well trained intradecraft as one can be. He never used any telephonic encryption, despite total access toall these devices. Sorry if the spys aren't using them, then why do we need away to break them? Your friendThe Advocate. PS Advocate prediction #13. That to push the clipper chip,supporters will claim that Child pornographers are distributingSnuff films in unbreakable crypto-form so that they can't bedetected. Date: 3 Mar 1994 12:12:08 -0500From: hovaness@PANIX.COM(Haig Hovaness)Subject: File 5--Newsday's Encryption and Law Enforcement (Re: CuD 6.19) With all due respect to Professor Denning, I offer the followingobservations in response to the material in her recent posting. 1. Professor Denning's views are representative of a small minority inthe US academic community. However, through her energetic campaign topromote pro-Clipper arguments, a casual observer of the debate wouldconclude that her position is representative of a substantial segment ofacademic opinion. This was especially evident in the ACM Communications"dialogue" on Clipper, in which Professor Denning's comments occupiedalmost half of the editorial space. 2. Professor Denning's efforts to advance her views are not limited tojournalistic advocacy and Usenet postings. Her presence on the ACMcommittee studying Clipper has contributed to the success of thepro-Clipper faction in deadlocking the committee, and thus preventingthe largest computing professional society from taking an anti-Clipperposition, a position that would reflect the sentiments of the majorityof the membership. 3. Professor Denning consistently makes generous assumptions about theproper and lawful actions of government officials - assumptions thatanyone familiar with recent American history knows to be naive. Forexample, the political manipulation of information gathered by J. EdgarHoover, former Director of the F.B.I. is common knowledge. 4. Professor Denning relies heavily on anecdotal evidence of crimes"prevented" through communications intercepts without presenting accuratedata on the (very small) number of crimes in which the intercept wasessential to the success of law enforcement. Others have posted thefigures, and they suggest that the practical value of such intercepts isgreatly overstated. 5. Professor Denning maintains that secure encryption is a difficulttechnology to master and is not readily available to the general public.In view of the existence of PGP, and the likely availability of itsvoice-scrambling successor, this is a ludicrous claim. 6. Professor Denning offers no explanation for how a US nationalstandard restricting encryption can be viable in the context ofworldwide voice and data communications. How can the US governmentpossibly assert control of information packets crossing US "cyberspace?" 7. Professor Denning omits to mention that polls reveal that themajority of the US public are opposed to telephone wiretaps. Allavailable evidence suggests that Clipper would never survive a publicreferendum. 8. Professor Denning neglects to mention that the entire commercialsector of the US computing industry is united in opposition to Clipper.Moreover, much of the business community is also hostile to the conceptof Government interception of business communications. 9. Professor Denning's arguments are ultimately authoritarian. Shebelieves that the judgement of government officials must carry greaterweight than the will of the people. This is a profoundlyanti-democratic position. Haig HovanessPelham Manor, NYhovaness@panix.com Date: 8 Mar 94 16:23:23 GMTFrom: dbatterson@ATTMAIL.COM(David Batterson)Subject: File 6--DOS is not dead yet. . . . Is DOS dead? Definitely not, says SPC While millions of PC users own and use Windows regularly, many ofus grouse about its idiosyncrasies. Meanwhile, innumerable userscontinue to use DOS applications, especially word processing programs. The DOS flavors of WordPerfect (versions 5.0 and later) havetheir legions of fans, along with Microsoft Word, WordStar andProfessional Write. Although I use Ami Pro for Windows, I alsooccasionally use Professional Write (Ver. 2.2) which has been aroundfor several years. Although WordPerfect users often turn up their noses atProfessional Write, I have always preferred ProWrite toWord(not-so)Perfect. In fact, I never could understand why SoftwarePublishing Corp. (SPC) didn't update the program. They did come outwith a Windows version (Professional Write PLUS), but it didn't sellvery well. Professional Write 3.0 is finally here, and should be in softwarestores soon. "This new version was primarily driven by the largenumber of customers who requested it," said Chris Randles, SPC's vicepresident of marketing. It seems a bit overpriced (at $249 list) for aprogram that has had only a modest facelift/update, though. Randles said that "DOS word processing is one of the most widelyused applications in rapidly-growing niche markets such as smallbusiness and the home office." In that market, PC users don't want tomess around with memory problems, Windows GPFs (General ProtectionFaults), or word processing programs that have become monsterapplications akin to desktop publishing software. Professional Write 3.0 is pretty much the same program, so thelearning curve is nil. There are some improvements that reflect thechanging PC arena. Now you can use a mouse; I missed having thatfeature in Ver. 2.2. And SPC realizes that LANs are routine now, somade it network-ready. The program supports Novell, IBM, Banyan,Artisoft's LANtastic and Microsoft LAN Manager. Marlise Parker of Ad Hoc Associates, a Denver-based computertraining and consulting firm, noted that "people are going back to thebelief that the finest things in life are the most simple, and formany of us, that also applies to the software we use. ProfessionalWrite is one of those rare software gems that keeps getting better,without losing its simplicity," Parker added. Want to import .PCX graphics into a document? Sorry, you can'tdo it. You CAN include graphs produced with the DOS versions ofHarvard Graphics (2.0 or higher). Want to make fancy newsletters andDTP documents? Forget it! SPC wisely decided to forego the "bells andwhistles," says Parker, because most users don't want or need them. Software Publishers Association (SPA) reported recently that DOSword processing software sales increased a bit in 1993 over 1992.This occurred while sales of other DOS applications declined, as theWindows Juggernaut continued. So as far as word processing is concerned, rumors about the deathof DOS are greatly exaggerated. Remember, the most popular offlinemail readers are Blue Wave, Silver Xpress and OLX--all DOS programs.Professional Write 3.0 should do well, I think. I would have liked tohave seen it at a $150 list price, however. Date: Sat, 5 Mar 1994 13:57:23 -0500From: "USENET News System" <news@INDIANA.EDU>Subject: File 7--Response to Frisk (Re CuD 6.19) frisk@COMPLEX.IS(Fridrik Skulason) wrote:> A poster in CuD #6.19 wrote: > >I even created a virus or two in my years of computing, but never with> >the purpose of trying to harm another user's system! I create them only> >for testing purposes, and when I find one that fails a scanned test, I> >forward it to the company that created the anti-virus software.>> Do you really think you are doing anybody a favour by doing that ?> Anti-virus companies already receive on the average 7 new viruses per> day right now...we really don't need any more. Fridrik: It seems to me that one of the purposes of creating anti-virus softwareis to combat viruses. *ahem* What better way to do so than to receive virusprograms from a "tester" and then write code to prevent similarprograms from proliferating from a less honest individual? I don't see any validity in the argument against writing virusesto be sent into anti-virus software companies. If these peopledon't write test viruses, someone else will come up with similarones and use them unscrupulously. If anti-virus companies are receiving "too many" new viruses everyday, then perhaps they need to deal with the backlog. A representativesuch as yourself (I take it from your statementd that you workwith such a company) certainly shouldn't be ranting and raving atpeople who are using their valuable time trying to help. Date: Mon, 28 Feb 1994 09:34:40 GMT-0600From: "Jeff Miller" <JMILLER@TERRA.COLOSTATE.EDU>Subject: File 8--Re: "Hackers" Whack Harding (CuD 6.19) Re: Media "Hackers" Whack Harding's E-Mail, CuD #6.19: > LILLEHAMMER, Norway--In what was described as a "stupid,> foolish mistake," perhaps as many as 100 American> journalists peeked into figure skater Tonya Harding's> private electronic mailbox at the Olympics. ++++++++++++++++ This story was mentioned on alt.2600 (an Internet news group dedicatedto the magazine "2600"). It annoys me now as much as when I firstread it. Here is the follow up I posted: Well, I personally know many hackers who have entered systems with someone elses password, looked around, and logged out. Did nothing more. They all lost *all* their computer equipment, and many non-computer related items, not to mention the thousands of dollars in lawyer and court costs, just to get the felony and misd charges slapped on them lowered to a misd. These reporters have just admitted to committing the exact same crime. Will they have all their equipment confiscated? Will they be raided by the secret service with guns pointed at their mothers at 5am? I think not. What a bunch of shit. Even if Norway's computer crime laws do not apply here, and theOlympic committee does not wish to take action against thesereporters, it really makes me sick that THESE hackers are given theimage of some responsible adults just having fun at 2AM while eatingpizza, while the other hackers you read about are juvenile delinquentsbent on moving satellites out of orbit and abusing the E911 system. Just a hypothetical thought: What would have happened if a US hackerwas the one who broke into Harding's account instead of one of thesejournalists? Date: 10 Mar 1994 10:46:04 -0500From: mnemonic@eff.org (Mike Godwin)Subject: File 9--"Porn Press Release" from EFF is a Hoax At EFF, we have been receiving a number of queries about an alleged EFF"press release" or "statement" announcing the following: "Senator Jess Helms (R-NC) requested that the FBI become more involved inthe fight to stop adult images from being distributed on electronicbulletin boards and the Internet." Typically, the "press release" has included the following: : "The EFF has issued a warning to sysops that the following files: which depict any of the following acts are illegal in all 50: states, and can subject the sysop to prosecution regardless of: whether the sysop knows about the files or not.:: "--Depiction of actual sex acts in progress":: "--Depiction of an erect penis" *There is no such press release.* *The press release is a hoax.* Several people seem to have been fooled by the false press release,including the new publication SYSOP NEWS, which reprinted it uncriticallyin its first issue. I urge you to spread this announcement to every BBS of which you a member. Thank you for helping us stop the unethical people who spread thismisinformation. --Mike Mike Godwin, (202) 347-5400 |"And walk among long dappled grass,mnemonic@eff.org | And pluck till time and times are doneElectronic Frontier | The silver apples of the moon,Foundation | The golden apples of the sun." End of Computer Underground Digest #6.23************************************ WT02-B12-120IA087-000631-B024-59http://res2.resnet.upenn.edu:80/cis590/reading.150.html 130.91.195.242 19970122065936 text/html 2131HTTP/1.0 200 OKDate: Wed, 22 Jan 1997 06:59:35 GMTServer: Apache/1.1.1Content-type: text/htmlContent-length: 1960Last-modified: Tue, 22 Nov 1994 06:33:13 GMTI promised no more clipper unless important. this is from the The mini-Journal of Irreproducible Results ("mini-JIR") Issue Number 1994-03 1994-03-04 Clipper Chip Envelope, Initiative, and Economics CLIPPER CHIP ENVELOPESoon the government-mandated Clipper Chip secret-code-decoder will beinstalled in every piece of US electronic communications equipment.Criminals might then try to send their coded messages via traditionalmail. Against that possibility, we are now applying Clipper Chipprotection to paper mail. Our Clipper Chip Envelope automatically readsand decodes any paper enclosed in it. The Clipper Chip Envelope consistsof a standard paper envelope with an installed optical scanner andmicroprocessor, optical character recognition software, a passivetransmitter, and a Clipper Chip. The whole mechanism is the size andvalue of a fingernail clipping. Ee-way are-ay aking-may is-thayechnology-tay available-ay oo-tay any-ay official-ay agency-ay ich-wayan-cay ecode-day is-they essage-may, free of charge. CLIPPER CHIP INTERNATIONAL SCIENCE INITIATIVEThe Society for Basic Irreproducible Research (SBIR) strongly supportsthe basic Clipper Chip requirement. Oxymoronically, it will cause USencryption research to quickly lag behind that of other countries. Wesee this as a boost to the international science community, which hassuffered so long from the domination of US researchers in too manyfields. CLIPPER CHIP ECONOMICSAn historical note: It was we who performed the economic analysis forthe government's Clipper Chip decision. Decoding requires too muchmathematical effort and talent, a considerable expense even during thecurrent mathematicians glut. With declining math skills in the US, thecost of encryption research can be expected to rise further. In the longrun, it will be much cheaper to bribe appropriate officials in thecountries that do continue to perform research. WT02-B12-121IA087-000631-B024-86http://res2.resnet.upenn.edu:80/cis590/reading.151.html 130.91.195.242 19970122065952 text/html 5904HTTP/1.0 200 OKDate: Wed, 22 Jan 1997 06:59:53 GMTServer: Apache/1.1.1Content-type: text/htmlContent-length: 5733Last-modified: Tue, 22 Nov 1994 06:33:14 GMTfinal results of ITAR survey on international crypto use From: douzzer@piranha.lcs.mit.edu (Daniel G. Pouzzner) _Digest of Responses to Cryptosystem Survey_Date of this report: 15 March 1994Compiled by: douzzer@athena.mit.edu (Daniel Pouzzner) keys to table: CO - countryRSA - have RSA source?DES - have DES source?TDES - have triple-DES source?X1 - have made software available to others?X2 - currently make available to others?X3 - be willing to make it available to own country?X4 - willing to make available to world?X5 - have means to make it available?XL1 - legal to import crypto software?XL2 - legal to use?XL3 - legal to export?A1 - capable of writing RSA implementation?A2 - capable of creating a new assymetric algorithm?A3 - capable of creating a new symmetric algorithm?acc - willing to let name be cited in followup reports and such?signed - well, was it PGP-signed? y - unambiguous yesn - unambiguous no? - unambiguous "don't know"y? - qualified yesn? - qualified no* - capable of implementing but not of confidently devising an algorithm CO RSA DES TDES X1 X2 X3 X4 X5 XL1 XL2 XL3 A1 A2 A3 acc(#) signednz y y y y y y y y n? n? n? y n n y(2) nnz n y n y n y y y n? n? n? y n n y(3) nch y y n y y y y y n n ? y n n y(4) nuk y y n y y y y y n? n? n? y n n y(5) nie y n n y y y y y n n n y y y y(6) nfi y y n y y y y y n n ? y * * y(7) nat y y n y y y y y n? n? n? y * * y(8) nde y y n n n y y n n n y n n n y(9) nuk y y y y y? y y y? n? n? n? y y? y y(10) nfi y y y y y y y y n n n y? ? ? y(11) nCO RSA DES TDES X1 X2 X3 X4 X5 XL1 XL2 XL3 A1 A2 A3 acc(#) signednl y y y ? ? y y ? n n n ? ? ? y(12) yuk y y n y n y y y n n ? n n y y(13) nbr n y n y y y y y n? n? n? y ? ? n(14) yuk y y y n n n n n ? y? y? y y y y(15) nuk n y y n n y y y n? n? n? y? n * y(16) yfi y n n y y y y y n n n n n n n(17) n [1]uk n y y y y y y y y? n n? y y y y(18) n [1]nl y y n y y y y y? n? n? n? y y y y(19) yde y n n y y y y n ? ? ? y y n y(20) yde y n n y y y y y n? n? n? n n n n(21) nCO RSA DES TDES X1 X2 X3 X4 X5 XL1 XL2 XL3 A1 A2 A3 acc(#) signedus n n n n n y y y? n n y y? ? ? n(22) nnl y y n? y y y y y n n n ? n n y(23) yde y n n y y y y y n? n n? y n n y(25) nde y y n y y y y y n n n y ? y y(26) yfr y y y y y y y n y y? ? n n n y(27) yde y y n y y y y y? n n n ? n n n(28) yde y n n n n y y y n? n? n? y? * * y(29) nde n n n n n y y y n n n n n n y(30) nbr y y y y y y y ? n n n y ? ? y(32) yuk y y y y y y y y? n n? n? y * y y(33) yCO RSA DES TDES X1 X2 X3 X4 X5 XL1 XL2 XL3 A1 A2 A3 acc(#) signedlv y n n n n y y y n n n y? ? ? y(34) nde y y y y y y y y n n n y y y y(35) nuk y y n y y y n y n? n? y? y n n y(36) yau n y y y y y y y ? ? ? y * * y(37) nau y y y ? ? ? ? ? n n n y n y n(38) nch y y n y y y y y n ? n y * y y(39) ych y y n y y y y y n n n y? n * y(40) ynl y y n y y y y y n n n ? ? ? n(41) nus n n n n n y y y n n ? n n n n(42) n [1] responses on XL1 through XL3 were reported after consultation with an authoritative government source _Original survey, for reference:_ __Survey of International Cryptosystem Availability__ 1) where are you from? (simply the name of your country) 2) do you presently have software in source code form that, when compiled, performs RSA encryption and decryption with prime moduli longer than 600 bits? 3a-b) a) do you have software in source code form that, when compiled, performs DES encryption and decryption? b) have you made the obvious extensions to perform "triple-DES" encryption and decryption? 4a-e) a) have you made, b) do you make, and/or c) would you be willing to make this cryptographic software available to others in your own country? d) to others worldwide? e) do you have the requisite resources to do this, i.e. a network connection or a BBS with at least one dedicated phone line? 5a-c) do the laws of your nation restrict the a) import, b) use, or c) export of cryptographic software? 6a-c) is your understanding of the mathematics of cryptography sufficient to allow you to create a) your own implementation of RSA, b) other robust public key cryptosystems, and/or c) other robust symmetric key cryptosystems? 7) do you give the survey taker permission to cite your name and email address in documents that are made generally available? ---daniel (douzzer@athena.mit.edu) i've been here and i've been there and key 0B 99 0D 4F E8 55 9A 95 i've been inbetween. i talk to the wind,print 43 C1 7F B5 DF 8F E3 33 my words are all carried away.key: finger douzzer@ai.mit.edu the wind cannot hear. WT02-B12-122IA087-000631-B024-136http://res2.resnet.upenn.edu:80/cis590/reading.152.html 130.91.195.242 19970122070026 text/html 14883HTTP/1.0 200 OKDate: Wed, 22 Jan 1997 07:00:23 GMTServer: Apache/1.1.1Content-type: text/htmlContent-length: 14711Last-modified: Tue, 22 Nov 1994 06:33:15 GMTstrange but interesting -- - A tekkie counterculture is born By Paul Saffo Cyberpunk R.I.P. - A tekkie counterculture is born By Paul Saffo Like a sun-grazing comet on a deep-space trajectory, the cyberpunk movement is disappearing as quickly as it arrived just a few years ago. Moreover, the movement was hardly more substantial than a comet's fuzzy tail when it came to numbers - there were never more than 100 hard-core cyberpunks at any time before the term hit the mainstream press. But don't sell cyberpunks's social impact short, for insubstantial comets have long served as messengers. I suspect that cyberpunks are to the 1990s what the beatniks were to the '60s - harbingers of a mass movement waiting in the wings. Just as the beatniks anticipated the hippies, cyberpunks are setting the stage for a coming digital counterculture that will turn the '90s zeitgeist utterly on its head. This movement in the making has yet to be described, much less named, but eerie parallels between the beatnik and cyberpunk movements offer strong hints of what is to come. For starters, both movements were given focus by literary fiction. The beatniks took their cue from a handful of "beat writers" (Jack Kerouac, Alan Ginsberg, Gregory Corso, and William S. Burroughs), while cyberpunks found their identity in the cyberpunk science ction genre dened by writers such as William Gibson, Rudy Rucker, Bruce Sterling, and John Shirley. Moreover, the lead works in both traditions orbited emerging infrastructures: Kerouac's On the Road played off the concrete mobility enabled by the Interstate Highway Act, while Gibson's Neuromancer portrayed a future world wrapped around vast information highways. Eager readers never realized that neither writer was really one of them: Kerouac disliked driving; Gibson banged out Neuromancer on a 1927 Hermes typewriter. Like the cyberpunks, there were never more than a handful of true beatniks - less than 120 in all before the movement hit the media in the late 1950s, according to essayist George Leonard. Leonard's descriptions of the North Beach beatnik milieu parallel today's cyberpunk culture. Word got out on the grapevine of parties at people's "pads," and, like raves, these happenings quickly evolved into underground quasi-commercial events. Just as cyberpunks carry their network identities into the physical world, the beatniks were fond of pseudonyms. "Everyone had a name, like in a Damon Runyon novel," observes Leonard. Ironically, neither group named its own movement, for just as the cyberpunks were so dubbed by a literary interloper, the term "beatnik" was coined by San Francisco Chronicle columnist Herb Caen. Once labeled, both movements quickly surrendered their visual archetypes to the cultural mainstream. In 1960, youths the world over were aping the goateed, cool-shades beatnik look, while today, PDBs (people dressed in black) affecting electronic lifestyles are more numerous than network nodes. This surrender would send both movements into the black hole of history, but not before they inspired larger movements to come. Just ve years after the beatniks's demise in 1960, the hippies emerged from the Haight-Ashbury to change our cultural landscape forever. Like cyberpunks, the beatniks were for the most part low-key, slightly mournful loners. Beatnik individualism was a sullen and stubborn reaction to the optimistic company-man materialism of the Eisenhower era, just as the cyberpunks stand in stark contrast to the antiseptic military- industrial orderliness of the Reagan-Bush years. But Kerouac later concluded that beat also meant beatific - imbued with joy or blessedness - and it was this aspect of the beatniks that became the germ of the hippie movement, according to Leonard. "It was a time of grace," he told me, referring to the early days of the Haight-Ashbury, when it seemed that a new age of cultural consciousness truly was dawning. Optimism and a sense of community distinguished the hippies from the beatniks, and will also distinguish the cyberpunks from the coming digital counterculture. The cyberpunk world is starkly non-utopian, serving up the same sort of intimate but uneasy accommodation with technology portrayed in the movie Blade Runner. I will bet that the digital counterculture will reject this bleak vision of a future in which technology enlarges the human spirit as a new tool for consciousness in much the same way that the hippies appropriated the psychoactive chemical spinoffs of the military- industrial complex. This new movement will be cyberpunk imbued with human warmth, substituting a deep sense of interdependence in place of lone-wolf isolationism. Cyberpunks envision humans as electronic cyber-rats lurking in the interstices of the information mega-machine; the gospel of the post- cyberpunk movement will be one of machines in the service of enlarging our humanity. It is too early to tell what the digital counterculture will call itself, but the history of the hippies offers a clue. "Hippie" traces its origins to "hipster," slang for a cruel and cynical 1950s subculture that predated the beats. The digital counterculture thus is likely to appropriate an older term for its own, in the same way that the hippies appropriated and turned "hipster" into something entirely new. I'll bet that they call themselves something like "tekkies," consciously adopting the scornful '80s slang for nerds, stripping the word of its industrial coldness and making it synonymous with the human control of technology. Hippies appeared in 1965, several years after the beatnik movement had gone public. Given this chronology, the tekkies will arrive sometime in the mid- 1990s, if not sooner. Watch the skies for a new comet - it will be digital, and its tail is likely to glow in Technicolor swirls. Its arrival will change our lives forever. Paul Saffo (psaffo@MCImail.com) is a research fellow at the I nstitute for the Future in Menlo Park, California. Life On the Net, 2015 Speaking truth to power By Bruce Sterling Earlier this year, Bruce Sterling testied before the House Subcommittee on Telecommunications and Finance in Washington, DC. This is the transcript of his remarks. _*Hello everyone and thanks for inviting me here. My name is Bruce Sterling and I'm a science-fiction writer and sometime science journalist. Since writing my nonction book Hacker Crackdown: Law and Disorder on the Electronic Frontier, I have returned to writing science ction. And I've returned to that with some relief, frankly, since the world of science ction is in most ways rather less strange and less bizarre than the contemporary world of telecommunications policy. I hope therefore that you will forgive me if I testify today as a science- fiction writer. It's one of the perks of my profession to write about the future, or attempt to, and I thought you might like to meet someone from the telecommunications future that you are so busy creating. With your kind indulgence for my novelist's whimsy then, the rest of my brief presentation today will be given by a Mr. Bob Smith, who is an NREN network administrator from the year 2015. I present Mr. Smith.*_ Thank you, Mr. Sterling. It's a remarkable privilege to talk to the legislators who historically created my working environment. As a laborer in the elds of 21st-century cyberspace, I of course would have no job without NREN. My wife and small son and I are all properly grateful for your foresight in establishing the information superhighway. Your actions in this regard have affected American society every bit as strongly as did the telegraph, the railroads, the telephone, the highway system, and television. In fact, it's impossible for me to imagine contemporary life in 2015 without the global Net; living without the Net would be like trying to live without electricity. However, it's a truism in technological development that no silver lining comes without its cloud. Today, I'd like to mention two or three trifling problems that were not entirely obvious from the perspective of the early 1990s. First, a word about this "research and education" issue. Because communications is power in an information society, giving fantastically advanced communications to the research and education communities did in fact empower those communities quite drastically by comparison with interest groups lacking that advantage. Today, one of the most feared political organizations in the world is the multi-national anarchist libertarian group called the Students for an Utterly Free Society. Of course, there have always been campus radicals, but thanks to their relative lack of nancial clout, and lack of even a steady home address, these young fanatics once found it very difcult to organize politically. Therefore, they were easy for the powers-that-be to ignore, except during occasional spasms of violent campus unrest. Thanks to NREN, however, spasms of student unrest can now spread like lightning across entire continents. Advanced Articial Intelligence (AI) translation programs installed on the Net only made matters worse, because in 2015 the global leaders of the student movements are not only extremely radical, but French. Attempts by campus authorities to control this unrest have failed miserably. In 2015, NREN sites are always the rst buildings occupied during a campus strike. Campus chancellors and faculty are themselves so utterly dependent on NREN that they become quite helpless offline. A second major problem has been the growth of unlicensed encryption, which has proven quite unstoppable. Today, some 75 percent of NREN archives is material that no one in authority can read. Countries that attempted to control and monitor network trafc have lost market share and service revenue as data processing simply moves offshore. The United States has profited by this phenomenon to a great extent as people worldwide have flocked to the relative liberty of our networks. Unfortunately, many of these electronic virtual immigrants are not simply dissidents looking for free expression, but in fact are organized criminals. Take for instance a recent FBI raid on an enormous archive of encrypted Iranian files, illicitly stored in an obscure NREN node in North Dakota. Luckily, the FBI was able to decrypt these les thanks to an informant. Deciphering these archives revealed the following contraband: * 80 percent graphic image files of attractive young women without veils or, in fact, much clothing of any kind. * 15 percent digitally stored pirated copies of Western pop music and Western videos, still illegal to possess in Tehran. * And, 5 percent text files in the Farsi language describing how to build, deliver, and park truck-bombs in major urban areas. I can't conclude my brief remarks today without a mention of a particularly odd development related to wireless computer telecommunications. Because it is now possible to carry out transactions entirely in cyberspace (including nancial transactions), many information entrepreneurs in 2015 have simply given up any physical home. Basically, they have become stateless people, 21st-century gypsies. A recent tragic example of this occurred in the small town of North Zulch, Texas. There, some rural law enforcement ofcers apprehended a scruffy vagabond on a motorcycle after a high-speed chase. Unfortunately he was killed. A search of his backpack revealed a device the size of a cigarette pack. The police ofcers, who were not computer literate, accidentally broke the device. This tiny device was actually a privately owned computer bulletin board system with some 15,000 registered users. Many of the users were wealthy celebrities, and the apparent outlaw biker was actually an extremely popular and nationally known system operator. These 15,000 users were enraged by what they considered the wanton destruction of their electronic community. They pooled their resources and took a terrible vengeance on the small town of North Zulch, which, by contrast, had only 2,000 residents, none of them wealthy or technologically sophisticated. Through a combination of harassing lawsuits and sharp real- estate deals, the vengeful board users bankrupted the town. Eventually the entire township was bulldozed flat and purchased for park land by the Nature Conservancy. Thanks in part to the advances that you yourselves set in motion, violent conflicts between virtual and actual communities have become a permanent feature of the cultural landscape in 2015. Bruce Sterling is author of four science ction novels, and co -author, with William Gibson, of The Difference Engine. Sterl ing edited Mirrorshades, the denitive document of the cyberpu nk movement. _Copyright (c) 1993 Wired magazine_ Requesting information from the Wired InfoBot (other than the help file) indicates your acceptance of the following terms and conditions: (1) These articles and the contents thereof may be reposted, remailed, or redistributed to any publicly accessible electronic forum provided that this notice remains attached and intact. (2) These articles may not under any circumstances be resold or redistributed for compensation without prior written agreement of Wired. (3) Wired keeps an archive of all electronic address of those requesting information from the Wired InfoBot. An electronic mailing list will be compiled from this archive. This list may from time to time be used by the staff of Wired Online Services for the purpose of distributing information deemed relevant to Wired's online readers. If you wish to have your name removed from this mailing list, please notify us by sending an electronic mail message to infoman@wired.com. If you have any questions about these terms, or would like information about licensing materials from Wired, please contact us via telephone (+1.415.904.0660), fax (+1.415.904.0669), or email (info@wired.com). WT02-B12-123IA087-000631-B024-174http://res2.resnet.upenn.edu:80/cis590/reading.153.html 130.91.195.242 19970122070056 text/html 102018HTTP/1.0 200 OKDate: Wed, 22 Jan 1997 07:00:45 GMTServer: Apache/1.1.1Content-type: text/htmlContent-length: 101845Last-modified: Tue, 22 Nov 1994 06:33:16 GMTGood articles on technology A couple of good articles ...(Also, you're going to cover digital telephony, arent you?)Also, read the Walker article in 3 parts (Farber's readings), it hasstuff on technology which you could cover. PAGE 62 145TH STORY of Level 1 printed in FULL format. Copyright 1992 Information Access Company; Copyright Seybold Publications Inc. 1992 Digital Media April 20, 1992 SECTION: Vol. 1 ; No. 11 ; Pg. 7; ISSN: 1056-7038 LENGTH: 3413 words HEADLINE: F.B.I. to 'dumb down' telecom equipment: proposed legislation hasunsettling implications for future of digital media; fears of inability to tapcomputer conversationsincludes related articles on digital communications,regulation proposal BYLINE: Caruso, Denise BODY: Proposed legislation has unsetting implications for future of digital media It is an unfortunate trait of humankind that we often do not note ourwatershed events until history has recorded their aftermath. The transition to digital technology that we are facing today is one ofthose watersheds. Almost every vendor in every area of computing, consumerelectronics, data communication and telecommunication is looking at new ways totransmit digital information, either over wires or through the airwaves. Whatwe are witnessing., whether we know it yet or not, is the building of a vastglobal network, with new foundations and new paradigms for communication andcommerce. Safe and reasonable commerce Large pan-industry investments (like the ones mentioned in "A TremendousBlossoming," p. 9) are being made based on the assumption that such commercecan and will be conducted in a safe and reasonable manner over networks. But that assumption is in question today. People who attended the secondannual Computers, Freedom and Privacy (CFP-2) conference in Washington DC latelast month were shocked to read copies of a legislative proposal instigated bythe U.S. Federal Bureau of Investigation called "Digital Telephony." Theproposed bill, which could be tacked on as an amendment to an existing bill, ispresently being sponsored by Ernest Hollings, the Democratic senator from SouthCarolina and chairman of the Senate Committee on Commerce, Science andTransportation. Should government dictate product design? The proposal apparently sprangforth from the FBI's concern that it cannot keep up with digital communicationstechnology, especially in the area of wiretap. The agency believes_that assignals sent over telephone lines become digital, it will be incapable offinding and recording the conversations that it is legally entitled tointercept. PAGE 63 Digital Media, April 20, 1992 To avoid this scenario, the F.B.I. is processing that the U.S. FederalCommunications Commissions and the U.S. Attorney General's office be given thepower to "determine" the technological interception needs of the government"and issue regulations about how vendors must comply - specifically to allow theF.B.I. (and other agencies like the National Security Agency) unimpeded accessto all digital communications. In other words, the FCC would be given authority to dictate product designin this fundamental regard. If such regulations are passed, vendors would have180 days to comply. If they do not, they can be charged and fined $ 10,000 perday for each day in violation. Faster police cars Even more incredibly, the proposed legislation decrees that any FCCproceeding regarding design regulations, standards or registrations issued toequipment vendors will be closed to the public and conducted in secret. The proposal has the potential to affect every single area touched bydigital media. It does not just limit the FCC's authority to traditionaltelephones and newer digital telephony technology. It would affect all kinds ofcomputer communication, and likely radio communications as well. Of course, one of the big questions is how far "wiretap" extends into therealm of non-voice digital communications - i.e., e-mail, document and filetransfer, the transmission of sound and video information - which areincreasingly in use today. Do files downloaded from the Internet constitute atype of communication the F.B.I. needs to monitor? Those who've studied the proposal believe the answer is yes, in which caseit will affect everyone from standard computer network providers, who oftenconnect customers to the outside world via telephone lines and equipment, tobanks, whose automatic teller machines must use secure data lines to transmitfinancial and customer identification information, and companies like AppleComputer, now in the process of developing an entire lie of personalcommunication devices. If encryption is outlawed ... As more proprietary information is sent overnetworks, and as more systems are compromised by crackers, viruses andelectronic eavesdroppers, equipment and software vendors as mainstream as Appleand Microsoft have begun incorporating high levels of security into theirsystems via encryption. Cellular phone makers are doing the same thing. And as wirelesscommunication traffic increases, one can expect that powerful security and encryption products will only become more popular, since more people will haveaccess to interception technologies. Though not specifically listed as a target in the proposal, many people arecalling Digital Telephony "Son of S. 266," a failed Senate bill that requiredthe same "dumbing-down" for encryption as the F.B.I. proposal does for phonesystems. In other words, makers of encryption devices or software were to berequired to leave a "back door" open for law -enforcement and security agenciesthat wanted to decode encrypted communication. PAGE 64 Digital Media, April 20, 1992 The bill, of course, completely defeats the purpose of encryption - leavingthe "back door" open for the very same sophisticated techno-criminals that theagencies were trying to thwart. S. 266 was shouted down last year by outragedcomputer experts and civil libertarians. At the CFP conference, encryption expert Whitfield Diffie said, "Iunderstand why the police don't like encryption . But a very large part of theessence of a free versus totalitarian society consists of the differencebetween being answerable for your actions and being subject to prior restraintagainst actions the society doesn't approve of." Making economic policy. Jim Bidzos, president of RSA Data Security, apublic-key encryption firm, says the issue is both personal privacy andnational competitiveness. The long-term effect of anti- encryption and related legislation is far worse than anything we've seen to date. "One could argue that economic policy is being made by the intelligenceagencies," he said during a CFP panel on encryption. "That's not a good idea." What's happening, he says, is that electronic commerce is driving industryand government into an adversarial role regarding encryption and dataprotection. "Crypto is moving into mainstream products, and people who aredoing so now will want to continue," he says. "Government keeps trying to sliplanguage into bills that weakens their ability to do so. They need to stopdoing that. "What we really need is a national policy review - a Computer Security Actadvisory board to Congress. It's the single more important thing we can do.We're long overdue to get some rational policy that will work for all of us." How about cable? Satellite? Cellular? But back to the F.B.I. proposal. Would the bill also have to restrict cableequipment, also capable of digital tele-communicati on? The cellular phone anddata networks? Satellite communications? If monitoring of communications iswhat the F.B.I. is interested in, the way the industry is moving today wouldcertainly indicate that any conduit of digital information would need to be"tappable." Jerry Berman, director of the EFF's Washington DC office, certainlybelieves that particular threat is implied. "It's one thing to get cooperationfrom a phone company," he says. "It's another thing to go to CompuServe andsay, We want to tap into electronic mail.' Or We want to know, when you'retapping into the line between EFF's Cambridge; whose data, voice, video is onthat line. What's in the packet? It's getting much more complicated todistinguish between different kinds of messages and different parties who arebeing bundled together. Any kind of dumbing-down to separate that out iscontraintuitive to the most efficient use of this technology." As a Washington Post op-ed piece stated, the proposal is "an assault onprogress, on scientific endeavor and on the competitive position of Americanindustry. It's comparable to requiring Detroit to produce only automobiles thatcan be overtaken by faster police cars." PAGE 65 Digital Media, April 20, 1992 The trouble with tapping It's true that the complexity of digital technology will make it harder, oreven impossible, for law enforcement to conduct its wiretaps in the manner towhich it has become accustomed. The prospect of techno-terrorists being able touse computers and sophisticated encryption techniques to thwart law -enforcement officials is a frightening one. But it is important to remember that technology itself is never theproblem. Technology only holds a magnifying glass to problems that alreadyexist, and the desire to seek remedy by somehow controlling or legislatingtechnology is a big step in the wrong direction. As Berman says, "If we can'tcompress data and move it quickly through an ISDN or digital pipeline, toimprove the infrastructure of the U.S., because the Bureau's having troublewiretapping, then the whole future of our information age is at stake." To put the issue in perspective, you must first look at the present stateof affairs. William Sessions, director of the FBI, has stated publicly that sofar the Bureau has not yet had any difficulty executing a warrant because ofdigital communications. In addition, says Marc Rotenberg, director of theWashington office of Computer Professionals for Social Responsibility, we mustquestion why such far-reaching legislation is required for a law enforcementprocedure of last resort. Top of the charts. "I think the F.B.I. is sort of off the charts on this,"says Rotenberg. "I know everyone else is talking about this as though theybelieve we're going to have some reasonable discussion at some point, but wherethey basically have come down on this issue is that the technology of thedigital network doesn't go forward until they can be assured that they cancontinue to conduct wire surveillance." He says the proposal is contrary to the spirit of the wiretap law of 1968,which is termed an investigative method of last resort. "It is the mostintrusive, most unbounded, most prone to abuse form of routine investigation,"says Rotenberg. "For the F.B.I. to come back now and say that this is theprimary concern is just not tenable - it stands the law on its head." In addition, he says, the proposal is simply impractical. The Bureau cannotreasonably expect to require every high tech firm in the United States toensure that its system complies with the FBI's needs and requirements of themoment. And the secrecy of the standards-setting hearings, he says, is a sureway to bring technological innovation to a crawl. "Private computer firms andresearchers are already coming forward saying the best way to slow innovationis to put up walls in the research community and start restricting informationon security practices." An impressive list of naysayers Factions from all corners of industry are rallying to fights the proposed legislation. The Electronic Frontier Foundation (EFF), an industry watchdog fornetworking issues, is helping organize vendors to oppose the bill. EFFco-founder Mitch Kapor (also founder of Lotus Development) says there's an"enormous coalition growing" in opposition to the legislation. In fact, thePAGE 66 Digital Media, April 20, 1992 EFF pulled together a coalition of concerned vendors and industry organizationswho signed a letter to Sen. Hollings on April 9, expressing deep concern overthe proposal. Signers included AT&T, Cellular Telecommunications Industry Assoc.,Computer & Business Equipment Manufacturers Assoc., Computer & CommunicationsIndustry Assoc., Digital Equipment Corp., the Electronic Mail Assoc., GTECorp., IBM, the Information Industry Assoc., Lotus Development Corp., McCawCellular Communications Inc., Microsoft Corp., NYNEX, Pacific Telesis Group,Software Publishers Asso., Southwestern Bell, Telecommunications IndustryAssoc. and U.S. West Inc. A spokeswoman for the influential Computer Systems Policy Project (CSPP),an organization comprised of CEOs of the 12 computer manufacturers, says theproposal has not yet been brought to the group as an issue, Tracking the issues The future of digital technologies depends on how we respond to theincreasing number of challenges from government and law enforcement agencies onthese critical issues. There are two industry organizations watchdogging these issues from a civilliberties perspective that also have access to technical expertise throughtheir illustrious membership rosters. The Electronic Frontier Foundation has generously offered to send a copy ofthe "Digital Telephony" to any interested party. Computer Professionals for Social Responsibility is based in Palo Alto, CA,and its Washington, DC office tracks policy issues. Write your legislators. Most importantly, though, after getting up to speedon the facts, is to contact your representatives in Congress. You can also callSen. Hollings, who is sponsoring the bill. The phone number is (202) 224-9340. Since the proposal has been drafted as an amendment rather than a separatebill, people are worried that it might get slipped into a bill that has alreadypassed one house and be sent quietly to conference. That would be very bad. Theonly way to make sure it doesn't happen is to let elected representatives knowit's not okay to shove this kind of proposal through without spirited debate,discussions and public hearings. A tremendous blossoming A newly published report from Insight Research Corp. in Livingston, NJ -called Multimedia Computing & the Network: Applications and Telecommunications1992-1997 - finds that in five years, 77 percent of all desktop, educationaland industrial PCs or workstations will have some communications capabilities."The network," says the executive summary," will function as a catalyst; itwill stimulate multimedia usage among users - and thereby increasecommunications traffic." Interest and investment in digital communication is in the midst of atremendous blossoming, but it could be snuffed by the kind of restrictive PAGE67 Digital Media, April 20, 1992 legislation proposed by the FBI. Here are just a few relevant news items fromthe past month or so: * IBM Corp., Northern Telecom and Pacific Bell announced an alliance to research and field-test telecommunications network applications to speed up the creation of "Information Age services" such as teleconferencing and telecommuting. The idea is long-term evolution of the network, coupled with near-term creation of applications. * A new clearinghouse for miniaturizedcomputer technologies was formed by SRI International in Menlo Park, CA, called the Pocket Intelligence Forum. The program monitors and provides information on the technologies, applications and markets of so-called "pocket intelligence products" such as notebook, hand-held, palmtop and pen-top computers, and "related emerging devices." The forum will also monitor peripherals and software that support the emerging market, such as wireless communication and smart cards. * A recent study by the InformationIndustries Group of Booz, Allen, & Hamilton estimated that the number of cellular data subscribers in the U.S. will reach 13 million by the year 2000. * Japan's Ministries of Finance andPosts & Telecommunication are starting a major project to develop next-generation telecommunications equipment, and intend to fund major Japanese electronics firms with $ 1.2 billion to do so. * Dow Jones & Co. and Nynex Corp. have agreedto develop and jointly test a prototype service which PAGE 68 Digital Media, April 20, 1992 would allow Dow Jones to transmit video programming and information over the Nynex phone network. * Motorola Inc. announced that it would open the protocols used in its ARDIS nationwide radio data network, to spur the adoption of wireless data communication by mobile workers and allow third-party vendors to manufacture ARDIS-compatible terminals and/or modem devices. (ARDIS is a partnership between IBM and Motorola and the largest wireless data network in the country, covering 80 percent of the population and more than 90 percent of the business activity in the U.S.) * ARDIS itself announced anew service, in conjunction with a firm called Business Partner Solutions, that will allow application software vendors to integrate wireless data technology into their existing products easily and cheaply. * Motorola also opened several keyover-the-air protocols for use on shared systems as a catalyst to market growth. The protocols are available through a royalty-free license to manufacturers who wish to provide radio modems. The protocols are already selected as a standard by ARDIS (no surprise there), Bell-ARDIS is Canada, Deutsche Bundespost in Germany and Hutchison Mobile Data Ltd. in the U.K. The F.B.I. proposal The following is taken directly from a Federal Bureau of Investigationdocument distributed to legislators and other concerned parties in Washington,DC. PAGE 69 Digital Media, April 20, 1992 Digital Telephony: Summary of Issues * The F.B.I. utilizes electronic surveillance (wire taps) in virtually every area of its investigative responsibilities. * Thetelecommunications industry, which remained virtually unchanged for approximately 50 years, is now rapidly changing to address the need for more advanced telecommunications systems, such as personal communications networks, advanced cellular and integrated services digital networks (ISDN) which have the capacity for high-speed transmissions of video, voice and data. * One of the telephonetelecommunications industry's major developmental efforts is to provide total digital connectivity (end to end) for its subscribers, including residential and business communities, in the near future. * At present, no capability exists to intercept ISDN (digital) transmissions; therefore, the emergence of digital telecommunications technology will preclude the F.B.I. and all of law enforcement from being able to intercept electronic communications, thus all but eliminating a statutorily-sanctioned, court-authorized and extraordinarily successful investigate technique. * The Department of Justice and the F.B.I. have been working with the White House, various Administration agencies, the telecommunications industry and Congress to find a workable solution to this very serious problem that endangers the safety of PAGE 70 Digital Media, April 20, 1992 the American public. A legislative solution has been developed to ensure that the legitimate need for law enforcement to lawfully intercept communications is met by the telecommunications industry. Legislative Remedy The proposal would amend the Communications Act of 1934 to requireproviders of electronic communications services and private branch exchanges toensure that the Government's ability to lawfully intercept communications isunimpeded by the introduction of advanced digital telecommunications technologyor any other emerging telecommunications technology. Specifically, theamendment provides the following: 1. The FCC, in consultation with the AttorneyGeneral, shall determine the technological interception needs of the Government and issue regulations that will preserve the Government's ability to conduct lawful electronic surveillance. 2. The FCC shall issue regulations within120 days after enactment requiring the modification of existing telecommunication systems if those systems impede the Government's ability to conduct lawful electronic surveillance. 3. Compliance by service providers and private branch exchanges will be required within 180 days of the issuance of the regulations and the use of non-conforming equipment is prohibited thereafter. 4. The FCC has theauthority to compensate (through rate structure) telecommunication system operators under FCC jurisdiction for reasonable costs associated with required modifications of existing telecommunications equipment or technology. 5. The Attorney General has specific authority, inaddition to that already vested in the FCC, to seek civil penalties and injunctive relief for non-compliance. PAGE 71 Digital Media, April 20, 1992 IAC-NUMBER: IAC 12224975 IAC-CLASS: Computer LANGUAGE: ENGLISH LOAD-DATE-MDC: December 28, 1993 PAGE 17 68TH STORY of Level 1 printed in FULL format. Copyright 1993 Information Access Company; Copyright POINT 1993 Whole Earth Review June 22, 1993 SECTION: No. 79 ; Pg. 40; ISSN: 0749-5056 LENGTH: 12871 words HEADLINE: Cypherpunks, e-money and the technologies of disconnection; encryption technology; includes related articles; excerpt from book, 'Out ofControl' BYLINE: Kelly, Kevin BODY: IN TIM MAY'S EYES a digital tape is a weapon as potent and subversive as a shoulder-mountedStinger missile. May (fortyish, trim beard, exphysicist) holds up a $ 9.95digital audio tape, or DAT. The cassette -- just slightly fatter than anordinary cassette -- contains a copy of a Mozart composition equivalent infidelity to a conventional digital compact disc. DAT can hold text as easily asmusic. If the data is smartly compressed, one DAT purchased at K-Mart can holdabout 10,000 books in digital form. One DAT can also completely cloak a smaller library of informationinterleaved within the music. Not only can the data of about 600 books (80megabytes) be securely encrypted within a digital tape, but the library'sexistence on the tape would be invisible even to powerful computers. In thescheme May (and others) promote, a computer hard disk's worth of codedinformation could be made to disappear inside an ordinary digital tape ofMichael Jackson's "Thriller." The vanishing act works as follows. DAT records music in sixteen binarydigits, but that precision is beyond perception. The difference contained inthe sixteenth bit of the signal is too small to be detectable by the human ear.A long message -- a book of diagrams, a pile of data spreadsheets -- can besubmitted (in encrypted form) in the positions of all the sixteenth bits ofmusic. Anyone playing the tape would hear Michael Jackson crooning in the exactdigital quality they would hear on a purchased "Thriller" tape. Anyoneexamining the tape with a computer would see only digital music. Only bymatching an untampered-with tape with the encrypted one bit by bit on acomputer could someone detect the difference. Even then, the random-lookingdifferences would appear to be noise acquired while duping a digital tapethrough an analog CD player (as is normally done). Finally, this "noise" wouldhave to be decrypted (not likely) to prove that it was something other thannoise. "What this means," says May, "is that already it is totally hopeless tostop the flow of bits across borders. Because anyone carrying a single musiccassette bought in a store could carry the entire computerized files of theStealth bomber, and it would be completely and totally imperceptible." One tapecontains disco music. The other tape contains disco and the essentialblueprints of a key technology. PAGE 18 Whole Earth Review, June 22, 1993 Music isn't the only way to hide things, either. "I've done this withphotos," says May. "I take a digitized photo posted on the net, download itinto Adobe Photoshop, and then strip an encrypted message into the leastsignificant bit in each pixel. When I repost the image, it is essentiallyindistinguishable from the original." The other thing May is into is wholly anonymous transactions. If one takesthe encryption methods developed by military agencies and transplants them intothe vast terrain of electronic networks, very powerful -- and very unbreakable-- technologies of anonymous dealing become possible. Two complete strangerscould solicit or supply information to each other, and consummate the exchangewith money, without the least chance of being traced. That's something thatcannot securely be done with phones and the post office now. It's not just spies and organized crime who are paying attention to thistechnology. Efficient means of authentication and verification, such as smartcards, tamperproof networks, and micro-size encryption chips, are driving thecost of ciphers down to the consumer level. Encryption is now affordable for everyman. The upshot of all this, Tim believes, is the end of corporations in theircurrent form and the beginning of more sophisticated untaxed black markets. Timcalls this movement Crypto-Anarchy. "I have to tell you I think there is acoming war between two forces," Tim May confides to me. "One force wants fulldisclosure, an end to secret dealings. That's the government going after potsmokers and controversial bulletin boards. The other force wants privacy andcivil liberties. In this war, encryption wins. Unless the government issuccessful in banning encryption, which it won't be, encryption always wins." A couple of years ago, May wrote a manifesto to alert the world to theadvent of widespread encryption. In this electronic broadside, published onthe net, he warned of the coming "specter of crypto anarchy.": The State will of course try to slow or halt the spread of this technology,citing national security concerns, use of the technology by drug dealers andtax evaders, and fears of societal disintegration. Many of these concerns willbe valid; crypto anarchy will allow national secrets to be traded freely andwill allow illicit and stolen materials to be traded. An anonymous computerizedmarket will even make possible abhorrent markets for assassinations andextortion. Various criminal and foreign elements will be active users ofCryptoNet. But this will not halt the spread of crypto anarchy. Just as the technology of printing altered and reduced the power ofmedieval guilds and the social power structure, so too will cryptologic methodsfundamentally alter the nature of corporations and of government interferencein economic transactions. Combined with emerging information markets, cryptoanarchy will create a liquid market for any and all material which can be putinto words and pictures. And just as a seemingly minor invention like barbedwire made possible the fencing-off of vast ranches and farms, thus alteringforever the concepts of land and property rights in the frontier West, so toowill the seemingly minor discovery out of an arcane branch of mathematics cometo be the wire clippers which dismantle the barbed wire around intellectualproperty. PAGE 19 Whole Earth Review, June 22, 1993 The manifesto was signed: Timothy C. May, Crypto Anarchy: encryption, digital money, anonymousnetworks, digital pseudonyms, zero knowledge, reputations, information markets,black markets, collapse of government. I asked May, a retired Intel physicist, to explain the connection between encryption and the collapse of society as we know it. May explained: "Medievalguilds would monopolize information. When someone tried to make leather orsilver outside the guilds, the King's men came in and pounded on them becausethe guild paid a levy to the King. What broke the medieval guilds was printing;someone could publish a treatise on how to tan leather. In the age of printing,corporations arose to monopolize certain expertise, like gunsmithing or makingsteel. Now encryption will cause the erosion of the current corporate monopolyon expertise and proprietary knowledge. Corporations won't be able to keepsecrets because of how easy it will be to sell information on the nets." The reason crypto-anarchy hasn't broken out yet, according to May, is thatthe military has a monopoly on the key knowledge of encryption -- just as theChurch once tried to control printing. With few exceptions, encryptiontechnology has been invented by and for the world's military organizations. Tosay that the military is secretive about this technology would be anunderstatement. Very little developed by the US National Security Agency (NSA)-- whose mandate it is to develop crypto-systems -- has ever trickled down forcivilian use, unlike technologies spun off from the rest of themilitary/industrial alliance. But who needs encryption, anyway? Only people with something to hide,perhaps. Spies, criminals, and malcontents. People whose appetite for encryption may be thwarted righteously, effectively, and harshly. The ground shifted two decades ago, when the information age arrived andintelligence became the chief asset of corporations. Intelligence was no longerthe monopoly of the Central Intelligence Agency, but the subject of seminarsfor CEOs. Spying meant corporate spying. Illicit transfer of corporateknowhow, rather than military plans, became the treasonous information thestate had to worry about. In addition, within the last decade, computers became fast and cheap;enciphering no longer demanded supercomputers and the super-budgets needed torun them. A generic-brand PC picked up at a garage sale could handle themassive computations a public-key encryption scheme required. For smallcompanies running their entire business on PCs, encryption was a tool theywanted on their hard disks. And now, within the last few years, a thousand electronic networks haveblossomed into one highly decentralized network of networks. A network is adistributed thing; if one part breaks, the workload is routed around thatfailing, and the whole net keeps flying. There are few centers of control, andfew clear boundaries. How do you secure something that doesn't even know howbig it is? Certain types of encryption, it turns out, are an ideal way to bringsecurity to a decentralized system while keeping the system flexible. Ratherthan trying to seal out trouble with a rigid wall of security, networks cantolerate all kinds of crap if a large portion of their members use peer-to-peer encryption. Suddenly, encryption has become incredibly useful to ordinary PAGE 20 Whole Earth Review, June 22, 1993 people who have "nothing to hide" but their privacy. Peer-to-peer encryption,sown into the net, linked with electronic payments, tied into everyday businessdeals, becomes just another business tool, like fax machines or credit cards. dollars funded the military ownership of this technology -- want thetechnology back. But the government (at least the US government) may not give encryptionback to the people for a number of antiquated reasons. So, for the past year orso, a loose federation of creative math hackers, civil libertarians,free-market advocates, genius programmers, renegade cryptologists, and sundryother frontier folk, has been creating, assembling, or appropriating encryptiontechnology to plug into the net. Some of them call themselves cypherpunks. On a couple of Saturdays, I join Tim May and about fifteen othercrypto-rebels for their monthly cypherpunk meeting, held near Palo Alto, CA.The group meets in a typically non-descript office complex full of smallhi-tech startup companies. It could be anywhere in Silicon Valley. The room hascorporate-gray carpeting and a conference table. The moderator for thismeeting, Eric Hughes, tries to quite the cacophony of loud, opinionated voices.Hughes, with sandy hair halfway down his back, grabs a marker and scribbles theagenda on a whiteboard. The items he writes down echo Tim May's digital card:reputations, PGP encryption, anonymous remailer update, and the Diffey-Hellmannkey exchange paper. After a bit of gossip the group gets down to business. It's class time. Onemember, Dean Tribble, stands up front to report on his research on digitalreputations. If you are trying to do business with people you know only asnames introducing some email, how can you be sure they are legit? Tribblesuggests that you can buy a reputation from a "trust escrow" -- a companysimilar to a title or bond company that would guarantee someone for a fee. Heexplains the lesson from game theory concerning iterated negotiation games,like the Prisoner's Dilemma; how payoffs shift when playing the game over andover instead of just once, and how important reputations become in iteratedrelationships. The potential problems of buying and selling reputations onlineare chewed on, and suggestions of new directions for research are made, beforeTribble sits down and another member stands to give a brief talk. Around thetable it goes. Arthur Abraham, dressed in heavy, studded black leather, reviews a recenttechnical paper on encryption. Abraham flicks an overhead projector on, whipsout some transparencies painted with equations, and walks the group through themathematical proof. It is clear that the math is not easy for most. Sittingaround the table are programmers (many self-taught), engineers, consultants --all very smart -- but only a single member is equipped with a background inmathematics. "What do you mean by that?" questions one quiet fellow as Abrahamtalks. "Oh, I see, you forgot the modulus," chimes in another guy. "Is that ato the x or a to the y?" The amateur crypto-hackers challenge each statement,asking for clarification, mulling it over until each understands. The hackermind, the programmer's drive to whittle things down to an elegant minimum, toseek shortcuts, confronts the academic stance of the paper. Pointing to a largehunk of one equation, Dean Tribble asks, "Why not just scrap all this?" A voicefrom the back: "That's a great question, and I think I know why not." So thevoice explains. Dean nods. Arthur looks around to be sure everyone got it. Thenhe goes on to the next line in the paper; those who understand help out thosePAGE 21 Whole Earth Review, June 22, 1993 who don't. Soon the room is full of people saying, Oh, that means you can servethis up on a network configuration! Hey, cool! And another tool fordistributed computing is born; another component is transferred from shroud ofmilitary secrecy to the open web of the net; another brick is set into thefoundation of public encryption. The main thrust of the group's efforts takes place in the virtual onlinespace of the Cypherpunk electronic mailing list. A growing crowd of crypto-hipfolks from around the world interact daily via an Internet "mailing list." Herethey pass around code-in-progress as they attempt to implement ideas on thecheap (such as digital signatures), or discuss the ethical and politicalimplications of what they are doing. An anonymous subset of them has launchedthe Information Liberation Front. The ILE locates scholarly papers on cryptology appearing in very expensive(and very hard-to-find) journals, scans them in by computer, and "liberates"them from their copyright restrictions by posting the articles anonymously tothe net. Posting anything anonymously to the net is quite hard: the nature of thenet is to track everything infallibly, and to duplicate items promiscuously. Itis theoretically trivial to monitor transmission nodes in order to backtrack amessage to its source. In such a climate of potential omniscience, thecrypto-rebels yearn for true anonymity. I confess my misgivings about the potential market for anonymity to Tim:"Seems like the perfect thing for ransom notes, extortion threats, bribes,blackmail, insider trading and terrorism." "Well," Tim answers, "what aboutselling information that isn't viewed as legal, say about pot-growing,do-it-yourself abortion, cryonics, or even peddling alternative medicalinformation without a license? What about the anonymity wanted forwhistleblowers, confessionals, and dating personals?" Digital anonymity is needed, the crypto-rebels feel, because anonymity isas important a civil tool as authentic identification is. Pretty good anonymityis offered by the post office; you don't need to give a return address, and thepost office doesn't verify it if you do. Telephones (without caller ID) andtelegrams are likewise anonymous (to a rough degree). And everyone has a right(upheld by the Supreme Court) to distribute anonymous handbills and pamphlets.Anonymity stirs the most fervor among those who spend hours each day innetworked communications. Ted Kaehler, a programmer at Apple Computer, believesthat "our society is in the midst of a privacy crisis." He sees encryption asan extension of such all-American institutions as the post office. "We havealways valued the privacy of the mails. Now, for the first time, we don't haveto trust in it; we can enforce it." John Gilmore, a crypto-freak who sits onthe board of the Electronic Frontier Foundation, says, "We clearly have asocietal need for anonymity in our basic communications media." A pretty good society needs more than just anonymity. An onlinecivilization requires online anonymity, online identification, onlineauthentication, online reputations, online trustholders, online signatures,online privacy, and online access. All are essential ingredients of any opensociety. The cypherpunks' agenda is to build the tools that provide digitalequivalents to the interpersonal conventions we have in face-to-face society,and hand them out for free. By the time they are done, the cypherpunks hope tohave given away free PAGE 22 Whole Earth Review, June 22, 1993 digital signatures, as well as the opportunity for online anonymity.(1) To create digital anonymity, the cypherpunks have developed about fifteenprototype versions of an anonymous remailer that would, when fully implemented,make it impossible to determine the source of an possible to determine thesource of an email message, even under intensive monitoring of communicationlines. One stage of the remailer works today. When you use it to mail Alice,she gets a message from you that says it is from "nobody." Unraveling where itcame from is trivial for any computer capable of monitoring the entire network-- a feat few can afford. But to be mathematically untraceable, the remailershave to work in a relay of at least two (more is better) -- one remailerhanding off a message to the next remailer, diluting information about itssource to nothing as it is passed along. Eric Hughes sees a role for digital pseudonymity -- your identity is knownby some but not by others. When cloaked pseudonymously, "You could join acollective to purchase some information and decrease your actual cost by ordersof magnitude -- that is, until it is almost free." A digital co-op could form aprivate online library and collectively purchase digital movies, albums,software, and expensive newsletters, which they would "lend" to each other overthe net. The vendor selling the information would have absolutely no way ofdetermining whether he was selling to one person or five hundred. Hughes seesthese kinds of arrangements peppered into an information-rich society as"increasing the margins where the poor can survive." "One thing for sure," Tim says, "long term, this stuff nukes taxcollection." I venture the rather lame observation that this may be one reasonthe government isn't handing the technology back. I also offer the speculationthat an escalating arms race with a digital IRS might evolve. For every newavenue the digital underground invents to disguise transactions, the digitalIRS will counter with a surveillance method. Tim pooh-poohs the notion."Without a doubt, this stuff is unbreakable. Encryption always wins." The Fax Effect Encryption always wins because it follows the logic of the net. A givenpublic-key encryption key can eventually be cracked by a supercomputer workingon the problem long enough. Those who have codes they don't want cracked try tostay ahead of the supercomputers by increasing the length of their keys (thelonger a key is the harder it is to crack) -- but at the cost of making thesafeguard more unwieldy and slow to use. However, any code can be deciphered,given enough time or money. As Eric Hughes often reminds fellow cypherpunks, "Encryption is economics. Encryption is always possible, just expensive." Ittook A. Shamir a year to break a 120-digit key using a network of distributedSun workstations working part-time. A person could use a key so long that nosupercomputer could crack it for the foreseeable future, but it would beawkward to use in daily life. A buildingful of NSA's specially hotroddedsupercomputers might take a day to crack a 140-digit code today. But that is afull day's commitment of big iron to open just one lousy key! Cypherpunks intend to level the playing field against centralized computerresources with the Fax Effect. If you have the only fax machine in the world,it is worth nothing. But with every other fax installed in the world, your faxmachine increases in value. In fact, the more faxes in the world, the morevaluable everybody's fax becomes. This is the logic of the net, also known asPAGE 23 Whole Earth Review, June 22, 1993 the law of increasing returns. It goes contrary to classical economic theoriesof wealth based on equilibratory tradeoff. These state that you can't getsomething from nothing; the truth is, you can. (Only now are a few radicalprofessors formalizing this notion.) Hackers, cypherpunks, and many hi-techentrepreneurs already know that in network economics, more brings more. This iswhy giving things away so often works, and why the cypherpunks want to pass outtheir tools gratis. It has less to do with charity than with the clearintuition that network economics reward the more and not the less -- and youcan seed the "more" at the start by giving the tools away. (The cypherpunksalso talk about using the economics of the net for the reverse side ofencryption: to crack codes. They could assemble a people's supercomputer bynetworking together a million Macintoshes, each one computing a coordinatedlittle part of a huge, distributed decryption program. In theory such adecentralized parallel computer would, in sum, be the most powerful computer wecan now imagine -- far greater than the centralized NSA's.) Encryption taps the Fax Effect. If you are the only person using encryption, you are a lightning rod for an attempted cracking. But your keysbecome more valuable as more people use encryption, because this lessens thepossibility of your key being cracked. Just as with fax, the more people using encryption, the more valuable it becomes for all. The world's most powerfulsupercomputer grinds all day to crack one key. What is it going to do when 100million people each use 100 different keys per day? The idea of choking Big Brother with a deluge of petty, heavily encryptedmessages so tickles the imagination of crypto-rebels that one of them came upwith a freeware version of a highly regarded public-key encryption scheme. Thesoftware is called PGP, for Pretty Good Privacy. The code has been passed outon the nets for free and made available on disk. In certain parts of the net itis quite common to see messages encrypted with PGP, with a note that thesender's public key is "available upon request." PGP is not the only encryption freeware. On the nets, cypherpunks can grabRIPEM, a software application for privacy-enhanced mail. Both PGP and RIPEM arebased on RSA, a patented implementation of encryption algorithms. But whileRIPEM is distributed as public-domain software by RSA (the company), PrettyGood Privacy software is homebrew code concocted by a crypto-rebel named PhilipZimmermann. Because Pretty Good Privacy uses RSA's patented math, it'soutlaw-ware. RSA was developed at MIT -- partly with federal funds -- but was laterlicensed to the academic researchers who invented it. The researcherspublished their crypto-methods before they filed for patents, out of fear thatthe NSA would hold up the patents or even prevent the civilian use of theirsystem. In the US, inventors have a year after publication to file patents. Butthe rest of the world requires patents before publication, so RSA could secureonly US patents on its system. PGP's use of RSA's patented mathematics islegitimate overseas. But PGP is commonly exchanged in the no-place of the net(what country's jurisdiction prevails in cyberspace?), where the law onintellectual property is still a bit murky, and close to the beginnings ofcryptoanarchy. Pretty Good Privacy deals with this legal tarbaby by notifyingits American users that it is their responsibility to secure from RSA a licensefor use of PGP's underlying algorithm. (Sure. Right.) PAGE 24 Whole Earth Review, June 22, 1993 Zimmermann claims he released the quasilegal PGP into the world because hewas concerned that the government would reclaim all public-key encryptiontechnology, including RSA's. RSA can't stop distribution of existing versionsof PGP because once something goes onto the net, it never comes back. But it'shard for RSA to argue damages: both the outlaw PGP and the officiallysanctioned RIPEM infect the net to produce the Fax Effect. PGP encouragesconsumer use of encryption -- the more use, the better for everyone in the business. PrettyGood Privacy is freeware; like most freeware, its users will sooner or latergraduate to commercially supported stuff. Only RSA offers the license for thatat the moment. Economically, what could be better for a patentholder than tohave a million people use the buddy system to teach themselves about theintricacies and virtues of your product (as pirated and distributed by others),and then wait in line to buy your stuff when they want the best? The Fax Effect, the rule of freeware upgrade, and the power of distributedintelligence are all part of an emerging network economics. Tim May even seesthe rise of encryption and the downfall of corporations as part of this neweconomics. ("Big monolithic corporations will become virtual corporations," hesays, "a temporary ensemble of skilled people. They'll nucleate for six monthsto make a product, say a Hollywood film, and then the virtual corporation willdissipate and vanish.") Corporations will become shifting network ghosts in anetworked world. Politics in a network economy will definitely require the kind of tools thecypherpunks are playing with. Glenn Tenney, chairman of the annual Hackers'Conference, ran for public office in California last year using the computernetworks for campaigning, and came away with a realistic grasp of how they willshape politics. He notes that digital techniques for establishing trust areneeded for electronic democracy. He writes online, "Imagine if a Senatorresponds to some email, but someone alters the response and then sends it on tothe NY Times? Authentication, digital signatures, etc. are essential forprotection of all sides." Encryption and digital signatures are techniques toexpand the dynamics of trust into a new territory. Encryption cultivates a"web of trust" says Phil Zimmermann, the very web that is the heart of anysociety or human network. The short form of the cypherpunk's obsession with encryption can be summarized as: Pretty good privacy means pretty goodsociety. One of the consequences of network economics, as facilitated by ciphers anddigital technology, is the transformation of what we mean by pretty goodprivacy. Networks shift privacy from the realm of morals to the marketplace;privacy becomes a commodity. A telephone directory has value because of the energy it saves a caller infinding a particular phone number. When telephones were new, having anindividual number to list in a directory was valuable to the lister and to allother telephone users (the Fax Effect). But today, in a world full of easilyobtained telephone numbers, an unlisted phone number is more valuable to theunlisted (who pay more) and to the phone company (which charges more). Privacyis a commodity to be priced and sold. Most privacy transactions will soon take place in the marketplace, ratherthan in government offices, because a centralized government is handicapped ina distributed, open-weave network, and can no longer guarantee how things areconnected or not connected. Hundreds of privacy vendors will sell bits of PAGE 25 Whole Earth Review, June 22, 1993 privacy at market rates. You hire Little Brother, Inc. to demand maximumpayment from junk-mail and direct marketers when you sell your name, and tomonitor uses of that information as it tends to escape into the net. On yourbehalf, Little Brother, Inc. negotiates with other privacy vendors for hiredservices such as personal encrypters, absolutely unlisted numbers, bozofilters, stranger-ID screeners (such as caller ID on phones that only acceptcalls from certain numbers), and for hired mechanical agents (called network"knowbots") to trace addresses, and for counter-knowbots that unravel traces ofyour own activities. Privacy is a type of information that has its polarity reversed; I imagineit as anti-information. The removal of a bit of information from a system canbe seen as the reproduction of a corresponding bit of anti-information. In aworld flooded with information ceaselessly replicating itself to the edges ofthe net, the absence or vaporization of a bit of information becomes veryvaluable, especially if that absence can be maintained. In a world whereeverything is connected to everything -- where connection and information andknowledge are dirt cheap -- then disconnection and anti-information andno-knowledge become expensive. When bandwidth becomes free and entire gigabytesof information are swapped around the clock, what you don't want to communicatebecomes the most difficult chore. Encryption systems and their ilk aretechnologies of disconnection. They attempt to tame the network's innatetendency to connect and inform without discrimination. The Next Utility Meter We manage the disconnection of other domestic utilities, such as water orelectricity, through metering. But metering is neither obvious nor easy. ThomasEdison's dazzling electrical gizmos were of little use to anyone until peoplehad easy access to electricity in their factories and homes. So, at the peak ofhis career, Edison diverted his attention away from designing electricaldelivery network itself. At first, very little was settled about howelectricity should be created (DC or AC?), carried, or billed. For billing,Edison favored the approach that most information-providers today favor: chargea flat fee. Readers pay the same for a newspaper no matter how much of it theyread. Ditto for cable TV, books and computer software. All are priced flat forall you can use. Edison pushed a flat fee for electricity -- a fixed amount if you areconnected, nothing if you aren't -- because he felt that the costs ofaccounting for differential usage would exceed the cost of the variances inelectricity usage. But mostly Edison was stymied about how to meterelectricity. For the first six months of his General Electric Lighting Companyin New York City, customers paid a flat fee. To Edison's chagrin, that didn'twork out economically. Edison was forced to come up with a stopgap solution.His remedy, an electrolytic meter, was erratic and impractical. It froze inwinter, sometimes it ran backwards, and customers couldn't read it (nor didthey trust the meter readers). It wasn't until a decade after municipalelectrical networks were up and running that another inventor came up with areliable watt-hour meter. Now we can hardly imagine buying electricity anyother way. A hundred years later, the information industry still lacks an informationmeter. George Gilder, hi-tech gadfly, puts the problem this way: "Rather thanhaving to pay for the whole reservoir every time you are thirsty, what you wantis to only pay for a glass of water." PAGE 26 Whole Earth Review, June 22, 1993 Indeed, why buy an ocean of information when all you want is a drink? No reason at all, if you have an information meter. Entrepreneur PeterSprague believes he has just invented one. "We use encryption to force themetering of information," says Sprague. His spigot is a microchip that dolesout small bits of information from a huge pile of encrypted data. Instead ofselling a CD-ROM crammed with a hundred thousand pages of legal documents for $2,000, Sprague invented a ciphering device that would dispense the documentsoff the CD-ROM at $ 1 per page. A user only pays for what she uses, and can useonly what she pays for. Sprague's way of selling information per-page is to make each pageunreadable until it is decrypted. Working from a catalog of contents, a userselects a range of information to browse. She reads the abstract or summaries(and is charged a minuscule amount). Then she selects a full text, which isdecrypted by her dispenser. Each act of decryption rings up a small charge(maybe fifty cents). The charge is tallied by a metering chip in her dispenserthat deducts the amount from a prepaid account (also stored on the meteringchip), much as a postage meter deducts credit while dispensing postage tapes.When the CD-ROM credit runs out, she calls a central office, which replenishesher account via an encrypted message sent on a modem line running into hercomputer's metering chip. Her dispenser now has $ 300 credit to spend oninformation -- by the page, by the paragraph, or by the stock price, dependingon how fine the vendor is cutting it. What Sprague's encryption -metering device does is decouple information'sfabulous ease in being copied from its owners' need to have it selectivelydisconnected. It lets information flow freely and ubiquitously -- like waterthrough a town's plumbing -- by metering it out in usable chunks. Meteringconverts information into a utility. The cypherpunks note, quite correctly, that this will not stop hackers fromsiphoning off free information. The Videocipher encryption system, used tometer satellite-delivered TV programs such as HBO and Showtime, was compromisedwithin weeks of its introduction. Despite claims by its manufacturer that theencrypto-metering chip was unhackable, big moneymaking scams capitalized onhacks around the codes. (The scams were set up on Indian reservations -- butthat's a whole 'nother story). Pirates would find a descrambler box with avalid subscription -- in a hotel room, for instance -- and then clone theidentity into other chips. A consumer would send the box to the reservation for"repairs," and it would come back with a new chip cloned with the identity ofthe hotel box. The broadcasting system couldn't perceive clones in theaudience. In short, the system was hacked not by cracking the code, but bysubverting places where the code tied into the other parts of the system. No system is hack-proof. But disruptions of an encrypted system requiredeliberate creative energy. Information meters can't stop thievery or hacking,but meters can counteract the effects of lazy mooching and the natural humandesire to share. The Videocipher satellite-TV system eliminates user piracy ona mass scale -- the type of piracy that plagued the TV outback beforescrambling, and that still plagues the lands of software and photocopying.Encryption makes pirating a chore, and not something that any slouch with ablank disk can do. Satellite encryption works overall because encryption alwayswins. PAGE 27 Whole Earth Review, June 22, 1993 Peter Sprague's crypto-meter permits Alice to make as many copies of theencrypted CD-ROMs as she likes, since she pays only for what she uses.Crypto-metering, in essence, disengages the process of payment from the processof duplication. This disconnection follows the bias of information. Using encryption to force the metering of information works, because itdoes not constrain information's desire to reproduce. All things being equal, abit of information will replicate through an available network until it fillsthat network. With an animate drive, every fact naturally proliferates as manytimes as possible. The more fit -- the more interesting or useful -- a fact is,the wider it spreads. A pretty metaphor compares the spread of genes through apopulation with the similar spread of ideas, or memes, in a population. Bothgenes and memes depend on a network of replicating machines -- cells or brainsor computer terminals. A network, in this general sense, is a swarm of flexiblyinterconnected nodes, each of which can copy (either exactly or with variation)a message taken from another node. A population of butterflies and a flurry ofemail messages have the same mandate: replicate or die. Information wants to becopied. Our digital society has built a supernetwork of copiers out of hundreds ofmillions of personal faxes, library photocopiers, and desktop hard disks. It isas if our information society is one huge aggregate copy machine. But we won'tlet this super machine copy. Much to everyone's surprise, information createdin one corner finds its way into all the other corners rather quickly. Becauseour previous economy was built upon scarcity of goods, we have so far foughtthe natural fecundity of information by trying to control every act ofreplication as it occurs. We take a massively parallel copy machine and try tostifle most acts of reproduction. As in other puritanical regimes, this doesn't work.Information wants to be copied. "Free the bits!" shouts Tim May. This sense of the word "free" shiftsStewart Brand's oft-quoted maxim, "Information wants to be free" -- as in"without cost" -- to the more subtle "without chains or imprisonment."Information wants to be free to wander and reproduce. Success, in a networkedworld of decentralized nodes, belongs to those plans that do not resist eitherthe replication or roaming urges of information. Sprague's encrypted meter capitalizes on the distinction between pay andcopy. "It is easy to make software count how many times it has been invoked,but hard to make it count how many times it has been copied," says softwarearchitect Brad Cox. In a message broadcast on the Internet, Cox writes: Software objects differ from tangible objects in being fundamentally unableto monitor their copying but trivially able to monitor their use....So why notbuild an information age market economy around this difference betweenmanufacturing age and information age goods? If revenue collection were basedon monitoring the use of software inside a computer, vendors could dispensewith copy protection altogether. Cox is a software developer specializing in a new species of modularsoftware code called object-oriented programming (OOP). OOP delivers twomagnificent improvements over conventional software. First, OOP provides theuser with applications that are more fluid, more interoperable with varioustasks -- sort of like a house with movable "object" furniture instead of ahouse saddled with built-in furniture. Second, OOP provides software developersthe PAGE 28 Whole Earth Review, June 22, 1993 ability to "reuse" modules of software, whether they wrote the modulesthemselves or purchased them from someone else. To build a database, an OOPdesigner like Cox takes a sort routine, a field manager, a form generator, anicon handler, etc., and assembles the program, instead of rewriting a workingwhole from scratch. Cox developed a set of cool OOP objects that he sold toSteve Jobs to use in his Next machine, but selling small bits of modular codeas a regular business has been slow. It is similar to trying to peddlelimericks one by one. To recoup the great cost of writing an individual objectby selling it outright would garner too few sales, but selling it by copy istoo hard to monitor or control. But if objects could generate revenue each timea user activated them, then an author could make a living creating them. While contemplating the possible market for OOP objects that were sold on a"per-use" plan, Cox uncovered the natural grain in networked intelligence: Letthe copies flow, and pay per use. He says, "The premise is that copy protectionis exactly the wrong idea for intangible, easily copied goods such as software.You want information-age goods to be freely distributed and freely acquired viawhatever distribution means you want. You are positively encouraged to downloadsoftware from networks, give copies to your friends, or send it as junk mail topeople you've never met. Broadcast my software from satellites. Please!" Cox adds (in echo of Peter Sprague, although, surprisingly, the two areunfamiliar with each other's work): "This generosity is possible because thesoftware is actually 'meterware.' It has strings attached that make revenuecollection independent of how the software was distributed." Cox calls this system "superdistribution," a name given by Japaneseresearchers to a similar method they devised to track the flow of softwarethrough a network. "The approach is called superdistribution," Cox says,"because, like superconductivity, it lets information flow freely, withoutresistance from copy protection or piracy." The model is the successful balanceof copyright and userights worked out by the music and radio industries.Musicians earn money not only by selling customers a copy of their work, but byselling broadcast stations a "use" of their music. The copies are suppliedfree, sent to radio stations in a great flood by the musicians' agents. Thestations sort through this tide of free music, paying royalties only for themusic they broadcast, as metered (statistically) by two agencies representingmusicians, ASCAP and BMI. JEIDA, a Japanese consortium of computer manufacturers, developed a chipand a protocol that allows each Macintosh on a network to freely replicatesoftware while metering userights. According to Ryoichi Mori, the head ofJEIDA, "Each computer is thought of as a station that broadcasts, not thesoftware itself, but the use of the software, to an audience of a single'listener.'" Each time your Mac "plays" a piece of software, or a softwarecomponent from among thousands freely available, it triggers a royalty.Commercial radio and TV provide an "existence proof" of a workingsuperdistribution system, in which the copies are disseminated free and thestations only pay for what they use. Musicians would be quite happy if oneradio station made copies of their tapes and distributed them to other stations("Free the bits!"), because it increases the likelihood of some station usingtheir music. JEIDA envisions software percolating through large computer networksunencumbered by restrictions on copying or mobility. Like Cox, Sprague, andthe cypherpunks, JEIDA counts on public-key encryption to keep these countsPAGE 29 Whole Earth Review, June 22, 1993 private and untampered as they are transmitted to the credit center. PeterSprague says plainly, "Encrypted metering is an ASCAP for intellectualproperty." Cox's electronically disseminated pamphlet on superdistribution sums up thevirtues very nicely: Whereas software's ease of replication is a liability today,superdistribution makes it an asset. Whereas software vendors must spendheavily to overcome software's invisibility, superdistribution thrusts softwareout into the world to serve as its own advertisement. Whereas the personalcomputer revolution isolates individuals inside a standalone personal computer,superdistribution establishes a cooperative/competitive community around aninformation age market economy. A hoary orge known as the Pay-Per-View Problem haunts the informationeconomy. In the past this monster ate billions of dollars in failed corporateattempts to sell movies, databases, or music recordings on a per-view orper-use basis. The ogre still lives. The problem is, people are reluctant topay in advance for information they haven't seen because of their hunch thatthey might not find it useful. They are equally unwilling to pay after theyhave seen it, because their hunch usually proves correct: they could have livedwithout it. Can you imagine being asked to pay after you've seen a movie?Medical knowledge is the only type of information that can be easily sold sightunseen, because the buyers believe they can't live without it. The ogre is usually slain with sampling. Moviegoers are persuaded to paybeforehand by lapel-grabbing trailers. Software is loaned among friends fortrial; books and magazines are browsed in the bookstore. The other way to slay the problem is by lowering the price of admission.Newspapers are cheap: we pay before looking. The ingenious thing aboutinformation-metering is that it delivers two solutions: it provides a spigotthat records how much data is used, and it provides a spigot that can be turneddown to a cheap trickle. Encryption metering chops big expensive data hunksinto small inexpensive doses of data. People will readily pay for bits of cheapinformation before viewing, particularly if the payment invisibly deductsitself from an account. The fine granularity of information-metering gets Peter Sprague excited.When asked for an example of how fine it could get, he volunteers one so fastit's obvious that he has been giving it some thought. "Say you want to writeobscene limericks from your house in Telluride, Colorado. If you could writeone obscene limerick a day, we can probably find 10,000 people in the world whowant to pay ten cents a day to get it. We'll collect $ 365,000 per year and payyou $ 120,000, and then you can ski for the rest of your life." In no otherkind of marketplace would one measly limerick, no matter how bawdy and clever,be worth selling on its own. Maybe a book of them -- an ocean of limericks --but not one. Yet in an electronic marketplace, a single limerick -- theinformation equivalent of a stick of gum -- is worth producing and offering forsale. Sprague ticks off a list of other fine-grained items that might be tradedin such a marketplace. He catalogs what he'd pay for right now: "I want theweather in Prague for twenty-five cents per month, I want my stocks updated for50 cents a stock, I want the Dines Letter for $ 12 a week, I want thecongestion report PAGE 30 Whole Earth Review, June 22, 1993 from O'Hare Airport updated continuously because I'm always getting stuck inChicago, so I'll pay a buck per month for that, and I want 'Hagar the Horrible'for a nickel a day." Each of these products is currently either given awayscattershot, or peddled in the aggregate very expensively. Sprague'selectronically mediated marketplace would "unbundle" the data, and deliver anarrowly selected piece of information to your desktop or mobile palmtop for areasonable price. Encryption would meter it out, preventing you from filchingother tiny bits of data that would hardly be worth protecting (or selling) inother ways. In essence, the ocean of information flows through you, but youonly pay for what you drink. At the moment, this particular technology of disconnection exists as a $ 95circuitboard that can slide into a personal computer and plug into a phoneline. To encourage established computer manufacturers such as Hewlett-Packardand Kalieda to hardwire a similar board into units coming off their assemblyline, Sprague's company, Waves, Inc., offers manufacturers a percentage of therevenue the encryption system generates. Their first market is lawyers,"because lawyers spend $ 400 a month on information searches." Sprague's nextstep is to compress the encrypto-metering circuits and the modem down into asingle $ 20 microchip that can be tucked into beepers, video recorders, phones,radios, and anything else that dispenses information. Ordinarily, this visionmight be dismissed as the pipe dream of a starry-eyed junior inventor, butPeter Sprague is chairman and founder of National Semiconductor. He is sort ofa Henry Ford of silicon chips. A cypherpunk: not. If anyone knows how tosqueeze a revolutionary economy onto the head of a pin, it might be him. Digital Cash This anticipated information economy still lacks one vital component -- aningredient that, once again, is enabled by encryption, and a key element that,once again, only long-haired crypto-rebels are experimenting with: electroniccash. We already have electronic money. It flows daily in great invisible riversfrom bank vault to bank vault, from broker to broker, from country to country,from your employer to your bank account. One institution alone, the ClearingHouse Interbank Payment System, currently moves an average of one trilliondollars (a million millions) each day via wire and satellite. But that river of numbers is institutional electronic money, as remote fromelectronic cash as mainframes are from PCs. When pocket cash goes digital --de-massified into data in the same transformation that institutional moneyunderwent -- we'll experience the deepest consequences of an informationeconomy. Just as computing machines did not reorganize society untilindividuals plugged into them outside of institutions, the full effects ofelectronic economy will have to wait until everyday pettycash (and check)transactions of individuals go digital. We have a hint of digital cash in credit card and ATMs. Like most of mygeneration, I get the little cash I use at an ATM, not having been inside abank in years. On average, I use less cash every month. Highoctane executivesfly around the country purchasing everything on the go -- meals, rooms, cabs,supplies, presents -- carrying no more than $ 50 in their wallets. Already,the cashless society is real for some. PAGE 31 Whole Earth Review, June 22, 1993 Today in the US, credit-card purchases are used for one-tenth of allconsumer payments. Credit-card companies salivate, envisioning a near futurewhere people routinely use their cards for "virtually every kind oftransaction." Visa U.S.A. is experimenting with card-based electronic moneyterminals (no slip to sign) at fast-food shops and grocery stores. Since 1975,Visa has issued over 20 million debit cards that deduct money from one's bankaccount. In essence, Visa moved ATMs off of bank walls and onto the frontcounters of stores. The conventional view of cashless money thus touted by banks and mostfuturists is not much more than a pervasive extension of the genericcredit-card system now operating. Alice has an account at National Trust MeBank. The bank issues her one of their handy-dandy smart cards. She goes to anATM and loads the wallet-size debit card with $ 300 cash, deducted from herchecking account. She can spend her $ 300 from the card at any store, gasstation, ticket counter, or phone booth that has a Trust Me smart-card slot. What's wrong with this picture? Most folks would prefer this system overpassing around portraits of dead presidents. Or over indebtedness to Visa orMasterCard. But this version of the cashless concept slights both user andmerchant; therefore it has slept on the drawing boards for years, and willprobably die there. Foremost among the debit (or credit) card's weaknesses is its nasty habitof leaving every merchant Alice buys from -- newsstand to nursery -- with apersonalized history of her purchases. The record of a single store is notworrisome. But each store's file of Alice's spending is indexed with her bankaccount number or Social Security number. That makes it all too easy -- andinevitable -- for her spending histories to be combined, store to store, intoan exact, extremely desirable marketing profile of her. Such a monetary dosierholds valuable information (not to mention private data) about her. She has nocontrol over it, and derives no compensation from it. Second, the bank is obliged to hand out whiz-bang smart cards. Banks beinglegendary cheapskates, you know who is going to pay for them, at bank rates.Alice will also have to pay the bank for the transaction costs of using themoney card. Third, merchants pay the system a small percentage whenever a debit card isused. This eats into their already-small profits and discourages vendors fromsoliciting the card's use for small purchases. Fourth, Alice can only use her money at establishments equipped with slotsthat accept Trust Me's proprietary technology. This hardware quarantine hasbeen a prime factor in the non-happening of this future. It also eliminatesperson-to-person payments (unless you want to carry a slot around, for othersto poke into). Furthermore, Alice can only refill her card account(essentially, purchase money) at an official Trust Me ATM branch. This obstaclecould be surmounted by a cooperative network of banks using a universal slotlinked into an internet of all banks; a hint of such a network already exists. The alternative to debit-card cash is true digital cash. Digital cash hasnone of the debit card's drawbacks. PAGE 32 Whole Earth Review, June 22, 1993 True digital cash is real money, with the nimbleness of electricity and theprivacy of cash. Payments are accountable, but unlinkable. The cash does notdemand proprietary hardware or software. Therefore, money can be received ortransferred from and to anywhere, including to and from other individuals. Youdon't need to be a store or institution to get paid in "non-paper" money.Anyone connected can collect. And any company with the right reputation can"sell" electronic-money refills, so the costs are at market rates. Banks areonly peripherally involved. You use digital cash to order a pizza, pay for abridge toll, or reimburse a friend, as well as to pay the mortgage, if youwant. It is different from plain old electronic money in that it can beanonymous and untraceable, except by the payer. It is fueled by encryption. The method, technically known as blinded digital signatures, is based on avariant of public-key encryption. Here's how it works at the consumer level.You use a digicash card to pay Joe's Meat Market for a prime roast. Themerchant can verify (by examining the digital signature of the bank issuing themoney) that he has been paid with money that has not been paid with money thathas not been spent before. Yet he'll have no record of who paid him. After thetransaction, the bank has a verifiable account that you spent $ 7, and spent itonly once, and that Joe's Meat Market did indeed receive $ 7. But those twosides of the transaction are not linked, and cannot be reconstructed, unlessyou the payer enable them to be. It seems illogical at first that such blind,but verifiable, transactions can occur, but the integrity of their"disconnection" is pretty watertight. Digital cash can replace every use of pocket cash, except flipping a coin.You have a complete record of all your payments, and to whom they were made. The privacy and agility of digital cash stems from a simple and clevertechnology. When I ask a digicash-card entrepreneur if I can see one of hissmart cards, he says that he's sorry. He thought he had put one in his wallet,but can't find it. It looks like a regular credit card, he says, showing me hisvery small collection of them. It looks like...why, here it is! He slips out ablank, very thin, flexible card. The plastic rectangle holds math money. In onecorner is a small gold square the dimensions of a thumbnail. This is acomputer. The CPU, no larger than a soggy cornflake, contains a limited amountof cash, say $ 500 or 100 transactions, whichever comes first. This one, madeby Cylink 2 , contains a coprocessor specifically designed to handle public-keyencryption mathematics. On the computer's gold square are six very minutesurface contacts, which connect with an online computer when the card isinserted into a slot. Less-smart cards (they don't do encryption) are big in Europe and Japan,where 61 million of them are already in use. Japan is afloat in a primitivetype of electronic currency -- prepaid magnetic phone cards. The Japanesenational phone company, NTT, has so far sold 330 million (some 10 million permonth) of them. Forty percent of the French carry smart cards in their walletstoday to make phone calls. New York City recently introduced a cashless phonecard for a few of its 58,000 public phone booths. New York is motivated not byfuturism, but by thieves. According to The New York Times, "Every threeminutes, a thief, a vandal, or some other telephone thug beaks into a coin boxor yanks a handset from a socket. That's more than 175,000 times a year," andit costs the city $ 10 million annually for repairs. The disposable phone cardNew York uses is not very smart, but it's adequate. It employs an infraredoptical memory, common in European phone cards, which is hard to counterfeit insmall quantities but cheap to manufacture in large numbers. PAGE 33 Whole Earth Review, June 22, 1993 In Denmark, smart cards substitute for the credit cards the Danes nevergot. So everyone who would tote a credit card in America, packs a smart debitcard in Denmark. Danish law demanded two significant restrictions: 1) thatthere be no minimum purchase amount; 2) that there be no surcharge for thecard's use. The immediate effect was that the cards began to replace cash ineveryday use, even more than checks and credit cards have replaced cash in theStates. The popularity of these cards is their undoing, because unlike cheap,decentralized phone cards, these cards rely on real-time interactions withbanks. They are overloading the Danish banking system, hogging phone lines asthe sale of each piece of candy is transmitted to the central bank, floodingthe system with transactions that cost more than they are worth. David Chaum, a Berkeley cryptographer now living in Holland, has asolution. Chaum, head of the cryptography group at the Center for Mathematicsand Computer Science in Amsterdam, has proposed a mathematical code for adistributed, true digital-cash system. In his solution, everyone carries arounda refillable smart card that packs anonymous cash. This digicash seamlesslyintermingles with electronic cash from home, company, or government. And itworks offline, freeing the phone system. Chaum looks like a Berkeley stereo-type: grey beard, full mane of hair tiedback in a ponytail, tweed jacket, sandals. As a grad student, Chaum gotinterested in the prospects and problems of electronic voting. For his thesis,he worked on the idea of a digital signature that could not be faked, anessential tool for fraudproof electronic elections. From there his interestdrifted to the similar problem in computer network communications: how can yoube sure a document is really from who it claims to be from? At the same time hewondered: how can you keep certain information private and untraceable? Bothdirections -- security and privacy -- led to cryptography and a Ph.D. in thatsubject. Sometime in 1978, Chaum says, "I had this flash of inspiration that it waspossible to make a database of people so that someone could not link them alltogether, yet you could prove everything about them was correct. At the time, Iwas trying to convince myself that it was not possible, but I saw a loophole,how you might do it, and I thought, gee ... But it wasn't until 1984 or '85that I figured out how to actually do that." "Unconditional untraceability" is what Chaum calls his innovation. Whenthis code is integrated with the "practically unbreakable security" of astandard public-key encryption code, the combined encryption scheme can provideanonymous electronic money, among other things. Chaum's encrypted cash (todate, none of the other systems anywhere are encrypted) offers severalimportant practical improvements in a card-based electronic currency. First, it offers the bonafide privacy of material cash. In the past, if youbought a subversive pamphlet from a merchant for a dollar, he had a dollar thatwas definitely a dollar and could be paid to anyone else; but he had no recordof who gave him that dollar, or any way to provably reconstruct who gave it tohim. In Chaum's digital cash, the merchant likewise gets a digital dollartransferred from your card (or from an online account), and the bank can provethat indeed he definitely has one dollar there and no more and no less, but noone (except you if you want) can prove where that dollar came from. PAGE 34 Whole Earth Review, June 22, 1993 One minor caveat: the smart-card versions of cash so far implemented are,alas, as vulnerable and valuable as cash if lost or stolen. However, encrytingthem with a PIN password would make them substantially more secure, though alsoslightly more hassle to use. Chaum predicts that users of digicash will useshort (four-digit) PINs (or none at all) for minor transactions, and longerpasswords for major ones. Speculating a bit, Chaum says, "To protect herselffrom a robber who might force her to give up her passwords at gunpoint, Alicecould use a 'duress code' that would cause the card to appear to operatenormally, while hiding its more valuable assets." Second, Chaum's card-based system works offline. It does not requireinstant verification via phone lines as credit cards do, so the costs areminimal and perfect for the numerous small-time cash transactions people wantthem for -- parking meters, restaurant meals, bus rides, phone calls,groceries. Transaction records are ganged together and zapped once a day, say,to the central accountant computer. During this day's delay, it would theoretically be possible to cheat. Electronic money systems dealing in larger amounts, running online inalmost real time, have a smaller window of opportunity for cheating -- theinstant between sending and receiving -- but the minute opportunity is stillthere. While it is not theoretically possible to break the privacy aspect ofdigital cash (who paid who), if you were desperate enough for small cash, youcould break the security aspect -- has this money been spent? -- withsupercomputers. By breaking the RSA public-key code, you could use thecompromised key to spend money more than once. That is, until the informationwas submitted to the bank and they caught you. For, in a delicious quirk,Chaum's digital cash is untraceable unless you try to cheat by spending moneymore than once. When that happens, the extra bit of information the twice-spentmoney now carries is enough to trace the payer. So electronic money is aanonymous as cash, except for cheaters! Because of its cheaper costs, the Danish government is making plans toswitch from the Dencard to the Dencoin, an offline system suited to smallchange. The computational overhead needed to run a system like this isnano-small. Each encrypted transaction on a smart card consumes only 64 bytes.(The previous sentence contains 67 bytes.) A household's yearly financialrecord of all income and expenditures would easily fit on one high-densityfloppy disk. Chaum calculates that the existing mainframe computers in bankswould have more than adequate computational horsepower to handle digital cash.The encryption safeguards of an offline system would reduce much of thetransactional computation that occurs on line over phone lines (for ATMs andcredit-card checks), enabling the same banking computers to cover the increasein electronic cash. Even if we assume that Chaum guessed wrong about thecomputational demands of a scaled-up system, and that he is off by a factor often, computer speed is accelerating so fast that this defers the feasibility ofusing existing bank power by only a few years. In variations on Chaum's basic design, people may also have computerappliances at home, loaded with digital-cash software, which allow them to payother individuals, and get paid, over phone lines. This would be e-money on thenetworks. Attached to your email message to your daughter is an electronic $100 bill. She may use that cash to purchase, via email, an airplane tickethome. The airline sends the cash to one of their vendors, the flight's mealcaterer. In PAGE 35 Whole Earth Review, June 22, 1993 Chaum's system nobody has any trace of the money's path. Email and digital cashare a match made in heaven. Digital cash could fail in real life, but it isalmost certain to flourish in computer networking society. I asked Chaum what banks think of digital cash. His company(3) has visitedor been visited by most of the big players; do they say, Gee, this threatensour business? Or do they say, Hmm, this strengthens us, makes us moreefficient? Chaum: "Well, it ranges. I find the corporate planners in $ 1,000suits and private dining halls are more interested in it than the lower-levelsystems guys, because the planners' job is to look to the future. Banks don'tgo about building stuff themselves. They have their systems guys buy stuff fromvendors. My company is the first vendor of electronic money. I have a veryextensive portfolio of patents on electronic money, in the US, Europe andelsewhere." Some of Chaum's crypto-anarcho friends give him a hard time abouttaking out patents on this work. Chaum tells me in defense, "It turns out thatI was in the field very early, so I wiped out all the basic problems. So mostof the new work now in encrypted electronic money are extensions andapplications of the basic work I did. The thing is, banks don't want to investinto something that is unprotected. Patents are very helpful in makingelectronic money happen." Chaum is an idealist. He sees security and privacy as a trade-off. Hislarger agenda is providing tools for privacy in a networked world, so thatprivacy can be balanced with security. In the economics of networks, costs aredisproportionately dependent on the number of other users. To get the FaxEffect going, you need a critical mass of early adopters. Once beyond thethreshold, the event is unstoppable because it is self-reinforcing. Electroniccash shows all the signs of having a lower critical-mass threshold than otherimplementations of data privacy. Chaum is betting that an electronic cashsystem inside an email network, or a card-based electronic cash for a localpublic transportation network, has the lowest critical mass of all. The most eager current customers for digital cash are European cityofficials. They see card-based digital cash as the next step beyond themagnetic fast-passes now issued regularly by most cities' bus and subwaydepartments. One card is filled with as much bus money as you want. But thereare added advantages: the same card could fit into parking meters, when you diddrive, or be used on trains for longer-distance travel. Urban planners love the idea of automatic tolls charging vehicles fordowntown entry or crossing a bridge, without having the car stop or slow down.Bar-code lasers can identify moving cars on the road, and drivers will acceptpurchasing vouchers. What's holding up a finer-grain toll system is theOrwellian fear that "THEY will have a record of my car's travels." Despite thatfear, automatic tolls that record the cars' identity are already operating inOklahoma, Louisiana, and Texas. Three states in the busy Northeast have agreedto install one compatible system, starting with experimental setups on two Manhattan/New Jersey bridges. In this system, a tiny card-size radio taped tothe car windshield transmits signals to the toll gate, which deducts the tollfrom your account at the gate (not from the card). Similar equipment running onthe Texas turnpike system is 99.99 percent reliable. These proven tollmechanisms could easily be modified to Chaum's untraceable encrypted payments,and true electronic cash, if people wanted. In this way, the same cash card that pays for public transportation canalso be used to cover fees for private transportation. Chaum relates that inhis PAGE 36 Whole Earth Review, June 22, 1993 experience with European cities, the Fax Effect -- the more people online = themore incentive to join -- takes hold, quickly drawing other uses. Officialsfrom the phone company get wind of what's up and make it known that they wouldlike to use the card to rid themselves of a nasty plague called "coins" thatbog public phones down. Newspaper vendors call to inquire if they can use thecard ... soon the economics of networks begin to take over. Ubiquitous digital cash dovetails well with massive electronic networks.It's a pretty sound bet that Internet - today's version of the Net - will bethe first place that e-money will infiltrate deeply. Money is another type ofinformation, a compact type of control. As the net expands, money expands.Wherever information goes, money is sure to follow. By its decentralized,distributed nature, encrypted e-money has the same potential for transformingeconomic structure as personal computers did for overhauling management andcommunication structure. Most importantly, the privacy/security innovationsneeded for e-money are instrumental in developing the next level of adaptivecomplexity in an information-based society. I'd go so far as to say that trulydigital money -- or, more accurately, the economic mechanics needed for trulydigital cash -- will rewire the nature of our economy, communications, andknowledge. The consequential effects of electronic money are already underway. Four wecan expect are: * Increased velocity. When money is disembodied -- removed from anymaterial basis at all -- it speeds up. It travels farther, faster. Circulatingmoney faster has an effect similar to circulating more money. When satelliteswent up, enabling near-the-speed-of-light round-the-clock world stock trade,they expanded the amount of global money by 5 percent. Digital cash used on alarge scale will further increase money's velocity. * Continuity. Money that is composed of gold, precious materials, or papercomes in fixed units that are paid at fixed times. The ATM spits out $ 20bills; that's it. You pay the phone company once a month, even though you usethe phone every day. This is batch-mode money. Electronic money iscontinuous-flow. It allows recurring expenses to be paid, in Alvin Toffler'sphrase, by "bleeding electronically from one's bank account in tiny droplets,on a minute-by-minute basis." Your e-money account pays for each phone call assoon as you hang up, or -- how about this -- as you are talking. Paymentcoincides with use. Together with its higher velocity, continuous electronicmoney can approach near instantaneity. This puts a crimp on banks, which derivea lot of their current profit on the "float" -- which instantaneity erases. * Unlimited fungibility. Finally, really plastic money. Once completelydisembodied, digitized money escapes from a single transmission form andmerrily migrates to whatever medium is handiest. Separate billing fades away.Accounts can be inter-leaved with the object or service itself. The bill for avideo comes incorporated into the video. Invoices reside alongside of barcodes, and can be paid with the zap of a laser. Anything that can hold anelectronic charge can hold a fiscal charge. Foreign currencies become a matterof changing a symbol. Money is as malleable as digitized information. Thismakes it all the easier to monetize exchanges and interactions that were neverpart of an economy before. It opens the floodgates of commerce onto the net.PAGE 37 Whole Earth Review, June 22, 1993 * Accessibility. Until now, sophisticated manipulations of money have beenthe private domain of professional financial institutions -- a financialpriesthood. But just as a million Macs broke the monopoly of the high priestsguarding access to main-frame computers, so e-money will break the monopoly offinancial Brahmins. Imagine if you could charge (and get) interest on any moneydue you by dragging an icon over that electronic invoice. Imagine if you couldfactor in the "interest due" icon, and give it variable interest, ballooning asit aged. Or maybe you would charge interest by the minute if you sent a paymentin early. Or program your personal computer to differentially pay billsdepending on the prime rate -- programmed bill-trading for amateurs. Or perhapsyou would engineer your computer to play with exchange rates, paying bills inwhatever currency is least valuable at the time. All manner of clever financialinstruments will surface once the masses can drink from the same river ofelectronic money as the pros. To the list of things to hack, we may now addfinance. We are headed toward programmed capitalism. * Privatization. The ease with which e-money is caught, flung, and shapedmakes it ideal for private currencies. The 214 billion yen tied up by Japan'sNTT's phone cards is one limited type of private currency. The law of the netis: he who owns a computer not only owns a printing press, but also a mint,when that computer is linked to e-money. Para-currencies can pop up anywherethere is trust (and fail there, too). Historically, most modern barter networks rapidly slide into exchanges ofreal currency; one could expect the same in electronic barter clubs, but theblinding efficiency of an e-money system may not tend that way. The $ 350billion tax question is whether para-currency networks would ever rise aboveunofficial status. * The minting and issuing of currency has been one of the few remainingfunctions of government that the private sector has not encroached upon.E-money will lower this formidable barrier. By doing so it will provide apowerful tool to private governance systems, such as might be established byrenegade ethnic groups, or the "edge cities" proliferating near the world'smegacities. The use of institutional electronic money transfers to laundermoney on a global scale is already out of anyone's control. The Yin of the Network's Yang The nature of e-money -- invisible, lightning-quick, cheap, globallypenetrating -- is likely to produce indelible underground economies, a worryway beyond mere laundering of drug money. In the net-world, where a globaleconomy is rooted in distributed knowledge and decentralized control, e-moneyis not an option but a necessity. Para-currencies will flourish as the GrandNet flourishes. The electronic matrix is destined to be an outback of hardyunderwire economies. The net is so amicable to electronic cash that onceestablished interstitially in the net's links, e-money is probablyineradicable. In fact, the legality of anonymous digital cash is in limbo from the start.There are now strict limits to the size of transactions US citizens can makewith physical cash; try depositing $ 10,000 in greenbacks in a bank. At whatamount will the government limit anonymous digital cash? The drift of allgovernments is to demand fuller and fuller disclosures of financialtransactions (to make sure they get their cut of tax) and to halt unlawfultransactions (as in the War on Drugs). The prospect of allowing untraceablecommerce to bloom PAGE 38 Whole Earth Review, June 22, 1993 on a federally subsidized network would probably have the US governmentseriously worried, if they were thinking about it. But they aren't. A cashlesssociety smells like stale science fiction, and the phrase reminds everybureaucrat drowning in paper of the unfulfilled predictions of a paperlesssociety. Eric Hughes, maintainer of the cypherpunks' mailing list, says, * "The Really Big Question is, how large can the flow of money on the netsget before the government requires reporting of every small transaction?Because if the flows can get large enough, past some threshold, then theremight be enough aggregate money to provide an economic incentive for atransnational service to issue money, and it wouldn't matter what onegovernment does." Hughes envisions multiple outlets for electronic money springing up allover the global net. The vendors would act like traveler's-check companies.They would issue e-money for, say, a 1 percent surcharge. You could then spendInternet Express checks wherever anyone accepted them. But somewhere on theglobal net, underwire economies would dawn, perhaps sponsored by thegovernments of struggling developing countries. Like the Swiss banks of old,these digital banks would offer unreported transactions. Paying in online Nigerian nairasfrom a house in Connecticut would be no more difficult than using US dollars."The interesting market experiment," Hughes says, "is to see what thedifference in the charge for anonymous money is, once the market equalizes. Ibet it'll be on the order of 1 to 3 percent higher, with an upper limit ofabout 10 percent. That amount will be the first real measure of what financialprivacy is worth. It might also be the case that anonymous money will be theonly kind of money." Usable electronic money may be the most important outcome of a suddengrassroots takeover of the formerly esoteric and forbidden field of codes andciphers. Everyday e-money is one novel use for encryption that never would haveoccurred to the military. There are certainly many potential uses of encryption that the cypherpunks' own ideological leanings blind them to, andthat will have to wait until encryption technology enters the mainstream -- asit certainly will. To date, encryption has birthed the following: digital signatures, blindcredentials (you have a diploma that says: Yes you have a Ph.D., but no one canlink that diploma with your other diploma from traffic school), anonymousemail, electronic money. These species of disconnection thrive as networksthrive. Encryption wins because it is the necessary counterforce to the net'srunaway tendency to connect everything. It is a prime technology ofdisconnection. The net says, "Just connect." The cipher says, "Disconnect."Encipherment is the complementary technology to the technology of cheap copyingand linking. Without some force of disconnection, the world would freeze up inan overloaded tangle of unprivate connections and unfiltered information. I'm listening to the cypherpunks, not because I think that anarchy is asolution to anything, but because it seems to me that encryption technologycivilizes the gridlocking avalanche of knowledge and data that networkedsystems generate. A cipher is the yin for the network's yang, a tiny hiddenforce that is able to tame the explosive interconnections born ofdecentralized, distributed systems. GRAPHIC: Photograph PAGE 39 Whole Earth Review, June 22, 1993 IAC-NUMBER: IAC 13805354 IAC-CLASS: Magazine LANGUAGE: ENGLISH LOAD-DATE-MDC: January 13, 1994 WT02-B12-124IA087-000631-B024-226http://res2.resnet.upenn.edu:80/cis590/reading.154.html 130.91.195.242 19970122070202 text/html 21270HTTP/1.0 200 OKDate: Wed, 22 Jan 1997 07:02:02 GMTServer: Apache/1.1.1Content-type: text/htmlContent-length: 21098Last-modified: Tue, 22 Nov 1994 06:33:18 GMTsurfpunk in cis590? would you like me to add the latest surfpunk to the clipper archive?it describes gilmore's FOIA request for (!) the entire escrowdatabase. -meng >From mengwong@pobox.upenn.edu Tue Mar 15 01:13:06 1994Posted-Date: Mon, 14 Mar 94 20:26:58 PSTReceived-Date: Tue, 15 Mar 94 01:12:49 -0500Date: Mon, 14 Mar 94 20:26:58 PSTReply-To: <surfpunk@osc.versant.com>Message-Id: <surfpunk-0105@SURFPUNK.Technical.Journal>Mime-Version: 1.0Content-Type: text/plainFrom: surfpunk@osc.versant.com (jvgarffvat gur travhf bs senzref)To: surfpunk@osc.versant.com (SURFPUNK Technical Journal)Subject: [surfpunk-0105] FOIA: the Clipper Key Escrow databases * "I know of no safe depository of the ultimate powers* of the society but the people themselves, and if we* think them not enlightened enough to exercise that* control with a wholesome discretion, the remedy is not* to take it from them, but to inform their discretion."** -- Thomas Jefferson, 1820* [passed along by librarian Ruth Reynolds] SURFPUNK BACKISSUES: ftp://ftp.yak.net/pub/surfpunk ALSO: ftp://ftp.eff.org/pub/Publications/CuD/Surfpunk/ John Gilmore has sent a Freedom Of Information Act (FOIA) request forthe database of escrowed key components. These are the half-keys that will be required to decrypt conversations on the pre-wiretappedClipper encrypted telephones. The idea behind FOIA is that the U S Government should be accountableto its citizens by having its files and databases open to publicinspection. The mechanism for doing this is to file a FOIA request toa government agency, and they are supposed to send you what you askfor, with some exceptions. Requesting the Clipper key databases seemssilly at first, but really it strikes at the heart of why Clipper issuch a bad idea: FOIA prevents government from collecting informationabout citizens that the citizens themselves cannot be trusted with. Ifwe do not want other citizens listening in to our private conversations, the government has no business doing it, either, because they should be working *for* us. BTW, Eric Hughes points out that "escrowed" is not really the rightword. An escrow agent is someone chosen and agreed to by both partiesto hold something for future release under certain conditions. In thecase of Clipper Keys, both parties do not get to agree to who theescrow agents are. They are chosen for you: one is the U S Treasurydepartment, whose Secret Service brought you the Steve Jackson Gamesfiasco; the other is NIST, who is plowing ahead with the Clipperstandard despite a nearly unanimous response against it during theirperiod of public comment. It looks like John has created a mailing list foia-keys-request@toad.com if you're interested in following this. The Cypherpunks list is still atcypherpunks-request@toad.com. --strick ________________________________________________________________________________________________________________________________________________ To: cypherpunks@toad.com, gnu@toad.comSubject: <6g> I have FOIA'd the Clipper Key Escrow databasesDate: Fri, 25 Feb 94 12:58:40 -0800From: gnu@toad.com There appears to be no FOIA exemption that would justify withholdingthe key escrow databases which Treasury and NIST are building. (Thekeys are not tied to any individual, so individual privacy isn't avalid exemption. The database isn't classified. Etc.) I have askedfor a copy of each database, in toto. Letters were sent yesterday.One is reproduced below; the other is identical except for theaddressee and minor details. You too can do things like this. It's fun and it occasionallyproduces highly useful information. Just think of something that thegovernment knows, and has written down on paper, that you want toknow. Ask them for it. You have the right to know. They're spendingyour taxes to subjugate you, and they're required to answer, thoughalmost all agencies do it grudgingly. Post your request to the net,so that we-all will know it's happening, and can be inspired to thinkof other interesting things to ask for. You don't need all the boilerplate below about exemptions and timelimits and stuff; that is to put the agencies on notice that we willpush them in court, if necessary, to be responsive. Or you can useour boilerplate in your own requests, if you like. Alter the "mediarequester" section to suit your own situation. John [[ The actual FOIA request is at the end --strick ]] ________________________________________________________________________ Date: Mon, 28 Feb 94 11:48:59 -0800From: hughes@ah.com (Eric Hughes)Message-Id: <9402281948.AA05053@ah.com>To: cypherpunks@toad.comSubject: <8c> I have FOIA'd the Clipper Key Escrow databases Should John's FOIA request for the clipper key database work, itcreates a wonderful hole in the entire key custody system. It would require a legislative act to plug the hole. This is extremely significant, since the whole clipper strategy isbased on unchecked and unbalanced actions by the executive branch. Nolaws were passed to create clipper and no judicial review has takenplace. John's request will be denied, no doubt, and will go to court. Shouldhe prevail in court, the executive branch is bound by that decision.A key custody database which was public would make the system insecureand unusable. The executive branch could not change this. Only thelegislature could. Now, how many legislators do you know that are going to make a publicrecord by voting in favor of Big Brother? We are witnessing the genius of framers of the USA Constitution here,folks. Eric ________________________________________________________________________ To: smb@research.att.comCc: cypherpunks@toad.com, gnu@toad.comSubject: <6g> Re: I have FOIA'd the Clipper Key Escrow databasesIn-Reply-To: <9402252135.AA04902@toad.com>Date: Sun, 27 Feb 94 00:21:43 -0800 > I confess -- I expect one of two outcomes. First, they may say that> the database is classified, if only at the level of ``For Official> Use Only''. `For Official Use Only' is not a valid classification. A documentwith this marking cannot be withheld under FOIA exemption 1. You haveto read the Executive Orders on classification -- this category gotcleaned up a LONG time ago. The current Executive Order gives particular criteria for classifyingthings. If this database doesn't fit any of those criteria, it can'tlegally be classified. I don't believe that this database is covered.And a judge in a FOIA case can do a "de novo" (from scratch) review ofwhether the material is legally classified, by examining it himself inprivate -- we don't have to take the agency's word that "there reallyis some reason it is classified". Also, giving classified information to unauthorized people is a majoroffense. They threatened me with that offense one time, over textsthat I found in a library. If the keys in the database areclassified, they can't give them out to cops. FOIA requires that they"segregate" any classified part and give me the rest of what's there,so if they claim that "well, one key isn't classified, but ten or athousand of them are classified", I bet we can (1) get some keys out,(2) challenge this idea in court. In particular, it should bepossible to record the LEAF from a particular chip (whether you ownit, or not!) and send it to them in a FOIA request asking for thematching unit key. They clearly can map a LEAF to a key (they do itfor cops), and FOIA only requires that you "reasonably describe" therecords you want. Given their mapping capability, the LEAF is areasonable description of the record you want. > Second, maybe they will release it -- but remember that> the keys are stored encrypted. Can you file an FOIA request for the> key, too? Either I can get the key, or I can get them to decrypt it for me. Ifthey could hold arbitrary government records in secret by simplyencrypting them and classifying the keys, FOIA would be entirelythwarted; the courts wouldn't let them get away with it. By the way, I did request the keys: > This request includes your database of the escrowed key> components. This request also includes any ancillary information> about the database, such as data formats, procedures, standards,> access methods, memos and documents about its use, access> software, plans, etc. If the database itself is stored in encrypted> form, then this request also includes the computer programs and> keys required to access it. John ________________________________________________________________________ law office ofLee Tien1452 Curtis StreetBerkeley, California 94702_______________ tien@well.sf.ca.us voice: (510) 525-0817fax: (510) 525-3015 February 24, 1994 Reference: KEY ESCROW DATABASE-TREASURY Departmental Disclosure OfficeDepartment of the TreasuryRoom 1054-MTWashington, D.C. 20220ATTN: FOIA request Dear Sir or Madam: This is a request under the Freedom of Information Act [5 U.S.C. Sec. 552] on behalf of my client, Mr. John Gilmore. I write to request a copy of all agency records or portions thereof, in electronic or other form, which relate to the database of escrowed key components for encryption using the key escrow encryption method. The Attorney General announced on Friday, February 4, 1994, that the Automated Systems Division of the Department of the Treasury will be one of the two escrow agents. This request includes your database of the escrowed key components. This request also includes any ancillary information about the database, such as data formats, procedures, standards, access methods, memos and documents about its use, access software, plans, etc. If the database itself is stored in encrypted form, then this request also includes the computer programs and keys required to access it. We specifically request that you make the database available in electronic form, such as on magnetic tape. We remind you that the long-standing rule that the FOIA "makes no distinction between records maintained in manual and computer storage systems," Yeager v. D.E.A., 678 F.2d 315, 321 (D.C.Cir. 1982), has recently been amplified in Armstrong v. Executive Office of the President, 810 F.Supp. 335 (D.D.C. 1993). Any paper print-outs of electronic records, such as e-mail, must include all information in the electronic record. Assuming that there would be no loss of releasable information, such as written comments made on paper print-outs, we therefore ask you to release all responsive electronic records in electronic, i.e., machine-readable, form. As you know, the FOIA provides that an agency must make an initial determination of whether to comply with a FOIA request within ten working days of receiving the request. If the records that you possess were originated or classified by another organization, I ask that your organization declassify them (if needed) and release them to me, as provided in the FOIA, within the statutory time limits. If there is a conflict between the statutory time limits and some regulation or policy that requires you to refer the records, the statutory requirement takes precedence over any Executive-branch regulation, policy or practice. Congress placed a limit on the time which may be expended in referrals. The FOIA explicitly provides that referrals to other interested agencies or agency components are treated under the provision for "unusual circumstances," and cannot justify a delay of more than an additional 10 working days. 5 U.S.C. Sec. 552(a)(6)(B)(iii). "[W]hen an agency receives a FOIA request for 'agency records' in its possession it must take responsibility for processing the request. It cannot simply refuse to act on the ground that the documents originated elsewhere." McGehee v. C.I.A., 697 F.2d 1095, 1110 (D.C. Cir. 1983). Even records originated by other agencies are subject to immediate release under the applicable case law, if they were at the time of the request in the possession and control of your agency. Simply put, the FOIA and the case law take precedence over executive branch regulations or practices regarding referrals. If you do refer documents to any other agency, and they are not provided within the time limits, we intend to litigate on this point. As you know, the FOIA provides that even if some requested material is properly exempted from mandatory disclosure, all segregable portions must be released. [5 U.S.C. Sec. 552(b)] If any or all material covered by this request is withheld, please inform me of the specific exemptions that are being claimed, and mark all deletions to indicate the exemption(s) being claimed to authorize each individual withholding. If the (b)(3) exemption is claimed, please indicate the relevant withholding statute(s). If any records are withheld, I request a Vaughn index or its equivalent during the administrative process. "[T]he objective of the Vaughn requirements, to permit the requesting party to present its case effectively, is equally applicable to proceedings within the agency." Mead Data Central v. Department of the Air Force, 402 F.Supp. 460 (D.D.C. 1974), remanded, 566 F.2d 242 (D.C. Cir. 1977) aff'd, 575 F.2d 932 (D.C. Cir. 1978). "[A] person cannot effectively appeal a decision about the releasability of documents ... if he is not informed of at least a list of the documents to which he was denied access ... and why those decisions were made. Denial of this information would in all likelihood be a denial of due process as well as effectively gutting the reasons for applying the exhaustion doctrine in FOIA cases." Shermco Industries, Inc. v. Secretary of the Air Force, 452 F.Supp. 306, 317 n.7 (N.D. Tex. 1978); see Oglesby v. Department of the Army, 920 F.2d 57, 65 (D.C. Cir. 1990) (citing Shermco). It should be simple to prepare a list and the claimed exemptions as the records are processed. Disclosing such information would not disclose any exempt information and it would make it easier to appeal your initial determination on the merits. In addition, I ask that your agency exercise its discretion to release information that may be technically exempt. As you know, the Attorney General on October 4, 1993, directed that agencies should administer the FOIA under a presumption of disclosure, and that information which need not be withheld should not be. I remind you that under Chrysler v. Brown, 441 U.S. 281, 293 (1979), the 5 U.S.C. Sec. 552(b) exemptions are discretionary, not mandatory. An agency can generally choose to release exempt information. This discretionary review process for withholding cannot take precedence over the law, which requires a response within specified time limits. Moreover, that discretion, according to the Attorney General's October 4, 1993 memorandum, must be exercised in accordance with a presumption of disclosure. Even if a substantial legal basis exists for withholding, information is not to be withheld unless it need be. I also request that fees be waived because Mr. Gilmore should be deemed a media requester by your agency for FOIA purposes, and because the public interest would be furthered by a fee waiver. The D.C. Circuit Court of Appeals has held that "a representative of the news media is, in essence, a person or entity that gathers information of potential interest to a segment of the public, uses its editorial skills to turn the raw materials into a distinct work, and distributes that work to an audience." National Security Archive v. Department of Defense, 880 F.2d 1381, 1387 (D.C.Cir. 1989), cert. denied 494 U.S. 1029 (1990). This definition applies strongly to Mr. Gilmore, who is a co-founder and director of the Electronic Frontier Foundation (EFF), a Washington, D.C.-based public interest organization. The EFF has been intimately involved in policy discussions concerning key escrow encryption and distributes information to the public by newsletter and electronic distribution about this and other topics involving civil liberties. Mr. Gilmore is also a skilled computer programmer who has spent the last ten years distributing his work for public use to a worldwide audience on the Internet and the Usenet. Mr. Gilmore is also entitled to a fee waiver because "disclosure of the information is in the public interest because it is likely to contribute significantly to public understanding of the operations or activities of the government and is not primarily in the commercial interest of the requester." There exists a tremendous public debate over the wisdom and legality of the key escrow encryption plan, as I am sure you are well aware. Your agency's database is clearly an operation of the government in which the public has a great interest. The Vice President himself has publicly expressed doubt about the delegating key escrow responsibilities to agencies which are part of the executive branch. The information requested herein relates to such doubt. This information is not yet in the public record, so the request makes a substantial contribution to the public understanding. This request is not primarily in the commercial interest of Mr. Gilmore. He will not benefit financially from this information in any way. He intends to disseminate the requested records widely and freely to inform this public debate. Should there be any problem in this regard, Mr. Gilmore promises to pay up to $1000 in fees, and you should therefore begin processing of this request without fee-related delays. As provided under the FOIA, I will expect a reply within ten (10) working days. Sincerely, Lee TienAttorney at LawOn behalf of Mr. John Gilmore ________________________________________________________________________ The SURFPUNK Technical Journal is a dangerous multinational hacker zineoriginating near BARRNET in the fashionable western arm of the northernCalifornia matrix. Quantum Californians appear in one of two states,spin surf or spin punk. Undetected, we are both, or might be neither.________________________________________________________________________ Submissions: <surfpunk@versant.com>,Subscriptions: <surfpunk-request@versant.com>.Backissues: ftp://ftp.yak.net/pub/surfpunkalso ftp://ftp.eff.org/pub/Publications/CuD/Surfpunk/________________________________________________________________________________________________________________________________________________ Vice President Al Gore's comments: By Jay Levin (C) 1994 From New York Unix Vol 4 #3. WASHINGTON, Feb 11 Under the Clipper plan, the keys would be stored at the Treasury Department and the National Insitute of Standards and Technology (NIST), whic is part of the Commerce Department. Both Treasury and Commerce are from the same branch of government, the executive branch. "When I saw that I said 'Wow. That is not right,' and I raised hell about that," Gore said in an interview Thursday. Having the key holders from the same branch of government raises concern because there is no systems of checks and balances, Gore said. "That's going to be changed," he said. ... The selection of NIST and Treasury "was spun out of the process at the low level and was not vetted at the top," Gore said. Gore's comments were made after appearing before the first meeting of a private sector advisory panel on the development of a "national information infrastructure" in Washington, D.C. From: Carl Ellison <cme@sw.stratus.com> >The FBI and the Justice Department say the initiative would >not expand their power, but would ensure access to the type of >communications they have been entitled to tap for years. This is totally bogus. The FBI has never had the right to watch computer programs execute. Now that computer programs are being written as distributed systems, what was originally written to be an internal subroutine call can look like a message over the phone system. The FBI never had the right to bug corporate conference rooms. Now that companies are using videoconferencing, a private corporate conference could look like a phone call. Etc. This needs to be fought. - Carl To: cypherpunks@toad.com Subject: SQUISH I just received a notice concerning your game. Please send me some more information on how to join/play as well as any rules. Thanks, Jeff WT02-B12-125IA087-000631-B024-259http://res2.resnet.upenn.edu:80/cis590/reading.155.html 130.91.195.242 19970122070229 text/html 980HTTP/1.0 200 OKDate: Wed, 22 Jan 1997 07:02:29 GMTServer: Apache/1.1.1Content-type: text/htmlContent-length: 810Last-modified: Tue, 22 Nov 1994 06:33:19 GMT Bob Metcalfe on Clipper CLIPPER CHIP OPPOSITIONInfoWorld publisher Bob Metcalfe states in a Wall Street Journal op-edpiece that he is against Clipper Chip technology, but for different reasonsthan those cited by the ACLU and the Electronic Frontier Foundation. Ratherthan getting steamed up about the right to privacy issue, which he noteswas always a conditional right anyway, Metcalfe says, "I am against Clippersimply because it will not work, and it will cost an unnecessary amount oftax money to outfit government computers with the chips." Even if Clipperwere built into every computer and phone system, "smart criminals caneasily get around Clipper by using additional encryption. Stupid criminalswill continue to do stupid things and get caught." (Wall Street Journal3/22/94 A14) WT02-B12-126IA087-000631-B024-301http://res2.resnet.upenn.edu:80/cis590/reading.156.html 130.91.195.242 19970122070252 text/html 4205HTTP/1.0 200 OKDate: Wed, 22 Jan 1997 07:02:52 GMTServer: Apache/1.1.1Content-type: text/htmlContent-length: 4034Last-modified: Tue, 22 Nov 1994 06:33:20 GMTThe NSA speaks on Clipper Posted-Date: Wed, 23 Mar 1994 19:04:42 -0500Newsgroups:alt.privacy.clipper,comp.org.eff.talk,sci.crypt,talk.politics.crypto,alt.politics.datahighway,alt.fan.david-sternlightPath:netnews.upenn.edu!news.amherst.edu!news.mtholyoke.edu!news.byu.edu!gatech!howland.reston.ans.net!math.ohio-state.edu!magnus.acs.ohio-state.edu!csn!csus.edu!netcom.com!strnlghtFrom: strnlght@netcom.com (David Sternlight)Subject: The NSA speaks on ClipperOrganization: DSI/USCRPACDate: Wed, 23 Mar 1994 23:24:01 GMTLines: 71Xref: netnews.upenn.edu alt.privacy.clipper:3508 comp.org.eff.talk:30266sci.crypt:25127 talk.politics.crypto:3950 alt.politics.datahighway:2293alt.fan.david-sternlight:768Apparently-To: farber@pcpond.cis.upenn.edu Readers are invited to repost this to any relevant newsgroups I've omitted,as long as they post it unaltered. They are welcome to comment in "reply"messages, either by posting or e-mail. Over the past several months a debate has been raging here about the ClipperChip. It has been marked by name-calling, incivility, the mocking ofrational arguments when writers were unable to respond, and much barnyardbehavior in general. Through it all I've been making a number of arguments,and presenting a number of hypotheses based on simple logic and commonsense. Having no access to "inside" information, I've had to rely on thatapproach, which is based on the simple notion that my teachers had somethingworthwhile to impart to me during my student days. Now the NSA has spoken out officially. In The Wall Street Journal of March22, 1994, on page B1 there is an interview with the Clipper Chip projectleader, Clinton Brooks of the NSA. The interview officially confirms the keypoints of my advocacy. 1. The original purpose of the Clipper Chip was to protect U.S. civiliancommunications. The escrow is laid on top of that for law enforcementpurposes. "the NSA is consumed with the 'equities problem'--how to balance privacyrights against the needs of law enforcement, national security, and privateindustry." "began discussion about how to improve computer security without making itimpenetrable to police" 2. The Clipper Chip algorithm, Capstone is algorithmically highly secure. "The team decided against using a weak encryption code. ...it had to be goodsecurity." 3. The Clipper Chip does not contain a trapdoor. "it also rejected a so-called trapdoor approach in which the computer codewould be designed so it would have a weak spot--a trapdoor--that federalagencies could enter via computer to tap the communications. Someone elsecould discover the trapdoor, they decided." 4. The reason the algorithm is secret is so that others cannot use such astrong algorithm without escrow. "It would defeat the purpose [of the project] if we gave the knowledge ofhow the algorithm worked" to the public..."It was going to have to be keptclassified." "Otherwise engineers could use the algorithm to designcomputer-security systems that the government's encryption keys couldn'tunlock." 5. The reason for the NSA's involvement is that they're the best experts wehave and not because of some sinister secret plot. "The only reason we're involved is that we have the bestcryptomathematicians in the country." Now it's possible he's lying in his teeth. But such a hypothesis would alsorequire lots of people up and down the NSA, the NSA's reportingorganizations, NIST, the civilian review board, the White House, and thePresident all to be lying or systematically lied to. That's far too complicated a hypothesis to be credible compared with thesimpler one that he and everyone up the line is telling the truth. There aretoo many cooks in this one for a "plot" to be sustained, and the damage ifthere were a plot and anyone "leaked" too great. The many people involvedare not going to stake their personal credibility and that of the Presidenton this one. David WT02-B12-127IA087-000631-B025-3http://res2.resnet.upenn.edu:80/cis590/reading.157.html 130.91.195.242 19970122070317 text/html 26265HTTP/1.0 200 OKDate: Wed, 22 Jan 1997 07:03:17 GMTServer: Apache/1.1.1Content-type: text/htmlContent-length: 26093Last-modified: Tue, 22 Nov 1994 06:33:20 GMT Gore GII Buenos Aires Speech Remarks prepared for delivery By Vice President AL GORE International Telecommunications Union Monday March 21, 1994 I have come here, 8,000 kilometers from my home, to ask you to helpcreate a Global Information Infrastructure. To explain why, I want tobegin by reading you something that I first read in high school, 30years ago. "By means of electricity, the world of matter has become a great nerve,vibrating thousands of miles in a breathless point of time. . . . Theround globe is a vast . . . brain, instinct with intelligence!" This was not the observation of a physicist -- or a neurologist.Instead, these visionary words were written in 1851 by NathanielHawthorne, one of my country's greatest writers, who was inspired bythe development of the telegraph. Much as Jules Verne foresawsubmarines and moon landings, Hawthorne foresaw what we are now poisedto bring into being. The ITU was created only 14 years later, in major part for the purposeof fostering an internationally compatible system of telegraphy. For almost 150 years, people have aspired to fulfill Hawthorne'svision--to wrap nerves of communications around the globe, linking allhuman knowledge. In this decade, at this conference, we now have at hand thetechnological breakthroughs and economic means to bring all thecommunities of the world together. We now can at last create aplanetary information network that transmits messages and images withthe speed of light from the largest city to the smallest village onevery continent. I am very proud to have the opportunity to address the firstdevelopment conference of the ITU because the President of the UnitedStates and I believe that an essential prerequisite to sustainabledevelopment, for all members of the human family, is the creation ofthis network of networks. To accomplish this purpose, legislators,regulators, and businesspeople must do this: build and operate aGlobal Information Infrastructure. This GII will circle the globe withinformation superhighways on which all people can travel. These highways--or, more accurately, networks of distributedintelligence--will allow us to share information, to connect, and tocommunicate as a global community. From these connections we willderive robust and sustainable economic progress, strong democracies,better solutions to global and local environmental challenges, improvedhealth care, and--ultimately--a greater sense of shared stewardship ofour small planet. The Global Information Infrastructure will help educate our childrenand allow us to exchange ideas in within a community and amongnations. It will be a means by which families and friends willtranscend the barriers of time and distance. It will make possible aglobal information marketplace, where consumers can buy or sellproducts. I ask you, the delegates to this conference, to set anambitious agenda that will help all governments, in their own sovereignnations and in international cooperation, to build this GlobalInformation Infrastructure. For my country's part, I pledge ourvigorous, continued participation in achieving this goal--in thedevelopment sector of the ITU, in other sectors and in plenipotentiarygatherings of the ITU, and in bilateral discussions held by ourDepartments of State and Commerce and our Federal CommunicationsCommission. The development of the GII must be a cooperative effort amonggovernments and peoples. It cannot be dictated or built by a singlecountry. It must be a democratic effort. And the distributed intelligence of the GII will spread participatorydemocracy. To illustrate why, I'd like to use an example from computer science.In the past, all computers were huge mainframes with a singleprocessing unit, solving problems in sequence, one by one, each bit ofinformation sent back and forth between the CPU and the vast field ofmemory surrounding it. Now, we have massively parallel computers withhundreds -- or thousands --- of tiny self- contained processorsdistributed throughout the memory field, all interconnected, andtogether far more powerful and more versatile than even the mostsophisticated single processor, because they each solve a tiny piece ofthe problem simultaneously and when all the pieces are assembled, theproblem is solved. Similarly, the GII will be an assemblage of local, national, andregional networks, that are not only like parallel computers but intheir most advanced state will in fact be a distributed, parallelcomputer. In a sense, the GII will be a metaphor for democracy itself.Representative democracy does not work with an all-powerful centralgovernment, arrogating all decisions to itself. That is why communismcollapsed. Instead, representative democracy relies on the assumption that thebest way for a nation to make its political decisions is for eachcitizen -- the human equivalent of the self-contained processor -- tohave the power to control his or her own life. To do that, people must have available the information they need. Andbe allowed to express their conclusions in free speech and in votesthat are combined with those of millions of others. That's what guidesthe system as a whole. The GII will not only be a metaphor for a functioning democracy, itwill in fact promote the functioning of democracy by greatly enhancingthe participation of citizens in decision-making. And it will greatlypromote the ability of nations to cooperate with each other. I see annew Athenian Age of democracy forged in the fora the GII will create. The GII will be the key to economic growth for national andinternational economies. For us in the United States, the informationinfrastructure already is to the U.S. economy of the 1990s whattransport infrastructure was to the economy of the mid-20th century.The integration of computing and information networks into the economymakes U.S. manufacturing companies more productive, more competitive,and more adaptive to changing conditions and it will do the same forthe economies of other nations. These same technologies are also enabling the service sectors of theU.S. economy to grow, to increase their scale and productivity andexpand their range of product offerings and ability to respond tocustomer demands. Approximately 60% of all U.S. workers are "knowledge workers" -- peoplewhose jobs depend on the information they generate and receive over ourinformation infrastructure. As we create new jobs, 8 out of 10 are ininformation-intensive sectors of our economy. And these new jobs arewell-paying jobs for financial analysts, computer programmers, andother educated workers. The global economy also will be driven by the growth of the InformationAge. Hundreds of billions of dollars can be added to world growth ifwe commit to the GII. I fervently hope this conference will take fulladvantage of this potential for economic growth, and not deny anycountry or community its right to participate in this growth. As the GII spreads, more and more people realize that information is atreasure that must be shared to be valuable. When two peoplecommunicate, they each can be enriched--and unlike traditionalresources, the more you share, the more you have. As Thomas Jeffersonsaid, "He who receives an idea from me, receives instruction himselfwithout lessening mine; as he who lights his taper at mine, receiveslight without darkening me." Now we all realize that, even as we meet here, the Global InformationInfrastructure is being built, although many countries have yet to seeany benefits. Digital telecommunications technology, fiber optics, and newhigh-capacity satellite systems are transforming telecommunications.And all over the world, under the seas and along the roads, pipelines,and railroads, companies are laying fiber optic cable that carriesthousands of telephone calls per second over a single strand of glass. These developments are greatly reducing the cost of building the GII.In the past, it could take years to build a network. Linking a singlecountry's major cities might require laying thousands of kilometers ofexpensive wires. Today, a single satellite and a few dozen groundstations can be installed in a few months -- at much lower cost. The economics of networks have changed so radically that the operationof a competitive, private market can build much of the GII. This isdependent, however, upon sensible regulation. Within the national boundaries of the U.S. we aspire to build ourinformation highways according to a set of principles that I outlinedin January in California. The National Information Infrastructure, aswe call it, will be built and maintained by the private sector. Itwill consist of hundreds of different networks, run by differentcompanies and using different technologies, all connected together in agiant "network of networks," providing telephone and interactivedigital video to almost every American. Our plan is based on five principles: First, encourage privateinvestment; Second, promote competition; Third, create a flexibleregulatory framework that can keep pace with rapid technological andmarket changes; Fourth, provide open access to the network for allinformation providers; and Fifth, ensure universal service. Are these principles unique to the United States? Hardly. Many areaccepted international principles endorsed by many of you. I believethese principles can inform and aid the development of the GlobalInformation Infrastructure and urge this Conference to incorporatethem, as appropriate, into the Buenos Aires Declaration, which will bedrafted this week. Let me elaborate briefly on these principles. First, we propose that private investment and competition be thefoundation for development of the GII. In the U.S., we are in theprocess of opening our communications markets to all domestic privateparticipants. In recent years, many countries, particularly here in Latin America,have opted to privatize their state-owned telephone companies in orderto obtain the benefits and incentives that drive competitive privateenterprises, including innovation, increased investment, efficiency andresponsiveness to market needs. Adopting policies that allow increased private sector participation inthe telecommunications sector has provided an enormous spur totelecommunications development in dozens of countries, includingArgentina, Venezuela, Chile, and Mexico. I urge you to follow theirlead. But privatization is not enough. Competition is needed as well. Inthe past, it did make sense to have telecommunications monopolies. In many cases, the technology and the economies of scale meant it wasinefficient to build more than one network. In other cases--Finland,Canada, and the U.S., for example--national networks were built in theearly part of this century by hundreds of small, independent phonecompanies and cooperatives. Today, there are many more technology options than in the past and itis not only possible, but desirable, to have different companiesrunning competing--but interconnected--networks, because competition isthe best way to make the telecommunications sector more efficient, moreinnovative--and more profitable as consumers make more calls and pricesdecline. That is why allowing other companies to compete with AT&T, once theworld's largest telephone monopoly, was so useful for the UnitedStates. Over the last ten years, it has cut the cost of along-distance telephone call in the U.S. more than 50%. To promote competition and investment in global telecommunications, weneed to adopt cost-based collection and accounting rates. Doing sowill accelerate development of the GII. International standards to ensure interconnection and interoperabilityare needed as well. National networks must connect effectively witheach other to make real the simple vision of linking schools,hospitals, businesses, and homes to a Global InformationInfrastructure. Hand in hand with the need for private investment and competition isthe necessity of appropriate and flexible regulations developed by anauthoritative regulatory body. In order for the private sector to invest and for initiatives opening amarket to competition to be successful, it is necessary to create aregulatory environment that fosters and protects competition andprivate sector investments, while at the same time protectingconsumers' interests. Without the protection of an independent regulator, a potential privateinvestor would be hesitant to provide service in competition with theincumbent provider for fear that the incumbent's market power would notbe adequately controlled. Decisions and the basis for making them must also be made public sothat consumers and potential competitors are assured that theirinterests are being protected. This is why in the U.S., we have delegated significant regulatorypowers to an independent agency, the Federal CommunicationsCommission. This expert body is well-equipped to make difficulttechnical decisions and to monitor, in conjunction with the NationalTelecommunications and Information Administration and the Department ofJustice, changing market conditions. We commend this approach to you. We need a flexible, effective system for resolution of internationalissues, too-- one that can keep up with the ever-accelerating pace oftechnological change. I understand that the ITU has just gone through a major reorganizationdesigned to increase its effectiveness. This will enable the ITU,under the able leadership of Mr. Tarjanne, to streamline its operationsand redirect resources to where they are needed most. This will ensurethat the ITU can adapt to future and unimaginable technologies. Our fourth principle is open access. By this I mean that telephone andvideo network owners should charge non-discriminatory prices for accessto their networks. This principle will guarantee every user of the GIIcan use thousands of different sources of information--videoprogramming, electronic newspapers, computer bulletin boards--fromevery country, in every language. With new technologies like direct broadcast satellites, a few networkswill no longer be able to control your access to information--as longas government policies permit new entrants into the informationmarketplace. Countries and companies will not be able to compete in the globaleconomy if they cannot get access to up-to-date information, if theycannot communicate instantly with customers around the globe. Readyaccess to information is also essential for training the skilledworkforce needed for high-tech industries. The countries that flourish in the twenty-first century will be thosethat have telecommunications policies and copyright laws that providetheir citizens access to a wide choice of information services.Protecting intellectual property is absolutely essential. The final and most important principle is to ensure universal serviceso that the Global Information Infrastructure is available to allmembers of our societies. Our goal is a kind of global conversation,in which everyone who wants can have his or her say. We must ensure that whatever steps we take to expand our worldwidetelecommunications infrastructure, we keep that goal in mind. Although the details of universal service will vary from country tocountry and from service to service, several aspects of universalservice apply everywhere. Access clearly includes making serviceavailable at affordable prices to persons at all income levels. Italso includes making high quality service available regardless ofgeographic location or other restrictions such as disability. Constellations of hundreds of satellites in low earth orbit may soonprovide telephone or data services to any point on the globe. Suchsystems could make universal service both practical and affordable. An equally important part of universal access is teaching consumers howto use communications effectively. That means developing easy-to-useapplications for a variety of contexts, and teaching people how to usethem. The most sophisticated and cost-efficient networks will becompletely useless if users are unable to understand how to access andtake full advantage of their offerings. Another dimension of universal service is the recognition thatmarketplace economics should not be the sole determinant of the reachof the information infrastructure. The President and I have called for positive government action in theUnited States to extend the NII to every classroom, library, hospital,and clinic in the U.S. by the end of the century. I want to urge that this conference include in its agenda for actionthe commitment to determine how every school and library in everycountry can be connected to the Internet, the world's largest computernetwork, in order to create a Global Digital Library. Each librarycould maintain a server containing books and journals in electronicform, along with indexes to help users find other materials. As moreand more information is stored electronically, this global librarywould become more and more useful. It would allow millions of students, scholars and businesspeople tofind the information they need whether it be in Albania or Ecuador. Private investment ... competition ... flexibility ... open access ...universal service. In addition to urging the delegates of this conference to adopt theseprinciples as part of the Buenos Aires Declaration, guiding the nextfour years of telecommunications development, I assure you that theU.S. will be discussing in many fora, inside and outside the ITU,whether these principles might be usefully adopted by all countries. The commitment of all nations to enforcing regulatory regimes to buildthe GII is vital to world development and many global social goals. But the power of the Global Information Infrastructure will bediminished if it cannot reach large segments of the world population. We have heard together Dr. Tarjanne's eloquent speech setting forth thechallenges we face. As he points out: the 24 countries of the OECDhave only 16 percent of the world's population. But they account for70 percent of global telephone mainlines and 90 percent of mobile phonesubscribers. There are those who say the lack of economic development causes poortelecommunications. I believe they have it exactly backwards. Aprimitive telecommunications systems causes poor economic development. So we cannot be complacent about the disparity between the high and lowincome nations, whether in how many phones are available to people orin whether they have such new technologies as high speed computernetworks or videoconferencing. The United States delegation is devoted to working with each of you atthis Conference to address the many problems that hinder development. And there are many. Financing is a problem in almost every country,even though telecommunications has proven itself to be an excellentinvestment. Even where telecommunications has been identified as a top developmentpriority, countries lack trained personnel and up-to-date information. And in too many parts of the world, political unrest makes it difficultor impossible to maintain existing infrastructure, let alone lay newwire or deploy new capacity. How can we work together to overcome these hurdles? Let me mention afew things industrialized countries can do to help. First, we can use the Global Information Infrastructure for technicalcollaboration between industrialized nations and developing countries.All agencies of the U.S. government are potential sources ofinformation and knowledge that can be shared with partners across theglobe. The Global Information Infrastructure can help development agencieslink experts from every nation and enable them to solve commonproblems. For instance, the Pan American Health Organization hasconducted hemisphere-wide teleconferences to present new methods todiagnose and prevent the spread of AIDS. Second, multilateral institutions like the World Bank, can help nationsfinance the building of telecommunications infrastructure. Third, the U.S. can help provide the technical know-how needed todeploy and use these new technologies. USAID and U.S. businesses havehelped the U.S. Telecommunications Training Institute train more than3500 telecommunications professionals from the developing world,including many in this room. In the future, USTTI plans also to help businesspeople, bankers,farmers, and others from the developing world find ways that computernetworking, wireless technology, satellites, video links, and othertelecommunications technology could improve their effectiveness andefficiency. I challenge other nations, the development banks, and the UN system tocreate similar training opportunities. The head of our Peace Corps, Carol Bellamy, intends to use Peace Corpsvolunteers both to help deploy telecommunications and computer systemsand to find innovative uses for them. Here in Argentina, a PeaceCorps volunteer is doing just that. To join the GII to the effort to protect and preserve the globalenvironment, our Administration will soon propose using satellite andpersonal communication technology to create a global network ofenvironmental information. We will propose using the schools andstudents of the world to gather and study environmental information ona daily basis and communicate that data to the world throughtelevision. But regulatory reform must accompany this technical assistance andfinancial aid for it to work. This requires top-level leadership andcommitment--commitment to foster investment in telecommunications andcommitment to adopt policies that ensure the rapid deployment andwidespread use of the information infrastructure. I opened by quoting Nathaniel Hawthorne, inspired by Samuel Morse'sinvention of the telegraph. Morse was also a famous portrait artist in the U.S.-- his portrait ofPresident James Monroe hangs today in the White House. While Morse wasworking on a portrait of General Lafayette in Washington, his wife, wholived about 500 kilometers away, grew ill and died. But it took sevendays for the news to reach him. In his grief and remorse, he began to wonder if it were possible toerase barriers of time and space, so that no one would be unable toreach a loved one in time of need. Pursuing this thought, he came todiscover how to use electricity to convey messages, and so he inventedthe telegraph and, indirectly, the ITU. The Global Information Infrastructure offers instant communication tothe great human family. It can provide us the information we need to dramatically improve thequality of their lives. By linking clinics and hospitals together, itwill ensure that doctors treating patients have access to the bestpossible information on diseases and treatments. By providing earlywarning on natural disasters like volcanic eruptions, tsunamis, ortyphoons, it can save the lives of thousands of people. By linking villages and towns, it can help people organize and worktogether to solve local and regional problems ranging from improvingwater supplies to preventing deforestation. To promote ... to protect ... to preserve freedom and democracy, wemust make telecommunications development an integral part of everynation's development. Each link we create strengthens the bonds ofliberty and democracy around the world. By opening markets tostimulate the development of the global information infrastructure, weopen lines of communication. By opening lines of communication, we open minds. This summer, from mycountry cameras will bring the World Cup Championship to well over onebillion people. To those of you from the 23 visiting countries whose teams are in theFinals, I wish you luck--although I'll be rooting for the home team. The Global Information Infrastructure carries implications even moreimportant than soccer. It has brought us images of earthquakes in California, of Boris Yeltsinon a tank in Red Square, of the effects of mortar shells in Sarajevoand Somalia, of the fall of the Berlin Wall. It has brought us imagesof war and peace, and tragedy and joy, in which we all can share. There's a Dutch relief worker, Wam Kat, who has been broadcasting anelectronic diary from Zagreb for more than a year and a half on theInternet, sharing his observations of life in Croatia. After reading Kat's Croatian diary, people around the world began tosend money for relief efforts. The result: 25 houses have beenrebuilt in a town destroyed by war. Governments didn't do this. People did. But such events are the hopeof the future. When I began proposing the NII in the U.S., I said that my hope is thatthe United States, born in revolution, can lead the way to this new,peaceful revolution. However, I believe we will reach our goal fasterand with greater certainty if we walk down that path together. AsAntonio Machado, Spanish poet, once said, "Pathwalker, there is nopath, we create the path as we walk." Let us build a global community in which the people of neighboringcountries view each other not as potential enemies, but as potentialpartners, as members of the same family in the vast, increasinglyinterconnected human family. Let us seize this moment. Let us work to link the people of theworld. Let us create this new path as we walk it together. WT02-B12-128IA087-000631-B025-37http://res2.resnet.upenn.edu:80/cis590/reading.158.html 130.91.195.242 19970122070404 text/html 51113HTTP/1.0 200 OKDate: Wed, 22 Jan 1997 07:04:00 GMTServer: Apache/1.1.1Content-type: text/htmlContent-length: 50941Last-modified: Tue, 22 Nov 1994 06:33:21 GMTno subject Transcript of DATA ENCRYPTION: WHO HOLDS THE KEYS? (Panel) at the Fourth Conference on Computers, Freedom and Privacy Chicago, Illinois, March 24, 1994 This is a verbatim transcript of the session on "Data Encryption; Who Holds the Keys?" held at the Fourth Conference on Computers, Freedom and Privacy in Chicago on March 24, 1994. The transcription was done by an independent local transcription agency. Light editing was done by CFP volunteers to resolve items the agency could not be expected to have knowledge of (for example, "technical" terms like "PGP"). "Did X *really* say U?" questions can always be resolved by listening to the audiotape available as tape JM414 from Teach'Em, 160 East Illinois St, Chicago, IL 60611, 1-800-225-3775, for $10 + $1 ($2 outside US) shipping and handling + 8.75% sales tax. ================================================================= Welcome to this program from the JohnMarshall Law School's fourth conference on computers, freedom and privacy entitled, "Cyberspace Superhighways: Access, Ethics & Control", held March 23rd through the 26th, 1994 at the Chicago Palmer House Hilton.On this cassette you will hear DataEncrytion -- who holds the keys? Now to our program. BOB SMITH Willis Ware originally had beenslated to being moderator for this panel and Willis had a problem and could not be with us and Robert Ellis Smith has agreed to fill in and use his technology background to fill in for Willis. It will take just a minute while we disengage from the T.V. hookup and get back to the modern overhead projector. My name is Bob Smith. I publishprivacy journal and actually I am moderating because Dave Banisar did not want to be moderator. We will hear from the three panelists with about three ten-minute presentations and then we will open it up to questions.The three ground rules for thissession: First, there will be no expansions of the metaphor of highways. We will not talk about highway metaphors for the next hour. Secondly, we will not accept as a defense that this issue is too sensitive or too complicated for us to understand and that we have to trust the government. And thirdly, a rule that I hope you will make work. If you hear a point of jargon or a point of technology that you don't understand, explanation -- not policy disputes but if there is something you don't understand feel free to raise your hand as a point of order. And if you can say it in ten words or less like, I don't understand, we'll get you an answer.I think Senator Leahy provided a goodprimer for cryptography and so I won't bother with that and we'll get right into the nuts and bolts of this issue. Our speakers are George Davida, whois with the University of Wisconsin in Milwaukee and has been involved in cryptography research for many years and was one of the first academicians to feel the heavy hand of government in the 1980's in its effort to try to curtail research into cryptography. That appears to be happening again in the 1990's so perhaps Professor Davida can tell us something about his experiences earlier on that same front.Our second speaker will be StuartBaker, who is General Counsel of the National Security Agency. He was a lawyer in private practice in Washington before joining NSA and one of the things he promised to do is to tell us exactly what NSA does and is because a lot of people don't know. It is different from the National Security Council by the way. Thirdly, our third speaker will beDavid Banisar who is the Computer Professionals for Social Responsibility office in Washington. He is trained as a lawyer and has a background in computer science and has some strong feelings about the cryptography debate.We will now move to Professor Davida.PROFESSOR DAVIDA I would like to talk about two issuesthat concern me and I believe a number of people here. By the way, I brought some copies of my paper in case you need one today. And if I don't have enough you can always write to me at that address. And I am also willing to put that on FTP for those of you who are on Internet and you can pick up a poster file and print it if you so wish.As Robert said, in 1978 I had aninteresting experience with NFA. I was doing research at the time in cryptograhy and one day I received a secrecy order by mail. It was more or less like a postcard telling me that under the penalty of three years in jail and $10,000 fine I am to talk to no one about what I had done in that paper without reference to any classified material.At first my graduate student and Ilaughed until we found out that it was deadly serious. We talked to the Chancelor about it and he said, no way because in Wisconsin there is a strong position of academic freedom and we are not allowed actually to conduct research that's secret. So we decided to resist the order and after a number of conversations between the Chancelor and someone you might have heard about recently again, Admiral Bobby Inman, and the then Commerce Secretary Juanita Kreps, the order was lifted. But not before Admiral Inman tried to convince the Chancelor that he should acquiesce to the order and allow us to stay, but I am happy to say that the Chancelor said that we could not put up with the order. Shortly thereafter a group was formedby the American Council on Education called Public Cryptography Study Group, not to be confused with Public Key Cryptosystems. And it is interesting that this group considered model legislation for censorship at first. I objected to it rather vigorously and when the press began to get involved in covering the meetings, they then approved what they called voluntary prior restraint. I again dissented from that report and the rest, as they say, is history. Many people have asked, "why do youoppose restaints?" Very simply, that privacy is just too important to leave it just to agencies like NSA. I also felt that the ACE recommendations were dangerous because they were later going to be looked at as some kind of admission by allegedly knowledgeable people that cryptography is an evil tool that will only be used by terrorists and drug dealers. And it is interesting that Senator Leahy himself refers to the struggle of the law enforcement with crimes -- and I assume he is talking about drug dealers and what have you. But someone should point out to him that they are not using cryptography today so I don't know what the struggle is all about. They may be struggling against criminals -- not because of cryptography but simply because a crime is just a major problem. I would also like to tell them that I don't think that the intelligence agencies struggle when it comes to tapping ordinary law abiding citizens. They do very well, thank you. I also think that the realities arevery different because cryptography is extremely important for two very critical applications. Now so far you mostly hear about one of them which is privacy. But the other application that also needs privacy work on is authenticity, or identification. These are two extremely critical applications of cryptography. And what is interesting is that the current proposals -- again, you only hear about one of them -- actually constitute a double whammy -- because there are two proposals that are being put forth today. You only hear about Clipper but what you do not hear about as much is the other twin monster that which is the digital signature standard. Basically what they are trying to do with this -- with Clipper you lack privacy and with DSS you essentially lack the signature, the identification schemes -- the two most important operations/applications of cryptography. So what will essentially happen isthat not only can you invade privacy with digital signatures which will be essentially the new way of identifying yourselves to an awful lot of systems and executables. They will actually be able to deny your very existence if those systems are allowed to be only government issued because it will be impossible in the systems of the future not to use something like digital identification/ digital authentication schemes because there are no other effective means. You all know about the silly paper systems we use for identifications, and even high school students know how to fake ID's to drink. So we will be moving toward digital signatures and if there is only one digital signature it's essentially a proposal to have just one government Bic pen. That is what they would like us to have. One pen to sign our names with and sign our checks with and authenticate ourselves with.Now again, as I said, privacy is oneapplication and I have raised a number of objections to it because it has been again portrayed as a tool of crime and criminals and drug dealers. But they are not the only ones who will be using cryptography and more importantly, if we continue this policy they will be the only ones who will have good security because we will not have any security as to privacy. And as that saying goes "if you outlaw privacy, only outlaws will have privacy". It is very strange. I find myself wanting to go and join organizations like the NRA all of a sudden. I really do. There is also an interesting sort ofdeception here going on with this so called escrow system. The problem is that, how in the hell can you escrow privacy. Go look at the definition of escrow -- it says that something of value held in trust is given back. Can you give back privacy? That is impossible. So I think that the very title of that is deceptive. Then I was amused, as some of youmight have been, with all the stories about bugging to look up a recent case of my friend Bobby Inman again, standing in front of television cameras saying that William Safire and Senator Dole were conspiring to get him with the President. And the question is, where is he getting this kind of data? Presumably he must because he spent his whole life, by the way, being very careful about what to say. You know, I can't imagine he is saying that without having something to back up with what he was claiming. So when we talk about bugging, just what do they do with all that data? Well, I think you have seen an example of what possibly may have been dealt with -- data that is intercepted.Again, authenticity is another areathat I think people should pay attention to. The second most important application of the use of identification, digital signatures for proving who you are and yet again they are proposing just one single big pen. I think that these two proposals jointly amount to what I consider a digital dragnet. Thank you. STUART BAKER: I have a friend who gives speeches alot and he likes to begin all his speeches by referring to country and western songs that sum up the theme of his talk. When he talks about U.S./Japan trade relations, he always starts out by referring to that classic "you got the gold mine, I got the shaft." And I thought about what David would have given as the country and western song that I should probably sing here and I think in relation to the Clipper Chip it would probably be "How can I miss you if you won't go away?"There is a reason why the ClipperChip won't go away and what I thought I would try to do very quickly because I only have ten minutes before the lynching begins is talk about why Key Escrow hasn't gone away by talking about some of the myths that are pretty prevalent about Key Escrow. I am not going to call it Clipper because there are a lot of products called Clipper. This is the internal name, not something that was used for the public. I don't object to people calling it Clipper but there probably are people who have Clipper products who would prefer that it not be called that.Let me see if I can put the first oneup. [OH slide: Myth #1: Key escrow encryption will create a brave new world of government, intrusion into the privacy of Americans.] I think this is pretty -- probably the classic opening statement about Clipper. That this is the beginning of some kind of brave new world in which everybody's privacy is at risk in a substantial new way. There is a lot of emotion behind that argument but not a lot of fact, because if you ask yourself if everybody in the United States used key escrow encryption and only key escrow encryption, which is not what the Administration has proposed by any means, what would the world look like? Well, the world would look like the world we live in today. It would be possible for the government to intercept communications subject to a variety of legal rules that make it very dangerous to go outside those rules. And, in fact, it would be a more private world because other people without authority would not be able to intercept and decrypt those communications. That is important because, in fact, there is somebody proposing a brave new world here and it is the people who want people to go away and to have unreadable encryption installed on all of the communications networks in the United States. That's a new world and that is a world we don't understand. We don't live in it today.We don't know what it is going to belike if criminals or terrorists or other people who are hostile to society can use that sanctuary to communicate. We don't know what it is like but it probably won't be as pleasant in terms of freedom from crime and terror as the world we live today, which is not exactly a comforting thought. It won't be a world in which the government can do more than they do today. So if you ask yourself well, how bad is it today, that's as bad as it can get under Clipper.[OH Slide: Myth #2L Unbreakableencryption is the key to our future liberty] Now the response to that, that youhear from people, well, yeah but what if the Republicans get elected? What if the Administration changes? This is a guarantee. I don't want to have to rely on laws and procedures and escrow agents. I don't trust the escrow agents, I don't trust the courts, I don't trust the government, I don't trust anybody. I want to trust my machine.Now that is not an uncommon way ofthinking in the parts of this community. I said to somebody once, this is the revenge of people who couldn't go to Woodstock because they had too much trig homework. It's a kind of romanticism about privacy and the kind of, you know, "you won't get my crypto key until you pry it from my dead cold fingers" kind of stuff. I have to say, you know, I kind of find it endearing. The problem with it is that thebeneficiaries of that sort of romanticism are going to be predators. PGP, you know, it is out there to protect freedom fighters in Latvia or something. But the fact is, the only use that has come to the attention of law enforcement agencies is a guy who was using PGP so the police could not tell what little boys he had seduced over the net. Now that's what people will use this for -- not the only thing people will use it for but they will use it for that and by insisting on having a claim to privacy that is beyond social regulation we are creating a world in which people like that will flourish and be able to do more than they can do today.[OH Slide: Myth #3: Encryption is thekey to preserving privacy in a digital world] I'll move quickly. There is anotherargument that I think is less romantic and that is the notion that technically, because we are all going to be networked, we are all going to be using wireless stuff -- we need encryption for privacy. I am not going to say that does not fit but it is a little oversold. Actually, I agreed with Professor Davida. Much of the privacy problems that we see in an electronic world are not because people are intercepting our communications, they're because we are giving it away. But what we don't like is that there are people now in a position that collate it all from public stuff that we willingly gave up. Well, you know, we gave this information to get a loan from one bank and before we know it, you know, our ex- spouse's lawyer has got it. That's a problem, but encryption won't solve it because you are going to have to give that information up if you want the benefit that the bank has. Similarly the most important use forthe protection for privacy, protection for data, is authentication -- digital signatures as opposed to privacy. I won't say that encrypting data for privacy purposes is irrelevant but it is probably not the most important way of guaranteeing privacy in an electronic age.[OH Slide: Myth #4: Key Escrow won'twork. Crooks won't use it if it's voluntary. There must be a secret plan to make key escrow encryption mandatory] This will be familiar. You shouldn'tover estimate the I.Q. of crooks. When I was first starting out as a lawyer I was in Portland, Maine and a guy walked into a downtown bank and he said, he handed a note to the teller, it said, "Give me all your money; I don't have a gun but I know where I can get one." I'm sure if you sent him out to buy encryption he for sure would buy the Clipper Chip.I think this misstates the problem.The notion that what the government is trying to do is to put in everybody's hands this kind of encryption in the hopes that crooks will be fooled into using it I think is to misstate the nature of the concern. The concern is not so much what happens today when people go in and buy voice scramblers; it is the prospect that in five years or eight years or ten years every phone you buy that costs $75 or more will have an encrypt button on it that will interoperate with every other phone in the country and suddently we will discover that our entire communications network, sophisticated as it is, is being used in ways that are profoundly anti-social. That's the real concern, I think, that Clipper addresses. If we are going to have a standardized form of encryption that is going to change the world we should think seriously about what we are going to do when it is misused.[OH Slide: Myth #5: Industry must beleft alone for competitiveness reasons]Are we interfering with the freemarket? Are we affecting the competitiveness of U.S. industry here? First, Clipper is an option. It is out there. People can use it. They can make it. They can not use it. And they can not make it. It's simply an additional option on the market. There may well be people who want this.I am a lawyer. I think in terms ofwho is liable if something goes wrong. And I think that if it's your business, and you are thinking about buying encryption and the possibility that your employees will misuse it to rip-off your customers, you ask yourself, well who is going to be liable if that happens? You might think, "Geez, maybe I don't want to be in a position where I can't actually make sure the police can come in and check to see if people are misusing this encryption where I have reason to believe that they are."Second, and this is a point that getslost a lot: this is a standard for what the government is going to buy because nobody in this room has to buy this thing. Now the complaint is kind of remarkable from all the stand-on-your-own-two- feet, free-market, nobody-tells-me-what-to-do, organizations that we hear from. The fact is, that this is just what the government is going to buy, and the people who are complaining that they don't want to make it, or don't want to buy it, don't have to. What they are really saying is, we would like the government to go on testing equipment, telling us what the best stuff is so we can then go out and sell it without doing our own research, doing our own debugging, our own checks on this technology. I think if you think of it from the government's point of view you see why we don't want to do that. We probably -- there are very few institutions other than government that are willing to devote both the kind of energy and resources that it takes to eliminate the last few bugs in encryption software or machinery. To go through and find every possible attack and think about how to prevent it -- somebody once said, the airport guy talking about encryption he said, well, I'll take it if it is invisible, doesn't have any effect on the pilot, and adds lift to my airplane. There is an attitude about encryption that I think most of you have probably encountered in the commercial world is, "Yeah, I want it if it is free." But there is very little demonstrated inclination on the part of industry to spend a lot of its own money to develop independent encryption. And the fact is that a lot of the encryption that is out there today was designed with government money, or endorsed by government standards or otherwise supported by government fortresses. But if the government is going to create encryption and create markets and run the cost down, then we ought to be designing and buying encryption that we are willing to see migrate into the private sector without destroying the ability of law enforcement to deal with it.And, I guess, the last point, peoplewho don't want to sell to the government can make anything they want. People are willing to put their own money into designing encryption can do it. This is just what the governments fund. AUDIENCE COMMENT: But you can't take it overseas. Whatthe government buys is (inaudible) technical for overseas. BAKER: This is also something that we heara lot about and I'll deal with it quickly. [OH Slide: Myth #6: NSA is a spyagency. It has no business worrying about domestic encryption policy]Yeah, the NSA does indeed gathersignal intelligence in foreign countries. But we have a second issue. Not only do we try to break people's codes but we make codes for the federal government. That means we have as a significant mission trying to design secure communications here that the government is going to use. And we face the very real concern that I described earlier, that if we design something and it's good and it's terrific stuff and the price goes down because the government has bought a lot of it, then other people are going to use it. It may end up becoming the most common encryption in the country. If that happens and people like this pedophile out in California start using it, we have some responsibility for that and therefore we have some responsibility to design and use encryption, that (if it does migrate to the private sector) does not put law enforcement out of business.[OH Slide: Myth #7: The entireinitiative was done in secret. There was no opportunity for industry or the public to be heard.]This is my last one. Again, this wastrue, I think or at least it was a reasonable thing to say in April of '93 when the Clipper Chip first showed up in people's newspapers. But since then the Administration has done an enormous amount of public outreach listening to a variety of groups -- EFF, CPSR, industry groups, holding hearings, organizing task forces to listen to people. It is not that they weren't heard -- what I expect people to say is, yes but you still didn't listen. We said we don't like it. How come you still did it? I think that the answer to that isyou have to ask yourself, what is the alternative that people will propose. It is not enough in my view to simply say "Get rid of it. What we want is unreadable encryption so that we have a guarantee of privacy against some government that hasn't come to our country in 15 years or a hundred years or two hundred years, and in the same guarantee that criminals and other people who don't have society's interest at heart will have a kind of electronic sanctuary." That is not a very satisfying answer for people who have to uphold the law as well as try to get the national information infrastructure off the ground. Thanks.DAVE BANISAR: Well, first I'd like to say I'm notsure what song you were referring to in your country and western description, but I think if I had to choose a country and western song it would probably be "Take This Job and Shove It." Moving onto the high road from now,I think what we have here is a really fundamental change in the way the communication system is being looked at in the future. Currently we have a situation where if somebody decides they need a wiretap, which is an issue I'll get to in a minute, whether it is useful or not, they go and they do an affirmative action. And the communication system is essentially set up to communicate. I use it to call.These two proposals, digitaltelephony which we haven't talked about here too much and Clipper, change that around. They change it into a fundamental purpose for the communication sytem now is going to be, let's make it available for surveillance. Essentially, we are designing pretapped telephones and then we have to work on the assumption that at only authorized periods will they not turn those on. This is a fundamental change. It treats now every person as a criminal. We are looking at them going -- well, I think that every person in this room is a criminal so I will build the tap into their phone. Perhaps next they will be building microphones into everybody's desk chairs and only turning them on when they need them. Frankly, in reality I don't know if the law enforcement has really made the case for wire tapping. Just last week they busted the entire Philadelphia mob. They got it by putting a microphone in the lawyer's office. This book here, GangLand, it is all about how they got Gotti. They put microphones on the street to get Gotti. The FBI comes and they give us the four cases. They have the El- Rukh people here in Chicago which I believe was more like a scam to get some money out of the Libyan government. They have one pedophile, they have a couple of drug dealers and so on and they keep doing this.I don't think they really made thecase. There's only in reality 800 or so wire taps a year. They are only a part of the deal. A lot of busts, especially from Mafia, are done with inside people with microphones, with a lot of other technologies out there. The FBI has spent billions of dollars in the last ten years modernizing. They have an amazing computer system now, amazing DNA systems, amazing everything. They are not behind the scenes anymore, or behind the ball anymore. To give you a new example: There wereapproximately a couple thousand arrests in 1992 that they say were attributable to electronic surveillance and that includes bugs. So it is hard to say how many of those were actually wire taps. In 1992 there were 14 million arrests in the United States. That's an awful lot of arrests and an awful small number of those had to do with electronic surveillance. Are we willing to revise our entire communication system just for that very small number? It is a question that needs to be asked.Now we have a problem. I wish wecould wave my magic wand here and solve the problem. [Takes out wand] You know, this is the magic wand that I can say crypto be gone, or crypto be strong. I don't know. It's not working. Oh well. So I have a couple solutions or a couple suggestions as they may be.First is to withdraw the Clipperproposal. It's a bad idea. Nobody wants it. Of the CNN/Time Magazine poll 80% of the American public didn't want it. Industry doesn't want it. Fifty-thousand people signed our CPSR Clipper petition asking for its withdrawal. I haven't seen anybody in the world who wants this thing -- well, save two, but I won't mention them.What should be done is to restart theprocess. Back in 1989 NIST was basically ordered to start a new process to return to make a new version of DES, or to replace DES with something else. And they had a good idea. They wanted it to be an open process. They wanted to look around, talk to people like they did back with DES and they eventually got that from IBM. They wanted a public algorithm that did both security and authenticity. They wanted it available in hardware and software. They wanted it to be a good strong standard for everybody. This hasn't happened.You know, withdraw the Clipperproposal and start the process over. There's lots of people in this room even who could come up with something very good but the fact is that we have not been allowed to do it. We had, I guess, nine or ten months after Clipper came out which had been designed in secret for the last five years. In that time nobody has come out and supported the thing and lots of people have had better ideas. But they came back a couple weeks ago and came out with the exact same proposal with one or two typos replaced. But that's about it.The second thing we need to do isrevise the law. We need to do this since NIST is the agency that is supposed to be in charge of this. We should make NIST subject to the same kind of rules that every other government agency has to go by. Why should NIST have lower standards to develop these crypto things which will affect all of our privacy than the FCC does when they hand out a radio license; when the Environmental Protection Agency does when they determine how much toxic waste we can survive in? The basis for this, for any of you that are lawyers in the room, is known as the Administrative Procedures Act. It is very well established, it has been around 40 years. Every other government agency, every other public government agency uses it already and it works well. The things that go under this rulemaking is that it is open. It is done in the open. There's no communications behind the scenes. It's all done in the public eye. The decision -- when they finally make a decision -- is based on the public record. It is not based on something on a classified study. And it is appealable. If we think that we've been screwed we can appeal.Finally, as we heard three or fourtimes today, we need an independent privacy commission. Simply speaking, there is nobody in this government -- in the U.S. government -- who is responsible for privacy. To look around and say, wait a second, this isn't working. I mean, what kind of government do we have that comes up with something on surveillance and calls it the "Communication Privacy Improvement Act"? What we need is a government agency that can look around and give an independent assessment on what's going on. And it can't be shunted aside or ignored or anything like that. We have to realize, and I apologize for breaking Bob's ground rules, that we're building the national information infrastructure without any guard rails. And we need to think about it and get back.Thank you.BOB SMITH: Questions, short and sweet. We havelimited time.CHARLES MARSON Charles Marson, lawyer of SanFrancisco. I would like to ask a question of the General Counsel. I have to say, this may be my one lifetime opportunity. A lot of the Administration's casefor the Clipper depends on a reliance and a level of comfort with present law. We are always told present law covers these things we are not extending anything. Present law requires your agency, sir, to apply to the foreign intelligence court for a warrant. CBS News issued a report last month that said that -- I think it was 4,500 applications had been made to that court -- all appointed by Chief Justice Renquist, and 4,500 have been granted. That is to say not one has been denied. Now in terms of our comfort level with present law will you tell us why it is that we should not conclude that this court is nothing but a Fourth Amendment fig leaf and that your agency is in fact free to tap anybody it wants. STU BAKER There's an interesting element -- Ithink you have to understand bureaucratic behavior in part here. CHARLES MARSON My fear is that I do, sir.[Laughter] A real tap whomever you please. STU BAKER Let's bear in mind, these are allArticle III judges. I actually don't know that the figures you gave are right. But these are Article III judges from all over the country. They are used to seeing law enforcement wire taps and to reviewing them carefully. Their whole life is sticking to the law. CHARLES MARSON If they said yes all the time, whocares?STU BAKER Well, I -- let me offer analternative explanation for the record of the courts and the agency in terms of FISA applications. And that is this. No one wants to be the first general counsel whose application is turned down. Nobody wants to get creative about what you can do and what you can't do. And so the effect of putting into judicial review is not so much that it is going to lead to judges rejecting a lot of stuff as much as it will make the agency make sure that before it takes something to the court, it is absolutely confident it has a case that it can make, that the judge will accept as fitting within the standards set by the statute. It's for the same reason that prosecutors don't like to bring cases that they don't think they can win. People do not like to try and fail and they consequently are very careful about what they put forward. I think that in fact is a more creditable explanation of the figures that you gave if they are right than the explanation you gave which is that judges don't care what the law is. I don't think that's true. SPEAKER Could we move on to the nextquestion, thank you.PHIL ZIMMERMANN That explanation reminds me of theDoonsberry cartoon about grade inflation where some students sued for not getting an "A" in this course and in the courtroom they said that this university gave an "A" to all students. How is it possible that the entire graduating class had an "A" average of 4.0 and they said, well, you know, it's just a great class. So I guess all those guys that applied for the wiretap orders through that judge, all those judges, absolutely all of them did everything right. It's sort of a grade inflation for wire tap requests. One thing that bothers me about thisprocess of Clipper ....MODERATOR Your name please.PHIL ZIMMERMANN I'm sorry. I'm Phil Zimmerman. I amthe author of PGP [applause]. I'm sorry, I didn't hear the part about what is your name.It seems to me that this Clipperprocess has some kind of secret game plan that the government is following through that we only find out about each step of it as it unfolds. I saw on the net some news about some representative of the U.S. government going -- it might have been from NSA -- talking to people in Europe, other countries in Europe, about them getting their own Clipper systems. Well, that seems like a public policy thing that we should have been discussing openly here before sending somebody over there to quietly do horizontal escalation and get this Clipper thing glued in worldwide, planetwide before .... thus making it harder to reverse later.MODERATOR Could you phrase the question? Theline behind is getting restless.ZIMMERMANN Okay, okay.I think that this kind of secretiveagenda is not being treated like other public policy issues like health care and things like that that are openly debated. It's like we are being treated like an enemy foreign population to be manipulated cynically. And so I would like somebody to respond to that, whoever wants to respond to that -- why can't we be treated like ...MODERATOR Let's hear the response.ZIMMERMANN Okay.STU BAKER There isn't a secret plan.AUDIENCE (Negative response from theaudience.)STU BAKER But, all right, there will be --we're not the only place that's worried about law enforcement and criminal misuse of the communications system. Every country in the world is going to be concerned about that -- it is no surprise. Today France says we will tell you what you can use, what you can export, what you import. Singapore, we've had lots of companies say we're concerned about that.ZIMMERMANN Singapore -- it's illegal to notflush the toilet in Singapore. I didn't make that up, that's true. It's possible to construct a society -- a crime-free society -- but who wants to live in a society like that? We might be heading toward Singapore. I'm glad you said Singapore -- I couldn't have paid you money to say that -- I'm glad you said Singapore. STU BAKER But look, Italy has just banned formsof encryption on the phone system. The significance I think of the Singapore example is that we shouldn't expect that as Asians get richer they are going to say, oh well, let's adopt American views about privacy. What's important about that, I think, is the view that we get from a lot of people whose life has been open systems and will have seen that standards are the key to new technological advances, believe that if they could standarize encryption and sell it everywhere in the world, it would sweep the world and whoever had the best product would win. I think that reckons without the law enforcement concerns that you will see in every country. And you are already beginning to see other countries say we are not going to tolerate unreadable encryption of all sorts proliforating throughout our communications network. You are going to see more of that. Not less. It won't happen here but it will happen in other countries.AUDIENCE Yes, worldwide.MODERATOR Can we move onto the next question?And we probably have time for only two more. BLAKE SOBILOFF My name is Blake Sobiloff and I'mwith ACM SIGCAS and I'm trying to figure out some sort of philosophical presupposition that you have -- the kind that frames your approach to your objections to anti-Clipper individuals. BAKER Most of the anti-Clipper individualsI really like actually.BLAKE SOBILOFF Okay, well, their position. Would itbe fair to characterize your position as one that assumes that a desire for an unimpeachable privancy can be fairly well equated with the desire to engage in lawless acts? BAKER No, I think that's completely wrong.The problem is that guaranteeing privacy to everybody is going to guarantee it to some people who will misuse that kind of technological sanctuary.AUDIENCE (Negative response.)BAKER All right, okay. Well, to continuethe poor song metaphor, if anyone is familiar with the Spin Doctors rock group. Let me say that you are a fantastic Spin Doctor and I do admire you for that but I'll keep my pocket full of kryptonite. Thanks.QUESTION Can I make a comment on that.BAKER Yes.QUESTION I think it is important to saysomething about who asked NSA to be the guarantor of privacy. Asking NSA to guarantee privacy is sort of like asking Playboy to guard chastity belts.BAKER I tried to address that briefly. Ourjob is in fact to guarantee the privacy of U.S. government communications when they're talking about whether to go to war, for example. That's one of the things we do and it is one of our two principle missions. We do guarantee privacy. Now I understand the reaction but we do have a job to create encryption and to make it as good as we possibly can.AUDIENCE Not for my privacy.BAKER My concern is that what we design isvery likely to be -- to find itself migrating into private sector and if we design it in a way that is going to put law enforcement out of business we haven't acted responsibly. MODERATOR Next question.HERB LIN My name is Herb Lin. I'm with theNational Academy of Sciences regarding the need for an independent look at it. The U.S. Congress has asked the Academy to undertake an independent assessment of national cryptography policy. Descriptions of that study are out on the giveaway desk. I'll be glad to talk to anybody about it.MODERATOR Thank you. We've got one more.(Unknown) My name is Barbolin (?) from GRC (?).I have a question concerning the algorithm that is used in the Clipper Chip, Skipjack. That algorithm is not being made public and yet one of the very basis of scientific research is that the work should be published and then reviewed by the community and approved as the state-of-the-art develops. Yet it seems that the NSA reluctant to do that. There is a certain amount of conjecture that in fact the algorithm contains a deliberately encoded weakness that will allow the NSA, without access to the escrow keys, to be able to intercept communication in their mission to monitor on- shore and off-shore communications. There's a number of us in the scientific community that are greatly concerned that that algorithm is not being made public. I would like the counsel from NSA to address that with a simple yes or no answer. Is that a problem? And then I would like our university professor to comment on his opinion in this matter.BAKER I'll answer it yes or no if you'lltell me exactly the question.UNKNOWN Does it or does it not contain aweakness that allows you to intercept the communications without access to the escrow keys.BAKER No.MODERATOR I'm sorry, that has to be the lastquestion. We will conclude. I'm sorry, we have to stick to the schedule. [Negative audience response.]We'll conclude with another country song which is .... GEORGE TRUBOW, CONF. CHAIR Let me explain to you what our problem is. During the reception this room is going to be cleared and turned into the dining room for our meal this evening and so the hotel has a schedule; and if you want to give up the evening reception and meal we could do that but that's why we've got to close out. You want to go for a little longer. Okay, how about this for a promise, we'll quit at six (pm) which will give us another seven minutes. All right.PROFESSOR DAVIDA I will comment just very briefly aboutthis issue of standards and algorithms.I've worked for almost 20 years inorganizations like IEEE(?) Computer Society and we have addressed issues like standards. It is important to understand what a standard is. Standards' purposes are primarily to promote trust in commerce and the products that you are actually engaging in, buying or using. DES and other encryption standards deviate from that substantially. These are not standards that set a boxing or weight standard, or a packaging standard, which is what most electronic standards and computer standards tend to be like. For example, there is no standard that says you must use the Intel 8085 or whatever. There is no standard that says you must use a particular chip. The standards pertain to buses, number of bytes and what have you. DES and other standards like that force us to adopt something which is basically monopolistic. It is specific algorithm. So there are some fundamental faults with it. But as for trusting algorithm that somebody else designed, I stand by my previous comment.MODERATOR Thank you.MIKE GODWIN I'm Mike Godwin with the ElectronicFrontier Foundation and I have a question, as you can image for the General Counsel of the NSA.You said in myth number four that we cananticipate -- and in fact NSA did anticipate that these technologies would become available in five to ten years. People would go buy telephones, have an encryption button and be able to use this technology -- I think I am quoting you accurately -- in profoundly anti-social ways. Isn't it true that many otherwise acceptable technologies can be used by individuals in profoundly anti-social ways including, say the printing press. Isn't it in fact true that in a democratic society we make a decision to empower individuals knowing upfront and openly that we do so taking risk about society. Isn't that in fact the case in this country? BAKER Yes. And first I should say, Mike, Ihaven't met you but I've read your stuff and actually, is David Sternlight here too?Sure you take risks and you have to lookat each technology as it comes. Let's take a look at cars. Cars have advantages and risks and how do we deal with that. We put license plates on every car and everybody has to have a license plate on their car even if they think it violates their First Amendment Rights to do it.MIKE GODWIN In fact, automobiles are a little bitdifferent because we do have explicit Constitutional guarantees with regard to communications. We have implicit and explicit guarantees as regard to privacy and it is a little bit different from driving your Ford.BAKER Well, actually there is a Constitutionalright to travel.MIKE GODWIN There is a Constitutional right to travel,that's correct. But we are talking -- it's still a false analogy. This is a central right. You know, Hugo Black said that there is a reason for the First Amendment to be a First Amendment. BAKER This is why I never get on the net withyou, Mike.MIKE GODWIN So I take it you've answered my question.The reason -- the thing that really troubled me about your comments is that you did talk about France and Italy and Singapore and it seems to me worth pointing out that the theory of government that we have in this country is a little bit different from the theory of government in France, Italy and Singapore. (Applause) BAKER Absolutely. I don't think that we willever have the same view of government that any of those places have.MIKE GODWIN I'm confident.BAKER And I think the short answer is, yes, aseach technology comes along we have to evaluate the risks and the rewards that come with it and try to figure out the way to get as much good from it and as little bad from it. And the response is going to be very variable depending on the technology. But you can't set up a principle that says we will always do whatever seems like the best technology today without regard for the social consequences. We don't do that with guns, we don't do that with cars, we don't do that with any kind of technology. MODERATOR Can we go on to another question?JOHN BRIMACOMBE Hi, my name is John Brimacombe I'm aEuropean scientist and user of cryptography. I'd like to go through something very quickly here. First, you know, people know about cryptography in Europe. We know about all the algorithms. Secondly, you know, scientists in Europe don't have brains so defective that we can't implement them. And there is going to be a big market for this sort of stuff out there in the world. Now, we can do that work, we are doing that work, we like doing that work. You are cutting yourselves off. My question is, why are you screwing yourselves this way? My worry looking at your nice salesmen of your shiny Clipper Chip coming to sell it to all my CEC people. I'm worrying that you see this problem. You see yourselves being put out of the market by these nice Europeans. They say, okay, let's go and screw their market up to a Clipper. MODERATOR No response?BAKER No, I liked the speech.MATT BLAZE Matt Blaze from Bell Labs. I have aquestion that was originally for Senator Leahy but it could be equally well directed to the NSA Counsel. Do you see any risks in terms of risk assessment of the Clipper proposal to the fact that the escrow procedures exist entirely within the purview of the Executive Branch, the Attorney General in particular, and can be changed essentially at will entirely within a single branch of government?BAKER I think that's a reasonable concern.One of the interesting things is that we designed it so you decide who you trust and that's where the keys go as a society. And we didn't have much input into who holds the keys. This is almost a litmus test though. It is kind of interesting when you ask, well who do you trust, exactly? And often the answer is "Well, just not those guys." And it is much harder when you ask the question, "Well who would you trust?" I think Jerry Berman was quoted as saying I don't care if it is Mother Theresa and the Pope who holds the keys. There certainly are people who feel that way. There is a lot of talk about whether, you know, should you have private sector entities hold the keys and I have to say that one doesn't ...MODERATOR I have to say through the escrow agency.The procedures are written and under the authority of the -- entirely within the Attorney General.BAKER The procedures don't change the factthat we are all governed by laws that are already on the books that make it a felony to do stuff without authority. And so the procedures for withdrawing key are written down as Executive Branch rules but the legal framework for that is set by Congress or by the Fourth Amendment as a matter of fact.EFREM LIPKIN I'm Efrem Lipkin that works incommunity and I guess I'm a fossil from the '60's. My parents had to deal with HUAC. I had the utterly surreal experience -- I was in the Civil Rights Movement -- I had this surreal experience of apparently a government agent tried to plant a copy of the Daily Worker on me. And so my question is really for CPSR. Why, I understand why the NSA says we don't have to worry about this government. We haven't had any trouble with it recently. But why doesn't CPSR point out all of the trouble we have had and how the protection -- the privacy protection we want and that we historically needed -- is from the government. BANISAR Well, obviously, you haven't beenreading a whole lot of my press releases. We've been pointing out a lot of the abuses and problems that have been going on. We have also some deep concerns to pour off here a little bit about the escrow procedures. At the end of each escrow procedure it mentions that they are not enforceable so if they are violated it wouldn't matter because this evidence can't be suppressed. Frankly -- I guess somebody asked me today -- Mike Nelson from OSTP apparently now is talking about putting the escrow key holders outside the government. I frankly think that it wouldn't make a whole world of difference whether Mother Theresa and the Pope held the keys then if they are not enforceable.MODERATOR Thank you, thanks to all the panelists forcoming. We'll conclude with another country song, "I've Enjoyed About as Much of This as I Can Stand."Just a moment please, there is arelated announcement on an equally high note I want to read this to you and to my colleague here. To a dedicated advocate, gifted journalist, generous friend and true champion of freedom, Robert Ellis Smith. publisher, Privancy Journal, in recognition of 20 years in service to the cause of privacy protection. With warm regards from friends and colleagues in celebrating the 20th year of the publication of this fine journal.ROBERT ELLIS SMITH I have a few words I would like tosay. END OF TAPE =================================================================== There endeth the transcript - CFP'94 Volunteers. --jet5@po.cwru.edu Case Western Reserve University Computer Engineeringjet@b62528.student.cwru.edu <<< finger me for PGP2.3a public key WT02-B12-129IA087-000631-B025-85http://res2.resnet.upenn.edu:80/cis590/reading.159.html 130.91.195.242 19970122070507 text/html 7071HTTP/1.0 200 OKDate: Wed, 22 Jan 1997 07:04:42 GMTServer: Apache/1.1.1Content-type: text/htmlContent-length: 6900Last-modified: Tue, 22 Nov 1994 06:33:23 GMTWSJ From: The Wall Street Journal, Tuesday March 22, 1994, p. B1 TECHNOLOGY Clipper Chip Is Your Fried, NSA Contends NSA Seeks to Dispel Misgivings of Public About Clipper Chip By Bob Davis Staff Reporter of The Wall Street Journal. FORT MEADE, Md. --- The National Security Agency wants everyone to knowthat its new computer-security system will protect individual privacy.But as the spy agency knows, hardly anyone believes that. Critics fear the government will use the NSA technology, designed insecret, to spy on Americans. The project "is a focal point for thedistrust of government," acknowledges Clinton Brooks, the NSA scientistwho led the so-called Clipper Chip project, in the agency's firstinterview on the subject. The Clinton administration last month adopted the NSA plan for a seriesof computer chips that would protect telephones and computers. Useof the technology would be voluntary. Federal agencies would adopt itfirst, and public use is expected to spread gradually. Under the plan, cryptographic "keys" that could unscramble thecommunications would be split in two and held separately at the TreasuryDepartment and the National Institute of Standards and Technology. Thatway, law-enforcement agents could tap the communications by getting courtauthorization to obtain the two halves. The idea is to boost securitybut to keep the technology out of the hands of criminals and spies. The NSA is the world's biggest eaves-dropper. Equipped with the latestin super-computers and satellite receivers, it targets communications byforeign governments. The agency shuns publicity but agreed to theinterview to explain its role in the Clipper controversy and try todispel fears. Mr. Brooks, a 26-year veteran of the NSA, says the projectbegan in 1989 and cost more than $2.5 million. He says the NSA is consumed with what it calls the "equities problem" ---how to balance privacy rights against the needs of law enforcement,national security and private industry. In 1989, he and Raymond Kammer,deputy director of NIST, began discussions about how to improve computersecurity without making it impenetrable to police. NIST is a CommerceDepartment agency with formal responsibility for unclassified computersecurity. Before the interview, Mr. Brooks takes a look around a small cryptographicmuseum just outside the NSA's gates. He stands before an exhibit ofEnigma machines, used by the Germans during World War II to encryptmessages --- and later broken by Allied intelligence. Enigma started asa commercial product; recognizing its military value, the Nazis pulledit off the market. "That was the concern we're wrestling with today,"Mr. Brooks says --- commercial encryption technology becoming so good thatU.S. spy agencies can't crack it. In 1989, NIST and the NSA put together an eight-person team, split evenlybetween the agencies, to quietly work out security concepts. The teamdecided against using a weak encryption code --- "Roman Numeral One isthat it had to be good security," says Mr. Brooks. And it also rejecteda so-called trapdoor approach, in which the computer code would bedesigned so it would have a weak spot --- a trapdoor --- that federalagencies could enter via computer to tap the communications. Someone elsecould discover the trapdoor, they decided. The team settled on a system with a powerful encryption formula, calledan algorithm, and encryption keys that would be held by outsiders. Law-enforcement agencies could get copes of the keys when they needed to bugthe conversations. The toughest decision, both Mr. Brooks and Mr. Kammersay, was to keep the algorithm, dubbed the Skipjack, secret. That meantthe public wouldn't know for sure whether the NSA had inserted a trapdooror some other eavesdropping device. "It would defeat the purpose [of the project] if we gave the knowledgeof how the algorithm worked" to the public, says the 56-year-old Mr.Brooks. "It was going to have to be kept classified." Otherwise, heexplains, engineers could use the algorithm to design computer-securitysystems that the government's encryption keys couldn't unlock. By 1990, he says, as many as 30 NSA "cryptomathematicians" and otheremployees were working to perfect the algorithm and other features. Ayear later, the NSA launched what it called the Capstone Project to buildthe algorithm into a computer chip. The NSA contracted with MykotronxInc., a small company in Torrance, Calif., to do much of the development.By September 1992, the NSA was confident the system would work. None too early for the NSA. Earlier that year, Mr. Brooks says, AmericanTelephone & Telegraph Co. informed the NSA that it wanted to sell aphone using a popular encryption technology to scramble conversations.The NSA balked. "We said it probably wouldn't get an export licensefrom this country," Mr. Brooks says. Instead, AT&T was told of theCapstone work and agreed to use the technology if it became a federalstandard and was exportable, he says. The NSA then took some of thefunctions of the Capstone chip and tailored it to phone equipment, callingthe resulting product the Clipper Chip. For computers, Capstone wasencased on a computer card that became known as Tessera. The the Bush administration, enmeshed in a re-election bid, never pushedCapstone. So shortly after the election, National-security heavyweightsimportuned the Clinton transition team to move quickly on Capstone. Justweeks after the inauguration, the new administration's national-securityteam was debating the NSA proposal and in April announced to the publicthat it would adopt the scheme. Last month, the administration gave the final go-ahead --- despitewithering criticism from industry. Vice President Gore called encryptiona "law and order issue." NIST's Mr. Kammer says the new administrationwas also trying to line up backing among national-security officials toliberalize export controls on computer equipment and other high-techgear. The high-tech industry was stunned at the decision. David Peyton, vicepresident of the Information Technology Association of America, a tradegroup of computer companies, says the scheme will dangerously centralizepower in the federal government and will limit exports. James Bidzos,president of a computer-security firm, RSA Data Security Inc., goesfurther. He posted a letter on the Internet computer network arguingthat Clipper may be the "visible portion of a large-scale covertoperation on U.S. soil by NSA." Nonsense, responds Mr. Brooks, who says he is distressed by the"emotionalism" of the arguments. "The only reason we're involved isthat we have the best cryptomathematicians in the country." --- WinQwk 2.0b#1165 WT02-B12-130IA087-000631-B025-151http://res2.resnet.upenn.edu:80/cis590/reading.160.html 130.91.195.242 19970122070546 text/html 15391HTTP/1.0 200 OKDate: Wed, 22 Jan 1997 07:05:46 GMTServer: Apache/1.1.1Content-type: text/htmlContent-length: 15219Last-modified: Tue, 22 Nov 1994 06:33:23 GMTSterling at CFP [I find this entertaining enough and thoughful enough to bypass my Clipper rules .. djf] eff.565: Computers, Freedom & Privacy in Chicago - CFP 94 <linked 2 places> eff.565.30: Bruce Sterling (bruces) Mon 28 Mar 94 20:11 Bruce Sterling bruces@well.sf.ca.us LITERARY FREEWARE: NOT FOR COMMERCIAL USE Remarks at Computers, Freedom and Privacy Conference IV Chicago, Mar 26, 1994 I've been asked to explain why I don't worry much about the topics of privacy threat raised by this panel. And I don't. One reason is that these scenarios seem to assume that there will be large, monolithic bureaucracies (of whatever character, political or economic) that are capable of harnessing computers for one-way surveillance of an unsuspecting populace. I've come to feel that computation just doesn't work that way. Being afraid of monolithic organizations especially when they have computers, is like being afraid of really big gorillas especially when they are on fire. The threat simply doesn't concur with my historical experience. None of the large organizations of my youth that compelled my fear and uneasy respect have prospered. Let me just roll off a few acronyms here. CCCP. KGB. IBM. GM. AEC. SAC. It was recently revealed that the CIA has been of actual negative worth -- literally worse than useless -- to American national security. They were in the pockets of the KGB during our death struggle with the Soviet Union -- and yet we still won. Japanese zaibatsus -- Japan Inc. -- the corporate monoliths of Japan -- how much hype have we heard about that lately? I admit that AT&T has prospered, sort of -- if you don't count the fact that they've hollowed themselves out by firing a huge percentage of their personnel. Suppose that, say, Equifax, turned into an outright fascist organization and stated abusing privacy in every way they could. How could they keep that a secret? Realistically, given current employment practices in the Western economies, what kind of loyalty could they command among their own personnel? The low level temps have no health insurance and no job security; the high level people are ready to grab their golden parachutes and bail at any time. Where is the fanatically loyal army of gray flannel organization men who will swear lifelong allegiance to this organization, or *any* organization in this country with the possible exception of the Mafia? I feel that the real threat to our society isn't because people are being surveilled but because people are being deliberately ignored. People drop through the safety nets. People stumble through the streets of every city in this country absolutely wrapped in the grip of demons, groping at passersby for a moment's attention and pity and not getting it. In parts of the Third World people are routinely disappeared, not because of high-tech computer surveillance but for the most trivial and insane reasons -- because they wear glasses, because they were seen reading a book -- and if they survive, it's because of the thin thread of surveillance carried out by Amnesty International. There may be securicams running 24 hours a day all around us, but mechanical surveillance is not the same as people actually getting attention or care. Sure, rich people, like most of us here, are gonna get plenty of attention, probably too much, a poisonous amount, but in the meantime life has become so cheap in this society that we let people stagger around right in front of us exhaling tuberculosis without treatment. It's not so much information haves and have-nots and watch and watch-nots. I wish I could speak at greater length more directly to the topic of this panel. But since I'm the last guy to officially speak at CFP IV, I want the seize the chance to grandstand and do a kind of pontifical summation of the event. And get some irrepressible feelings off my chest. What am I going to remember from CFP IV? I'm going to remember the Chief Counsel of NSA and his impassioned insistence that key escrow cryptography represents normality and the status quo, and that unlicensed hard cryptography is a rash and radical leap into unplumbed depths of lawlessness. He made a literary reference to BRAVE NEW WORLD. What he said in so many words was, "We're not the Brave New World, Clipper's opponents are the Brave New World." And I believe he meant that. As a professional science fiction writer I remember being immediately struck by the deep conviction that there was plenty of Brave New World to go around. I've been to all four CFPs, and in my opinion this is the darkest one by far. I hear ancestral voices prophesying war. All previous CFPs had a weird kind of camaraderie about them. People from the most disparate groups found something useful to tell each other. But now that America's premiere spookocracy has arrived on stage and spoken up, I think the CFP community has finally found a group of outsiders that it cannot metabolize. The trenchworks are going up and I see nothing but confrontation ahead. Senator Leahy at least had the elementary good sense to backpedal and temporize, as any politician would when he saw the white-hot volcano of technological advance in the direct path of a Cold War glacier that has previously crushed everything in its way. But that unlucky flak-catcher the White House sent down here -- that guy was mousetrapped, basically. That was a debacle! Who was briefing that guy? Are they utterly unaware? How on earth could they miss the fact that Clipper and Digital Telephony are violently detested by every element in this community -- with the possible exception of one brave little math professor this high? Don't they get it that everybody from Rush Limbaugh to Timothy Leary despises this initiative? Don't they read newspapers? The Wall Street Journal, The New York Times? I won't even ask if they read their email. That was bad politics. But that was nothing compared to the presentation by the gentleman from the NSA. If I can do it without losing my temper, I want to talk to you a little bit about how radically unsatisfactory that was. I've been waiting a long time for somebody from Fort Meade to come to the aid of Dorothy Denning in Professor Denning's heroic and heartbreaking solo struggle against twelve million other people with email addresses. And I listened very carefully and I took notes and I swear to God I even applauded at the end. He had seven points to make, four of which were disingenuous, two were half-truths, and the other was the actual core of the problem. Let me blow away some of the smoke and mirrors first, more for my own satisfaction than because it's going to enlighten you people any. With your indulgence. First, the kidporn thing. I am sick and tired of hearing this specious blackwash. Are American citizens really so neurotically uptight about deviant sexual behavior that we will allow our entire information infrastructure to be dictated by the existence of pedophiles? Are pedophiles that precious and important to us? Do the NSA and the FBI really believe that they can hide the structure of a telephone switch under a layer of camouflage called child pornography? Are we supposed to flinch so violently at the specter of child abuse that we somehow miss the fact that you've installed a Sony Walkman jack in our phones? Look, there were pedophiles before NII and there will be pedophiles long after NII is just another dead acronym. Pedophiles don't jump out of BBSes like jacks in the box. You want to impress me with your deep concern for children? This is Chicago! Go down to the Projects and rescue some children from being terrorized and recruited by crack gangs who wouldn't know a modem if it bit them on the ass! Stop pornkidding us around! Just knock it off with that crap, you're embarrassing yourselves. But back to the speech by Mr. Baker of the NSA. Was it just me, ladies and gentlemen, or did anyone else catch that tone of truly intolerable arrogance? Did they guy have to make the remark about our missing Woodstock because we were busy with our trigonometry? Do spook mathematicians permanently cooped up inside Fort Meade consider that a funny remark? I'd like to make an even more amusing observation -- that I've seen scarier secret police agencies than his completely destroyed by a Czech hippie playwright with a manual typewriter. Is the NSA unaware that the current President of the United States once had a big bushel-basket-full of hair? What does he expect from the computer community? Normality? Sorry pal, we're fresh out! Who is it, exactly, that the NSA considers a level-headed sober sort, someone to sit down with and talk to seriously? Jobs? Wozniak? Gates? Sculley? Perot -- I hope to God it's not Perot. Bob Allen -- okay, maybe Bob Allen, that brownshoe guy from AT&T. Bob Allen seems to think that Clipper is a swell idea, at least he's somehow willing to merchandise it. But Christ, Bob Allen just gave eight zillion dollars to a guy whose idea of a good time is Microsoft Windows for Spaceships! When is the NSA going to realize that Kapor and his people and Rotenberg and his people and the rest of the people here are as good as people get in this milieu? Yes they are weird people, and yes they have weird friends (and I'm one of them), but there isn't any normality left for anybody in this society, and when it comes to computers, when the going got weird the weird turned pro! The status quo is *over!* Wake up to it! Get used to it! Where in hell does a crowd of spooks from Fort Meade get off playing "responsible adults" in this situation? This is a laugh and a half! Bobby Ray Inman, the legendary NSA leader, made a stab at computer entrepreneurism and rapidly went down for the third time. Then he got out of the shadows of espionage and into the bright lights of actual public service and immediately started gabbling like a daylight-stricken vampire. Is this the kind of responsive public official we're expected to blindly trust with the insides of our phones and computers? Who made him God? You know, it's a difficult confession for a practiced cynic like me to make, but I actually trust EFF people. I do; I trust them; there, I've said it. But I wouldn't trust Bobby Ray Inman to go down to the corner store for a pack of cigarettes. You know, I like FBI people. I even kind of trust them, sort of, kind of, a little bit. I'm sorry that they didn't catch Kevin Mitnick here. I'm even sorry that they didn't manage to apprehend Robert Steele, who is about one hundred times as smart as Mitnick and ten thousand times as dangerous. But FBI people, I think your idea of Digital Telephony is a scarcely mitigated disaster, and I'll tell you why. Because you're going to be filling out your paperwork in quintuplicate to get a tap, just like you always do, because you don't have your own pet court like the NSA does. And for you, it probably is going to seem pretty much like the status quo used to be. But in the meantime, you will have armed the enemies of the United States around the world with a terrible weapon. Not your court-ordered, civilized Digital Telephony -- their raw and tyrannical Digital Telephony. You're gonna be using it to round up wiseguys in streetgangs, and people like Saddam Hussein are gonna be using it to round up democratic activists and national minorities. You're going to strengthen the hand of despotism around the world, and then you're going to have to deal with the hordes of state-supported truckbombers these rogue governments are sending our way after annihilating their own internal opposition by using your tools. You want us to put an axe in your hand and you're promising to hit us with only the flat side of it, but the Chinese don't see it that way; they're already licensing fax machines and they're gonna need a lot of new hardware to gear up for Tiananmen II. I've talked a long time, but I want to finish by saying something about the NSA guy's one real and actual argument. The terrors of the Brave New World of free individual encryption. When he called encryption enthusiasts "romantic" he was dead-on, and when he said the results of spreading encryption were unpredictable and dangerous he was also dead-on, because people, encryption is not our friend. Encryption is a mathematical technique, and it has about as much concern for our human well-being as the fact that seventeen times seventeen equals two hundred and eighty-nine. It does, but that doesn't make us sleep any safer in our beds. Encrypted networks worry the hell out of me and they have since the mid 1980s. The effects are very scary and very unpredictable and could be very destabilizing. But even the Four Horsemen of Kidporn, Dope Dealers, Mafia and Terrorists don't worry me as much as totalitarian governments. It's been a long century, and we've had enough of them. Our battle this century against totalitarianism has left terrible scars all over our body politic and the threat these people pose to us is entirely and utterly predictable. You can say that the devil we know is better than the devil we don't, but the devils we knew were ready to commit genocide, litter the earth with dead, and blow up the world. How much worse can that get? Let's not build chips and wiring for our police and spies when only their police and spies can reap the full benefit of them. But I don't expect my arguments to persuade anyone in the NSA. If you're NSA and I do somehow convince you, by some fluke, then I urge you to look at your conscience -- I know you have one -- and take the word to your superiors and if they don't agree with you -- *resign.* Leave the Agency. Resign now, and if I'm right about what's coming down the line, you'll be glad you didn't wait till later. But even though I have a good line of gab, I don't expect to actually argue people out of their livelihood. That's notoriously difficult. So CFP people, you have a fight on your hands. I'm sorry that a community this young should have to face a fight this savage, for such terribly high stakes, so soon. But what the heck; you're always bragging about how clever you are; here's your chance to prove to your fellow citizens that you're more than a crowd of net- nattering MENSA dilettantes. In cyberspace one year is like seven dog years, and on the Internet nobody knows you're a dog, so I figure that makes you CFP people twenty-eight years old. And people, for the sake of our society and our children you had better learn to act your age. Good luck. Good luck to you. For what it's worth, I think you're some of the best and brightest our society has to offer. Things look dark but I feel hopeful. See you next year in San Francisco. WT02-B12-131IA087-000631-B025-180http://res2.resnet.upenn.edu:80/cis590/reading.161.html 130.91.195.242 19970122070628 text/html 10926HTTP/1.0 200 OKDate: Wed, 22 Jan 1997 07:06:29 GMTServer: Apache/1.1.1Content-type: text/htmlContent-length: 10754Last-modified: Tue, 22 Nov 1994 06:33:24 GMTEFF Summary of Public Interest Summit EFF SUMMARY PUBLIC INTEREST SUMMIT: SHAPING THE NATIONAL INFORMATION INFRASTRUCTURE Hyatt Regency Hotel in Washington, DCMARCH 29, 1994 OPENING REMARKS Welcoming remarks were delivered by Andrew Blau from the Benton Foundation,who expressed gratitude to the program sponsors and planning committee.Secretary of Commerce Ron Brown delivered pre-taped opening remarks onvideo, because he was in Russia at the time of the conference. SecretaryBrown, who chairs the Information Infrastructure Task Force (IITF),restated the Administration's commitment to universal service, emphasizingthat no one should be left standing on the side of the road. PUBLIC INTEREST SUMMIT PANELS DELIVERING THE GOODS: MEETING PUBLIC NEEDS? Moderator: V. Lane Rawlins, President, Memphis State UniversityC. Everett Koop, Senior Scholar, Koop InstituteDavid Lytel, White House Office of Science and TechnologyJean Armour Polly, NY State Research and Education NetworkAnthony Riddle, Chair, Alliance for Community MediaConnie Stout, Director, Texas Education NetworkPatricia Waak, National Audubon Society This panel discussed the ways in which the National InformationInfrastructure (NII) can improve education, health care, and theenvironment by enhancing communication and decisionmaking withincommunities, as well as within state, national, and internationalboundaries. There was strong consensus on the panel and from the floorthat teaching people to use the tools is as important as building thetools. Choosing the right regulatory model is a difficult issue, but DavidLytel said that the Clinton Administration is committed to making sure thatcitizens can be information producers, as well as information consumers.He stated that the challenge is to make sure that the NII becomes more thanjust a large pipe for television reruns and movies, home shopping,electronic games, and gambling. The architecture of the NII must guaranteethat needs outside the commercial marketplace, including cultural and otherpublic benefits, are met. A LINK INTO EVERY HOME: HOW, WHAT, AND WHEN? Moderator: Allen Hammond, Director, Communications Media Center, NY Law SchoolRon Binz, Director, Colorado Office of Consumer CounselMark Cooper, Director of Research, Consumer Federation of AmericaDeborah Kaplan, Vice President, World Institute on DisabilityRobert Larson, President/General Manager, WTVS-DetroitMichael Nelson, White House Office of Science and TechnologyAndrew J. Schwartzman, Executive Director, Media Access Project The panel explored the challenges in applying the concept of universalservice to the NII to ensure access for everyone. The panelists discusseduniversal service funding mechanisms, the role of government in supportinga diversity of voices, and the need for public interest advocacy before theFederal Communications Commission. Mike Nelson said that theAdministration's model for the NII is the Internet, and its goals foruniversal service are to provide subsidies to enable open access for asmany people as possible, to adopt pro-competitive policies, to requirenondiscriminatory prices, to prohibit network providers from controllinginformation, and to enhance interoperability and interconnectionrequirements. Addressing the difference between the common carriage regime for telephonecompanies and the market/consumer model for the cable industry, AndrewSchwartzman argued for the common carriage model instead of the cablemodel, because the cable model is passive and connotes people receivingonly limited services such as video-on-demand and home shopping. Commoncarriage would help NII users to be speakers as well as listeners, andproducers as well as consumers. Ron Binz offered the phrase "InformationSuperhypeway" and cautioned that a fully competitive telecommunicationsindustry is not right around the corner. The key decision, according toBinz, is whether to rely on taxing voice communications service to fund theNII. Binz also characterized as "industry propaganda" the view thatsubsidies should be provided to enable access for as many people aspossible. Mark Cooper challenged the widely cited statistic that 93% ofthe population enjoys telephone service. Instead, he stated that the 7%"unsolution" is really closer to 30%, which includes individuals withdisabilities and low incomes. He argued that those who cannot affordaccess to the NII will be assured access if everyone who can afford to usethe NII is required to pay for it. Deborah Kaplan took the discussion beyond the issue of funding to the issueof access. She argued that the 7% of the population that is underserved isa product of the market model. There is no one-size-fits-all solution, andpolicy input from low-income people is essential. She raised the concernthat access to the NII for disabled individuals may be uniquely difficult,especially if the NII architecture is modeled on voice-based telephoneservice. Schwartzman emphasized the First Amendment dimension of universalservice, including artistic speech, and the need to protect against anyform of censorship. Bob Larson explained how public broadcasting's role inpromoting local service responsibilities and public service duties is amodel for what the NII can do to marshall local resources. The NII couldaugment public broadcasting's efforts aimed at reducing violence andimproving the well-being of young people. SPEECH BY VICE PRESIDENT AL GORE The Vice President was introduced by Peter Goldmark, President of TheRockefeller Foundation, who emphasized the historical role of the NII incharting the future of democracy. Vice President Gore stated theAdministration's commitment to wiring every classroom, clinic, and libraryin the United States to the NII within the next five years. Every personwill benefit from the NII. However, while we already have the technology,we do not yet have the infrastructure. The National Telecommunication andInformation Adminstration in the Department of Commerce recently announcedthe availability of funding for some of the aspects of the NII and alreadyhave received 3,500 inquiries. Reforming telecommunications law is essential. Universal service meanslower prices for everyone. Open access means receiving and sendinginformation across the NII. The future will look like the Internet if wemake sure the NII is open and accessible like the personal computer. Networked communities are consistent with our democratic form of governmentand distinguish it from communism and fascism. We need to increase accessto government information to enhance community decisionmaking. We areincreasing the availability of government information. SeniorNet isproviding services to senior citizens. The Environmental ProtectionAgency's toxics release inventory is empowering citizens to ameliorateenvironmental hazards in their communities. HUD has begun to putinformation about fair housing and fair lending on the net. We can empowerour representative democracy. People closest to the problems are thesmartest about the solutions. BUILDING COMMUNITIES AND THE ECONOMY Moderator: Linda Tarr-Whelan, President and Exec. Dir., Center for PolicyAlternativesMorton Bahr, President, Communications Workers of AmericaCushing Dolbeare, President, Low-Income Housing CoalitionThomas Kalil, National Economic Council for Science and TechnologyAnthony Pharr, Counsel, Office of Communication, United Church of ChristDiana Roose, Research Director, National Association of Working WomenRandy Ross, Vice President, American Indian Telecommunications After brief introductory statements, the panelists discussed what the NIImeans for generating jobs and economic benefits. The goal is to use theNII to create better, high wage jobs. Development of information policymust make sure that the NII is a tool for community planning.Telecommuting will have an impact on the national economy by enablingpeople to live and work anywhere, including in other countries. We shoulduse the technology that exists now in order to do the kind of planningneeded to make sure the new technologies produce advances in our nationaleconomy. MAKING DEMOCRACY WORK Moderator: Sonia Jarvis, Exec. Dir., National Coalition for Black VoterParticipationBrian Banks, Policy Research Action GroupJim Butler, Director, AARP/VOTE, American Association of Retired PersonsMitchell Kapor, Chair, Electronic Frontier FoundationSally Katzen, Chair, Information Policy Committee, IITFRalph Nader, Center for the Study of Responsive LawNadine Strossen, ACLU This panel addressed whether the NII can support increased civicparticipation, free speech and assembly, and privacy. Brian Banks stressedthe NII's ability to bring about a reconfiguration of hierarchies; enhancedcitizen participation in the decision making process would be the mostfundamental change. Jim Butler revisited the NII's potential for communitydevelopment, educational opportunity, and access to government databases.Mitchell Kapor focused on the potential for achieving the Jeffersonianprinciples of individual liberty and decentralization. The Internet hasenormous democratic potential, but it is not easy to use. The emphasisshould be on the Internet and interactivity, not on the InformationSuperhighway and Hollywood reruns. Everyone should become hands-on, startlearning and interacting, and ask for help when needed. The networksshould be easy to use, but we cannot wait for a national handout. Sally Katzen stressed the goal of economic sustainable development. Thegovernment should not be solely responsible for the nation's informationsytems. The toxics release inventory is a model that has worked well.Ralph Nader, who still uses a manual Underwood typewriter, questioned whatall this new technology will do about such problems as violence in theschools. Will it just put more people into the Office of Management andBudget and lead to mega-billion dollar overselling of unused software?While there needs to be a window on government databases, there is notreason for them to be overprivatized or overmonopolized. Educationalefforts, like liberal arts-type courses, could motivate people toparticipate. Nadine Strossen argued that the common carriage model isimportant to ensure universal access--but security and privacy are equallyimportant. We have to make certain that there are no censorial controlsover content. All of us must lobby for privacy protection -- and we mustfight the clipper chip. WT02-B12-132IA087-000631-B025-209http://res2.resnet.upenn.edu:80/cis590/reading.162.html 130.91.195.242 19970122070807 text/html 11099HTTP/1.0 200 OKDate: Wed, 22 Jan 1997 07:08:07 GMTServer: Apache/1.1.1Content-type: text/htmlContent-length: 10927Last-modified: Tue, 22 Nov 1994 06:33:25 GMT P. R. China Computer Security Rules (long) [a known contributor who wishes to remain anonymous -- from risks pn] from: [a known contributor who wishes to remain anonymous ] connection to the Internet (CHINANET; sub CHINANET toLISTSERV@TAMVM1.TAMU.EDU). The Chinese have named their new project to connect China to the Internet the"Golden Bridge" project. The following document purports to be the newlydeveloped "PRC Regulations on Safeguarding Computer Information Systems." Itseems quite appropriate for RISKS. As you read this, keep in mind that 1) in China accused persons are guiltyuntil proven innocent; 2) laws referred to in the document as ones applying incertain circumstances are often harsh, subject to change without notice, andso vaguely worded as to make easy the prosecutor's job, not of proving guilt(not necessary), but of arguing why the penalty should be maximized; 3) the"Public Security" laws referred to are the same laws that stipulate that thefamilies of serious offenders will be billed for the single bullet used injudgement; 4) certain concepts (virus, special security products) are eitherpoorly defined or all inclusive; 5) in China when there is doubt as to thelegality of any particular act, illegality is assumed (this is important notonly in court, but also in normal life, where people tend to be moreconservative in part because of it.) As we welcome this brave new domain into our net.universe, it will beinteresting, and perhaps surprising at times, to see how another set ofexplorers on the electronic frontier are approaching the flow of information.Golden Bridge, indeed. As read, sending email without filing a customsdeclaration, or accepting a shareware registration for an anti- virus productcould both be construed as being illegal. There's a lot of room forimprovement here, imho. ===============================================================P.R.C. Regulations on Safeguarding Computer Information Systems=============================================================== Source: Beijing XINHUA Domestic Service in Chinese, February 23, 1994From: john@jho.com (John Ho), Asia Online Chapter I. General Provisions Article 1. These regulations have been formulated to safeguard computerinformation systems, to promote the application and development of computers,and to ensure smooth progress in socialist modernization. Article 2. The computer information systems referred to in these regulationsare man-machine systems, composed of computers and their allied and peripheralequipment and facilities (including networks), that collect, process, store,transmit, and retrieve information according to prescribed goals and rules ofapplication. Article 3. In safeguarding computer information systems, measures shall betaken to secure computers, allied and peripheral equipment and facilities(including networks), the operating environment, and data, as well as toensure the normal functioning of computers, so as to safeguard the safeoperation of computer information systems . Article 4. In safeguarding computer information systems, priority shall begiven to the security of computer systems containing data on such importantareas as state affairs, economic construction, national defense, andstate-of-the-art science and technology. Article 5. These regulations shall apply to safeguarding computer informationsystems within the PRC's borders. Measures for safeguarding microcomputers that have not been hooked up shall beenacted separately. Article 6. The Ministry of Public Security shall be in charge of safeguardingcomputer information systems. The Ministry of State Security, the State Secrecy Bureau, and relevant StateCouncil departments shall carry out work pertaining to safeguarding computerinformation systems within the lines of authority prescribed by the StateCouncil. Article 7. No organization or individual may use computer informationsystems to engage in activities that endanger national or collectiveinterests, as well as the legitimate interests of citizens; theymay not jeopardize computer information systems. Chapter II. The Safeguards System Article 8. Computer information systems shall be established and applied inaccordance with laws, administrative rules, and relevant state provisions. Article 9. Computer information systems shall be protected on the basis ofsecurity grades. The Ministry of Public Security, in conjunction with relevantdepartments, shall establish security grades and formulate specific measuresfor protection based on such grades. Article 10. Computer rooms shall conform to state norms and relevant stateprovisions. No work may be carried out in the vicinity of computer rooms that jeopardizescomputer information systems. Article 11. Units using internationally networked computer information systemsshall register their systems with the public security departments of people'sgovernments at or above the provincial level. Article 12. Individuals who ship, bring, or mail computer information mediainto or out of the country shall file truthful declarations with the customsauthorities. Article 13. Units that use computer information systems shall establishsecurity management systems and assume responsibility for safeguarding theircomputer information systems. Article 14. Units that use computer information systems shall report anyincidents relating to their systems to the public security departments oflocal people's governments at or above the county level within 24 hours of theincidents. Article 15. The Ministry of Public Security shall exercise centralizedmanagement over research into the control and prevention of computer virusesand other harmful data that jeopardizes public security. Article 16, The state shall implement a licensing system for the sale ofspecial safety products for computer information systems. The Ministry ofPublic Security shall enact specific measures in conjunction with relevantdepartments. Chapter III. Supervision Over Security Article 17. Public security organs shall perform the following functions tosupervise efforts to safeguard computer information systems: (1) Supervising, inspecting, and guiding the work of safeguarding computerinformation systems; (2) Investigating and dealing with illegal and criminal cases involving theendangerment of computer information systems; and (3) Other supervisory functions with regard to safeguarding computerinformation systems. Article 18. Upon detecting latent hazards in computer information systems,public security organs shall promptly advise the units that use such systemsto institute safety measures. Article 19. Under urgent circumstances, the Ministry of Public Security mayissue special circulars on specific security aspects of computer informationsystems. Chapter IV. Legal Responsibilities Article 20. In the event of any of the following violations of the provisionsin these regulations, public security organs shall issue warnings or shut downthe computers for screening purposes: (1) Contravening the system for protecting computer information systems basedon security grades and jeopardizing computer information systems; (2) Violating the registration system for internationally networked computerinformation systems; (3) Failing to report incidents related to computer information systems withinthe prescribed time frames; (4) Failing to take remedial action within the prescribed time after receivingnotification from public security organs mandating security improvementmeasures; (5) Other actions endangering computer information systems. Article 21. Public security organs, in conjunction with relevant units, shalldeal with cases in which computer rooms do not conform to state norms orrelevant state provisions, or in which work carried out in the vicinity ofcomputer rooms endangers computer information systems. Article 22. The customs authorities shall deal with failure to file truthfuldeclarations on computer information media shipped, brought, or mailed into orout of the country, pursuant to the "PRC Customs Law" and the provisionsoutlined in these regulations and other laws and regulations. Article 23. Public security organs shall issue warnings or impose fines of notmore than 5,000 yuan and 15,000 yuan, respectively, on individuals or units ifcomputer viruses or other data harmful to computer information systems aredeliberately input into such systems, or if special safety products forcomputer information systems are sold without permission. They shallconfiscate illegal proceeds and impose a fine that is 100 or 300 percent morethan the sum of such proceeds. Article 24. Actions that violate the provisions in these regulations andconstitute infractions of public security shall be punished pursuant torelevant provisions in the "PRC Regulations on Security Administration andPunishment"; if the actions constitute a crime, criminal responsibilitiesshall be investigated. Article 25. Any organization or individual who inflicts property losses on thestate, collectives, or other individuals in violation of the provisions inthese regulations shall assume civil responsibility in accordance with thelaw. Article 26. Interested parties who are dissatisfied with specificadministrative actions carried out by public security organs pursuant to theseregulations may apply for administrative reconsideration in accordance withthe law or file administrative lawsuits. Article 27. Government functionaries who abuse their power to demand and takebribes or commit other illegal or delinquent acts while enforcing theseregulations shall be punishable on criminal grounds if their actionsconstitute crimes or given disciplinary actions if their actions do notconstitute crimes. Chapter V. Supplementary Provisions Article 28. The meanings of terms used in these regulations are defined asfollows: Computer viruses mean a set of self-replicating computer commands orprogramming codes inserted during the course of programming or into computerprograms that can impair computer functions, destroy data, or affect computeruse. Special safety products for computer information systems mean special hardwareand software products for use in safeguarding computer information systems. Article 29. Military-related computer information systems shall be safeguardedin accordance with relevant military laws and regulations. Article 30. The Ministry of Public Security may formulate implementationmeasures in accordance with these regulations. Article 31. These regulations shall take effect upon promulgation. WT02-B12-133IA087-000631-B025-247http://res2.resnet.upenn.edu:80/cis590/reading.163.html 130.91.195.242 19970122070857 text/html 6716HTTP/1.0 200 OKDate: Wed, 22 Jan 1997 07:08:59 GMTServer: Apache/1.1.1Content-type: text/htmlContent-length: 6545Last-modified: Tue, 22 Nov 1994 06:33:26 GMTNew scriptable pgp Mac PGP2.3a V1.1 Readme ----------------------- Why two version numbers? This update mainly consists of changes to the human interface (i. e. to the =Mac-specific part). Since I expect that this part will be developed more or lessindependantly from the encryption part, I use two version numbers:This is the Mac implementation V1.1 of PGP 2.3a. What's different? Some minor bugs have been fixed, but you probably didn't have any problemswith them.The menus have been adapted to look more like a typical Mac application. Asyou havealready seen, there are now two versions of MacPGP: An Englisch version anda Germantranslation. For more information about the translated version read the Germ=andreadme. The most important change (in my opinion) is that MacPGP is now AppleScriptaware.You can invoke all important actions (like encrypt, decrypt, sign etc.) byAppleScript commands. The preferences can be changed online only. The following text assumes you are already familiar with AppleScript (otherw=iseread the AppleScript User's Manual) and with PGP (Please DO read the stuff i=nthe documentation folder)! MacPGP V1.1 supports the Required Suite and a MacPGP Suite. You can use itscommandsvia AppleScript or directly to communicate with other programs. E. g. the"Mausefalle"(an offline-reader for the German BBS-Network "MausNet") uses them todecode incomingmail automatically and to encrypt your own mail before sending it. If youincludePGP support in your own program, I'd like you to give me a quick note (just =forcuriosity), my EMail address is: "Christoph_Pagalies@HH2.maus.de". The following is a rough description of the supported AppleScript commands. =Youcan get a nicely formatted list by the "Open Dictionary" command in theAppleScripteditor. Required Suite open: =D6ffnet eine Reihe von Objektenprint: Druckt Objektequit: Beendet das Programmrun: Wird beim Programmstart automatisch gesendet MacPGP Suite encrypt: Eine Datei codieren encrypt alias -- die zu codierende Datei to string -- Der Empf=E4nger [user id string] -- Eigener Name [signature separated/included/omitted] [reading MacBinary/plaintext/normal] [writing binary/asciified] Empf=E4nger oder Absenderangaben m=FCssen mit dem Namen im Schl=FCsselbund=FCbereinstimmenoder dem Anfang des Namens entsprechen. Also kann man"Gabriele Mustermann <gabi@test.aga.de>" als "Gabriele" oder "Gab"adressieren, abernicht als "gabi", da der Anfang nicht =FCbereinstimmt. Beim Codieren kann eine Unterschrift angelegt werden, die entweder hintenangeh=E4ngtwird (signature included) oder in eine getrennte Datei geschrieben wird(signature separated). Bei "omitted" wird keine Unterschrift angelegt. Der "reading" Parameter gibt die Art der Quelldatei an. Handelt es sich umASCII-Texte, gibt man "reading plaintext" an, bei Bin=E4rdateien "reading normal".= Wenneine Macintosh-Datei =FCbertragen werden soll, die einen Data- und einen Res=ource-=46ork enth=E4lt, ist "reading MacBinary" anzugeben. "writing binary" bedeutet eine Ausgabe als kompakte Bin=E4rdatei, bei "ascii=fied"wird ein 7-Bit-ASCII-Text erzeugt, der =FCber EMail verschickt werden kann. sign: Eine Datei unterschreiben sign alias -- Die zu unterschreibende Datei [user id string] -- Eigener Name [signature separated/included/clear] [reading MacBinary/plaintext/normal] [writing binary/asciified] Neu ist hier der "signature clear" Parameter: Die Unterschrift wird eingef==FCgt(wie bei "included"), der eigentliche Nachrichtentext wird im Klartextausgegeben.Der Text kann dann gelesen werden, ohne ihn erst mit PGP decodieren zu m=FCs=sen.Allerdings kann er evtl. auf dem =DCbertragungsweg umformatiert werden,wodurch dieUnterschrift dann nicht mehr stimmt. execute: Eine Befehlszeile ausf=FChren. execute string -- Die Befehlszeile Hier kann ein DOS-Befehl =FCbergeben werden.Statt "encrypt file 'Test' to 'Gabriele' writing asciified" kann man auch"execute 'pgp -ea Test Gabriele'" schreiben. Hiermit lassen sich selteneBefehle aufrufen, die keine zugeordneten AppleScript-Befehle haben, z. B."Unterschrift l=F6schen". decrypt: Datei decodieren, unterschrift pr=FCfen o. =E4. decrypt alias [toScreen boolean] [to file specification] -- Decodierte Datei speichern als Result: string "toScreen" gibt den decodierten Text auf dem Bildschirm aus. Sonst wird erin derangegebenen Datei gespeichert. Bei unterschriebenen Dateien wird der Name des Unterzeichners zur=FCckgegebe=n. add: Schl=FCssel zum Schl=FCsselbund hinzuf=FCgen add alias -- Die Datei mit dem Schl=FCssel [key ring file specification] -- Das Schl=FCsselbund extract: Schl=FCssel aus einem Bund in eine Datei schreiben extract string -- Der zu extrahierende Schl=FCssel to file specification -- Die Zieldatei [key ring file specification] -- Das Schl=FCsselbund remove: Schl=FCssel aus einem Bund l=F6schen remove string -- Der fragliche Schl=FCssel [key ring file specification] -- Das Schl=FCsselbund certify: =D6ffentlichen Schl=FCssel unterschreiben certify string -- Der zu unterschreibende Schl=FCssel [key ring file specification] -- Das Schl=FCsselbund [user id string] -- Einer Name fingerprint: Fingerabdruck zum Schl=FCssel errechnen. fingerprint string -- Der fragliche Schl=FCssel [key ring file specification] -- Das Schl=FCsselbund Result: string -- Der Fingerabdruck asciify: Datei zum EMail-Versand ASCIIfien (wird nicht codiert oderunterschrieben) asciify file specification -- Die zu bearbeitende Datei [reading MacBinary/plaintext/normal] generate: Geheimes/=F6ffentliches Schl=FCsselpaar erzeugen generate string -- Der gew=FCnschte Benutzername [length casual/commercial/military] Die L=E4ngenangabe bedeutet: "casual" =3D 384 Bit, "commercial" =3D 512 Bit,"military" =3D1024 Bit. Die Exponentenl=E4nge kann per AppleScript nicht vorgegeben werden=. WT02-B12-134IA087-000631-B025-275http://res2.resnet.upenn.edu:80/cis590/reading.164.html 130.91.195.242 19970122070915 text/html 3510HTTP/1.0 200 OKDate: Wed, 22 Jan 1997 07:09:15 GMTServer: Apache/1.1.1Content-type: text/htmlContent-length: 3339Last-modified: Tue, 22 Nov 1994 06:33:27 GMTletter from Phil Zimmerman requesting Positive uses of PGP Subject: Positive uses of PGPDate: Sun, 3 Apr 1994 20:32:08 -0700 (PDT)From: Jeff Davis <eagle@deeptht.armory.com>To: eff-activists (eff-activists mailing list) I'm forwarding this message from Phil Zimmermann. ====================================================================To all PGP users: We've all heard arguments raised by the law enforcement andintelligence communities that PGP and other encryption technology canbe used by criminals to hide their activities. This line ofreasoning is being used to justify Government key escrow systems likeClipper, and to clamp down on encryption technology like PGP. Itwould be helpful to come up with real-world examples of how PGP hasbeen used for good constructive purposes. Journalists sometimes askme for examples of positive uses for PGP. But most of my fan mailfrom PGP users do not tell me what they are using it for. If you have any stories about how PGP is used for good purposes, I'dlike to see them. Not just disaffected paranoid libertariansembracing it for the theoretical benefits for a free society. Weneed to be able to cite examples of real people using PGP for goodends. Human rights activists using it are a great example. But itdoesn't have to be in the Nobel-Prize winning catagory of humanendeavor (although that would be nice). It could just be anypositive upbeat application that normal people can relate to in apositive way, so I can tell reporters about it. I'd like to hear(actually, see some email) from real people who are actually usingPGP for good things. It could be for helping others, like protecting HIV patient records,or keeping psychological counseling records. Or conducting goodwholesome business that must remain confidential. Or lawyers usingit to maintain confidential records and communications with theirclients. Or, it could be for your own personal life, but forwholesome upbeat uses, like sending love letters (you don't have tosupply any actual love letters), or keeping your diary. For those that don't know what PGP is: Pretty Good Privacy (PGP) isa free software program that encrypts email using public keycryptography, allowing you to communicate securely with people you'venever met, without the prior exchange of keys over secure channels.PGP has become the worldwide de facto standard for email encryption.It's available on many Internet FTP sites and BBS systems. Please send me some email (to prz@acm.org), with the subject line"Positive uses for PGP", so that I can quickly sort it out from therest of my email. If it's a really good story, I may want to use it,so let me know if I can and if I can give reporters the information.You might not get a reply-- it depends on how much mail I get or howbusy I am when you send it. There is no prize for the best story, but for what it's worth, I'llsign the public key of the person who submits the best story byMonday, April 11th. But keep sending stories after that date ifyou've got them. This notice can be copied and reposted on any newsgroup or mailinglist that is likely to be familiar with PGP. Philip Zimmermannprz@acm.org=================================================================== WT02-B12-135IA087-000631-B025-302http://res2.resnet.upenn.edu:80/cis590/reading.165.html 130.91.195.242 19970122070931 text/html 238HTTP/1.0 200 OKDate: Wed, 22 Jan 1997 07:09:33 GMTServer: Apache/1.1.1Content-type: text/htmlContent-length: 69Last-modified: Tue, 22 Nov 1994 06:33:27 GMTclass? Will there, then, be class this thursday? meng WT02-B12-136IA087-000631-B026-23http://res2.resnet.upenn.edu:80/cis590/reading.166.html 130.91.195.242 19970122070949 text/html 5608HTTP/1.0 200 OKDate: Wed, 22 Jan 1997 07:09:51 GMTServer: Apache/1.1.1Content-type: text/htmlContent-length: 5437Last-modified: Tue, 22 Nov 1994 06:33:28 GMTAP Wire Story on NSA Manual NSA from A-1Semiconfidentialrules circulate By Keay DavidsonEXAMINER SCIENCE WRITER It arrived mysteriously at an Austin, Texas, post office box by ""snailmail'' - computerese for the Postal Service. But once the National Security Agency's employee handbook was translatedinto bits and bytes, it took only minutes to circulate across the country. Thus did a computer hacker in Texas display his disdain for governmentsecrecy last week - by feeding into public computer networks thesemiconfidential document, which describes an agency that, during the darkestdays of the Cold War, didn't officially ""exist.'' Now, anyone with a computer, telephone, modem and basic computer skillscan read the 36-page manual, which is stamped ""FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY'' andoffers a glimpse of the shadowy world of U.S. intelligence - and the personalprice its inhabitants pay. New NSA employees are warned: ""Your home, car pool, and public places are not authorized areas toconduct classified discussions - even if everyone involved in the discussionpossesses a proper clearance and "need-to-know.' The possibility that aconversation could be overheard by unauthorized persons dictates the need toguard against classified discussions in non-secure areas.'' The manual includes a list of telephone numbers for NSA offices includingthe cryptically named ""Agency Anonymity'' and ""Cipher Lock Repair,'' andthe not-so-cryptic ""Alcohol Rehabilitation Program'' and ""Disposal ofClassified Waste.''"Anal retentive and paranoid' The manual is ""so anal retentive and paranoid. This gives you someinsight into how they think,'' said Chris Goggans, the Austin hacker whounleashed it on the computer world. His on-line nom de plume is ""ErikBloodaxe'' because ""when I was about 11, I read a book on Vikings, and thatname really struck me.'' NSA spokeswoman Judi Emmel said Tuesday that ""apparently this document isan (NSA) employee handbook, and it is not classified.'' Rather, it is anofficial NSA employee manual and falls into a twilight zone of secrecy. Onone hand, it's ""unclassified.'' On the other hand, it's ""FOR OFFICIAL USEONLY'' and can be obtained only by filing a formal request under the U.S.Freedom of Information Act, Emmel said. ""While you may take this handbook home for further study, remember thatit does contain "FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY' information which should beprotected,'' the manual warns. Unauthorized release of such information couldresult in ""appropriate administrative action ... (and) corrective and/ordisciplinary measures.'' Goggans, 25, runs an on-line electronic ""magazine'' for computer hackerscalled Phrack, which caters to what he calls the ""computer underground.'' Heis also a computer engineer at an Austin firm, which he refuses to name. The manual recently arrived at Goggans' post office box in a whiteenvelope with no return address, save a postmark from a Silicon Valleylocation, he says. Convinced it was authentic, he typed it into his computer,then copied it into the latest issue of Phrack.Private life not private Other hackers, like Grady Ward of Arcata, Humboldt County, and JeffLeroy Davis of Laramie, Wyo., redistributed the electronic files to computerusers' groups. These included one run by the Cambridge, Mass.-basedElectronic Frontier Foundation, which fights to protect free speech oncomputer networks. Ward said he helped redistribute the NSA manual ""to embarrass the NSA''and prove that even the U.S. government's most covert agency can't keepdocuments secret. The action also was aimed at undermining a federal push fordata-encryption regulations that would let the government tap into computernetworks, Ward said. In the NSA, one's private life ceases to be private: A ""waiver must begranted in advance of a marriage to or cohabitation with a foreign nationalin order to retain one's access to NSA information ...'' the manual says.""The marriage or intended marriage of an immediate family member (parents,siblings, children) to a foreign national must also be reported. ... Allpersonnel, either employed by or assigned to NSA, must advise the Office ofSecurity of any changes in their marital status (either marriage or divorce),cohabitation arrangements, or legal name changes.'' There's nothing wrong with ""casual social associations with foreignnationals,'' but during such associations ""you are encouraged to extend theusual social amenities. Do not act mysteriously or draw attention to yourself(and possibly to NSA) by displaying an unusually wary attitude.'' None of the hackers thought he or she had done anything unpatriotic. ""The cloak of secrecy that the intelligence communities operate behind isan archaic paradigm of global warfare,'' said Davis, whose business cardidentifies him as an ""Outlaw Transcendentalist.'' ""The Cold War's over ...'' Davis said. ""What, is a terrorist group goingto call the National Security Agency alcoholism hot line and say, "Hey, Ihave a drinking problem, can I come in?'''--PGP PUBLIC KEY via finger! JAFEFFM Speaking & Thinking For Myself! * eagle@deeptht.armory.com email info@eff.org **** O U T L A W S On The E L E C T R O N I C F R O N T I E R ********* Committed to Free Public Internet Access for World Peace ***** WT02-B12-137IA087-000631-B026-49http://res2.resnet.upenn.edu:80/cis590/reading.167.html 130.91.195.242 19970122071024 text/html 334HTTP/1.0 200 OKDate: Wed, 22 Jan 1997 07:10:22 GMTServer: Apache/1.1.1Content-type: text/htmlContent-length: 164Last-modified: Tue, 22 Nov 1994 06:33:28 GMTRe: Meet TODAY 6pm | I want to stay involved but I am suffering from Jet Lag and am at home i will keep you posted. just read the html :) meng WT02-B12-138IA087-000631-B026-84http://res2.resnet.upenn.edu:80/cis590/reading.168.html 130.91.195.242 19970122071115 text/html 13066HTTP/1.0 200 OKDate: Wed, 22 Jan 1997 07:10:45 GMTServer: Apache/1.1.1Content-type: text/htmlContent-length: 12894Last-modified: Tue, 22 Nov 1994 06:33:29 GMTAn International Cryptographic Experiment A Solution to the International Use of Cryptography? An International Cryptographic Experiment A Solution to the International Use of Cryptography? Stephen T. Walker Trusted Information Systems, Inc. April 12, 1994 Summary This document proposes a program that could fundamentally changethe international availability of information security products. There is an ever growing need by individuals, corporations, andgovernments for improved protection of their sensitiveinformation. At the same time, governments worldwide need tomaintain their prerogatives to control the use and export ofcryptography by their own countries. This paper proposes adevelopment plan to provide a range of solutions to theinternational availability of cryptography which meets the needsof both governments and industry. This international plan has emerged from a variety of ideasproposed by industry and governments in several countries. The Overall Problem As the world of business moves ever further into the informationage, the need to protect sensitive information from unauthorizedaccess is rapidly growing in all segments of the economy.Failure to provide appropriate mechanisms for protectinginformation vital to the functioning of an organization (be it abusiness or government) threatens the very existence of thatorganization. Lack of such mechanisms will severely damage thepotential of any national or global information highway. And yet, the very availability of technological solutions toprotect essential business and government information threatens avital function of modern government in the information age, themonitoring of communications of its adversaries, be theyterrorists, criminals, or others. The dilemma posed by these fundamental and conflicting interestsis causing difficult and emotional debates within many countriestoday. The lack of a solution acceptable to both sides isfrustrating both government and business interests and keepingmuch highly sensitive information at risk of compromise. The Ingredients of the Problem Until very recently, the use of cryptographic techniques forprotecting information from unauthorized access was the exclusivedomain of governments. Only in the past fifteen years havealgorithms such as the Data Encryption Standard and techniquessuch as public key cryptography made cryptography available toordinary business interests. Only in the past few years has thewide spread use of information networks raised the generalpublic's awareness of the need for such protection. Governments have long protected their prerogatives incryptography through control of its export, import, and, in somecases internal use. As cryptography has become availableworldwide, continuation of these controls by governments has beenseen as increasingly futile and restrictive by information systemdevelopers and users. Nevertheless, the restrictions remain andthe penalties are sufficiently severe to strongly curtail theavailability of popular information system products withintegrated cryptographic capabilities. Vendors of major massmarket software systems with worldwide markets will not afford tobuild products they cannot ship to all their existing andpotential markets. Meanwhile in an effort to establish what it feels is a reasonablebalance between the interests of privacy and those of the lawenforcement community, the US government has introduced atechnique it calls key escrow that makes available strongcryptography while maintaining the interests of law enforcementby allowing decryption of key-escrowed communications whenlegally authorized. The recently announced Tessera initiative by the US NationalSecurity Agency (NSA) places the cryptographic functions forprotection of unclassified but sensitive information in anexternal card (called a PCMCIA card) that interfaces toapplications running on a workstation or laptop computer. Thisapproach, which employs key escrow, has the advantage ofisolating the cryptography from the computer system, thus makingit difficult to modify and easier to control its distribution. While the details of key escrow bother some, the US is proceedingwith Tessera for at least government use. Other governments aresaid to be considering similar programs. Meanwhile, business groups within most western countries continueto try to convince their governments that the growing worldwideavailability of cryptography makes further control ofcryptographic export both futile and highly restrictive to theeconomic interests of those countries. These efforts mayeventually succeed in loosening some export control restrictions,but any coordinated worldwide relaxation of controls is highlyunlikely in the near future. An Interim Solution That Meets the Needs of Both Sides? In the meantime, it is useful to explore alternatives that mayprovide at least partial solutions to this international dilemmawhile satisfying the interests of both sides. The seeds of onepotential solution come from a number of sources within variousnational government and industry initiatives. The success of the NSA Tessera initiative depends upon theinformation systems industry adopting a common set of interfacestandards for Cryptographic Application Programming Interfaces(CAPIs). The Tessera program has defined an initial set of suchstandards, but they must be endorsed industry-wide to succeed. Various vendors such as Hewlett-Packard and NationalSemiconductor have proposed the development of additional PCMCIAcard configurations that would make use of standard CAPIs andallow individual countries to implement their own collections ofcryptographic algorithms serving their own particular needs. Ifcommon CAPIs were to be widely adopted, initiatives such as theTessera program in individual countries would be much more likelyto succeed. In the United Kingdom, the Ministry of Defence (MoD) has begun aSecurity in Open Systems (SOS) Technology Demonstration Programme(TDP) with a specific objective of defining such CAPIs andattempting to get them widely adopted by industry and governmentthroughout the world. These proposals, sparked in part by the Tessera program, couldbring about a fundamental change in the availability ofinformation security capabilities. With common CAPIs atsufficiently high levels of abstraction, mass market softwaredevelopers could include the capability for cryptographicfunctions in their products without implementing any particularcryptographic algorithms. Such products, which rely on the userselecting the actual cryptography to be used at the time ofactual use, should be readily exportable. The user in aparticular country would choose among those availablecryptographic PCMCIA cards in that country to perform the actualencryption functions. This approach offers the dual advantages of freeing majorsoftware vendors to include some form of cryptographic functionin their products while allowing governments to retain the samecontrols they now have over the export, import, and use ofcryptography. Governments that wish to pursue techniques likekey escrow can "enter the marketplace" and "prove" the advantagesof their approach. A program to define and place such CAPIs in use internationallyrequires no legislation (at least in most western countries) andcan be adopted through industry-wide cooperation, drawing fromalready available draft CAPI standards. An International Cryptographic Experiment What is needed now is a consortium of interested parties inindustry and government to define preliminary standards and placethem in use on an experimental basis for a period of a year ortwo. After this test period, international standardsorganizations would be requested to adopt the resulting CAPIs forwidespread use throughout the world. This paper proposes three phases for such an experiment: CAPI Definition Phase (3 to 6 months) A rapid effort over three to six months to define an initial set of cryptographic application programming interfaces for use in the experiment. These interfaces would be derived from the Tessera interface standards, a National Institute of Standards and Technology draft entitled Standard for Cryptographic Service Calls, other publicly available specifications from industry in the US, UK, Canada, Germany and elsewhere, and from the efforts of programs such as the UK Technology Demonstration Programme. This effort should look at such interfaces in the context of multiple cryptographic algorithms. Development Phase (3 to 6 months) Application Software Development. Major software application developers would include cryptographic function calls to the high-level CAPIs within their products. Products containing these function calls would be tested against the PCMCIA implementations that would be developed in the next phase. These high-level products that contain no cryptography themselves should not be subject to export controls in most countries. All exports of these products will be coordinated with the country's government in which they are developed. PCMCIA card implementations. Cryptographic functions that meet the CAPIs would be implemented in each participating country in accordance with the cryptography available in that country. These implementations may not be exportable from the country of implementation depending upon the type of cryptography used. Experimental Use Phase (one to two years) As soon as applications using the CAPIs are generally available and PCMCIA implementations of specific cryptography are available in specific countries, a one-to- two-year experimental period will commence. During this period, coordination of use within each participating country and among participating countries (where compatible cryptography is available) will validate the design and implementation of the CAPIs and lead to additional application development. Because the actual use of cryptography is constrained to be in accordance with the internal regulations of each participating country, there should be no export issues with this phase. Following the experimental use phase, international standards organizations will be consulted to begin adoption of the validated CAPIs as international standards. Additional Thoughts The approach proposed herein relies on the use of PCMCIA cardsfor isolating the selection of cryptographic functions to auser's decision at the time of use rather than a developer'sdecision at the time of implementation. This time-of-use featureis essential to allowing application developers to employ high-level cryptographic functions without encountering exportcontrols. However, the use of PCMCIA devices is considered a disadvantageby many because of extra hardware costs and potential performanceissues. It may be possible within a particular country toimplement system level cryptographic software compatible with thePCMCIA CAPIs. Such software functions would be subject to exportcontrol and if integrated directly into the general purposeapplication, would render that version of the applicationunexportable. If a sufficient market existed within a particularcountry, overcoming the hardware disadvantages may be worth theexport restrictions. Some will argue that this approach does not satisfy government'sconcerns with the widespread availability of cryptography. Inreality, though, this approach gives governments that wish topursue techniques such as key escrow their best chance forsuccess by providing a wide marketplace of application programsthat can easily be used by their PCMCIA cards so long as they arecompatible with the evolving worldwide standards. So Where Do We Go From Here? Persons interested in participating in such a consortium shouldsend email to ice@tis.com; or correspondence to Stephen T.Walker, Trusted Information Systems, Inc., 3060 Washington Road(Rt. 97), Glenwood, MD 21738. Please use the words "Crypto API"in the subject field of your internet message or letter andindicate whether you are interested in: application development, cryptographic function development, participating as a user, or something else. As our contacts in various industries and governments develop, wewill be back to you with details on how to proceed. - ------- End of Forwarded Message ------- End of Forwarded Message WT02-B12-139IA087-000631-B026-124http://res2.resnet.upenn.edu:80/cis590/reading.169.html 130.91.195.242 19970122071146 text/html 12060HTTP/1.0 200 OKDate: Wed, 22 Jan 1997 07:11:47 GMTServer: Apache/1.1.1Content-type: text/htmlContent-length: 11888Last-modified: Tue, 22 Nov 1994 06:33:30 GMTFroomkin on Clipper keys The tireless eagle@armory.com dug this up, not sure if you've seen it. From: IN%"MFROOMKI@umiami.ir.miami.edu" "Michael Froomkin" The cites are there (and in a good administrative law book too: try egMashaw, Merril & Shane 3rd ed.) _Executive Summary_ Bottom line for the crypto proposal: Congress cannot hold the keys.Courts cannot hold the keys.Only an agency in the executive branch of government can hold thekeys. Up to a point (which is not well defined) an agency can be createdwith is headed by a person shielded from Presidential dismissal(commonly known as an "independent agency"). It may be that thehead of this agency could be appointed by the court, although theleading case on the subject concerns the appointment of aprosecutor by a court, which is a more traditional judicialfunction than the appointment of a trustee or custodian. _end executive summary_ _ The Problem _ The Supreme Court's separation of powers decisions aregenerally agreed to be hopelessly contradictory. Academiccommentators accuse the Court, with much justice, of zigzaggingbetween formalism and functionalism. See, e.g., Stephen L.Carter, From Sick Chicken to Synar: The Evolution and SubsequentDe-Evolution of the Separation of Powers, 1987 B.Y.U. L. Rev. 719;Stephen L. Carter, The Independent Counsel Mess, 102 Harv. L. Rev.105 (1988); Erwin Chemerinsky, A Paradox Without a Principle: AComment on the Burger Court's Jurisprudence in Separation of PowersCases, 60 S. Cal. L. Rev. 1083 (1987); E. Donald Elliott, Why OurSeparation of Powers Jurisprudence Is So Abysmal, 57 Geo. Wash. L.Rev. 506 (1989); Peter L. Strauss, The Place of Agencies inGovernment: Separation of Powers and the Fourth Branch, 84 Colum.L. Rev. 573 (1984). Peter L. Strauss, Was There A Baby In theBathwater? A Comment on the Supreme Court's Legislative VetoDecision, 1983 Duke L.J. 789. If one can bring oneself to ignore the doctrinal temptationsposed by the irreconcilable rationales of the cases set out below,there is a general rule which explains all the results and evenoffers some hope of predicting outcomes in future cases: Just asCongress may increase the other two branches' powers by statutesconferring jurisdiction (on courts) or rule-making/action-takingpower (on the executive branch), so too may Congress constrain theother two branches' exercise of their powers so long as Congressstrictly obeys two fundamental constraints. First, Congress must obey the strictures set out in Buckleyand Chadha, that neither it nor other persons in the legislativebranch (broadly defined, cf. Bowsher), may constitutionally takeany action that affects the rights, duties, or responsibilities ofany person outside that branch except via the procedures ofbicameralism and presentment set out in Article I. See I.N.S. v.Chadha, 462 U.S. 919 (1983); Buckley v. Valeo, 424 U.S. 1 (1976);and Metropolitan Wash. Airports, __ U.S. __, 111 S. Ct. 2298(1991). Second, the courts have jurisdiciton only to decide "casesand controversies". Outside the context of a lawsuit, thereare few acts that courts may take which might affect anyone's rights.Courts may make rules of procedure, and they can (if Congresswishes) make inter-branch appointments. But that's about it. Third, all three branches' powers can be divided into the twoclasses of enumerated and unenumerated powers. Congress' power tolimit the President's enumerated powers is relatively slight. Itexists only when Congress can assert a directly relevant enumeratedpower of its own. See, e.g., Public Citizen v. United States Dep'tof Justice, 491 U.S. 440, 467, 483-89 (1989) (Kennedy, J.,concurring in judgment) (application of open meetings law to ABAconsultation with Justice Department on judicial appointments wouldimpermissibly infringe President's enumerated appointment power);Nixon, 433 U.S. at 443 (upholding statutory intrusion into disposalof presidential papers on grounds that President had no relevantenumerated power); United States v. Klein, 80 U.S. (13 Wall.) 128(1871) (statute seeking to alter effect of presidential pardonunconstitutional interference with enumerated presidential power).But, Congress' power to check other, unenumerated, presidentialpowers is somewhat greater. Overall, the Court's decisions fit a pattern in whichCongress' power to check the other branches by determining theirstructure is very great, but Congress is checked by therequirements that it not aggrandize its own powers and that it actthrough persons outside the legislature (which usually meanspersons in the Executive or the Judiciary, although Congress isalso capable of taking certain types of actions, such as grantinga charter to a federal corporation, which act directly on privateparties and require little or no action by the other branches).Thus, in Myers, Buckley, Chadha, Bowsher, and MetropolitanAirports, separation of powers was violated by Congress seeking toreserve an executive power for itself. Myers concerned acongressional attempt to require Senatorial approval before apostmaster was fired. Myers v. United States, 272 U.S. 52 (1926).Bowsher held that the Comptroller General could not be an executivebranch official because Congress reserved the right to remove himby legislation. Bowsher, 478 U.S. at 714. Chadha struck down theone-house veto because it impermissibly inserted Congress into anexecutive function. Chadha, 461 U.S. at 919. MetropolitanAirports held that Congresspersons could not serve on a commissionthat had the power to reverse certain executive decisions.Metropolitan Wash. Airports, 111 S. Ct. at 2298. Humphrey'sExecutor, Wiener, Morrison, Schor, and Mistretta all concernedcases in which Congress had lessened the President's power (orincreased the Judiciary's) without reserving a corresponding powerfor itself. In Humphrey's Executor, Weiner, and Morrison thestatute in question reduced the President's removal power but didnot inject Congress into the procedure. By contrast, in CommodityFutures Trading Comm'n v. Schor, 478 U.S. 833, 856 (1986), theCourt noted that Congress was not seeking to increase its ownpowers. Indeed, when the issue is an unenumerated presidentialpower, such as the power to remove executive branch officials, theSupreme Court has, since at least 1838, most consistently focusedon whether Congress has impermissibly aggrandized itself, not onwhether the President's "nebulous" executive power is beingundermined. See Kendall v. United States, 37 U.S. (12 Pet.) 524(1838) (stating that although the President has a specialconstitutional position "it by no means follows that every officerin every branch of [a] department is under the exclusive directionof the President"). Detailed discussion of a few issues of interest:[For a fuller statement of the issues, see A. Michael Froomkin,Note, In Defense of Administrative Agency Autonomy, 96 Yale L.J.787 (1987) and Peter L. Strauss, The Place of Agencies inGovernment: Separation of Powers and the Fourth Branch, 84 Colum.L. Rev. 573 (1984).] _The Myers Decision_ In Myers v. United States, 272 U.S. 52 (1926) (holding statuterequiring Senate consent to presidential removal of postmaster wasunconstitutional). and Springer Springer v. Government ofPhilippine Islands, 277 U.S. 189 (1928) (holding that statutepermitting certain members of Phillippine legislature to votegovernment-owned shares in corporations ex officio violatedprinciple of separation of powers) the Supreme Court took adecidedly formalist approach to the problem, in which each branch'spowers were seen to be discernable and distinct. _The Modern View: Limits to Presidential Power (Constitutional Basis for Independent Agencies & limits to their autonomy)_ The modern view begins with Humphrey's Executor v. UnitedStates, 295 U.S. 602 (1935) (upholding statute preventing Presidentfrom firing FTC Commissioner without cause against constitutionalchallenge) and Wiener v. United States, 357 U.S. 349 (1958)(holding that statute which was silent as to tenure in office ofmember of "quasi-judicial" War Claims Commission would beinterpreted to bar President from dismissing member without cause).In this more "functionalist" view, Congress is allowed to constrainthe power of the executive but did not consider to what extentCongress could act by means other than legislation. _Limits to Congressional Power_ I.N.S. v. Chadha, 462 U.S. 919 (1983) (holding that a two-house legislative veto violates constitutional requirement thatCongress act in accordance with Presentment Clause ofConstitution), Buckley v. Valeo, 424 U.S. 1 (1976) (holding thatCongresspersons could not constitutionally serve on FEC), Bowsherv. Synar, 478 U.S. 714 (1986) (holding that Comptroller Generalcould not be an executive branch official because Congress reservedthe right to remove him by legislation and that therefore he couldnot constitutionally exercise budget-cutting powers given to him byDeficit Reduction Act) and Metropolitan Wash. Airports Auth. v.Citizens for the Abatement of Aircraft Noise, Inc., __ U.S. __, 111S. Ct. 2298 (1991) (holding that participation of members ofCongress in committee with power to veto decisions regarding localairports violated separation of powers) collectively stand for theproposition that unless Congress is using a constitionallyennumerated power (e.g. the Senate's advice and consent power overnominations and treaties), or regulationg purely internal matters(e.g. who will be the Sargent at Arms of the House), the *only* wayin which Congress may affect the rightrs, duties orresponsibilities of a person outside the legislative branch is bylegislation, which is defined constitutionally as acts of bothhouses which are the presented to the President for his signature. _The Courts' Inter-Bramch Appointment Power_ In Morrison v. Olson, 487 U.S. 654 (1988) (upholdingconstitutionality of independent special prosecutor) the SupremeCourt upheld a procedure by which the special prosecutor wasappointed by the court. The opinion has been criticized fofudging the extent to which the special prosecutor was independentof the President and Attorney General. But the inter-branchappointment power is rooted in the constitution, which states thatCongress may vest the appointment of "inferior officers, as theythink proper, in the President alone, in the courts of law, or inthe Heads of Departments." (U.S. Const. Art II. sec. 2 para 2). _ Limits on Judicial Power _ Marbury v. Madison held that the federal courts have the powerand duty to refuse to take on tasks that are beyond theirjurisdiction. Federal courts have historically been conscious ofhteir status as courts of limited jurisdiction and have beenvigillant to block moves by congress to give them non-judicaltasks. Thus, for example, federal courts have refused to giveadvisory opinions. It is a truism, but no less true for thatreason, that a federal court has no jurisdiction to affect privateor public rights in the absence of a case or controversy. The closest thing to contrary authority of which I am aware isMistretta v. United States, 488 U.S. 361 (1989) (upholdingconstitutionality of Sentencing Commission against challengepredicated on participation of Article III judges on commission).The decision justified the participation of judges on the groundsthat sentencing was a judicial matter. A.Michael Froomkin | +1 (305) 284-4285; +1 (305) 284-2349 (fax)U.Miami Law School | MFROOMKI@UMIAMI.IR.MIAMI.EDUPO Box 248087 |Coral Gables, FL 33146 USA | It's warm here. WT02-B12-140IA087-000631-B026-159http://res2.resnet.upenn.edu:80/cis590/reading.170.html 130.91.195.242 19970122071250 text/html 13499HTTP/1.0 200 OKDate: Wed, 22 Jan 1997 07:12:37 GMTServer: Apache/1.1.1Content-type: text/htmlContent-length: 13327Last-modified: Tue, 22 Nov 1994 06:33:31 GMTWSJ on PGP & Zimmerman From: <anon@desert.hacktic.nl> (Anon Account an3)To: cypherpunks@toad.comSubject: WSJ article on PGPDate: Sun, 30 Apr 1994 10:04:20 MET >From The Wall Street JournalVol. LXXV No. 138Thursday April 28, 1994 CIPHER PROBE:Popularity Overseas Of Encryption Code Has the U.S. Worried ----------Grand Jury Ponders if Creator 'Exported' the Program Through the Internet ----------`Genie Is Out of the Bottle' By William M. BulkeleyStaff Reporter of The Wall Street Journal BOULDER, Colo. - During the battle between Boris Yeltsin and the RussianParliment last October, with Russian freedom hanging in the balance, softwareauthor Philip Zimmermann received an electronic-mail message from Latvia."If dictatorship takes over Russia," it read, "your PGP is widespread fromBaltic to Far East now and will help democratic people if necessary.Thanks." PGP - for Pretty Good Privacy - is a program written by Mr. Zimmermann forscrambling computer messages. Dissidents around the world use it to protecttheir electronic communications from the prying eyes of secret police. But PGP has a darker side. In Sacramento, Calif., police lament that lastyear, PGP encryption blocked them from reading the computer diary of aconvicted pedophile and finding critical links in a suspectedchild-pornography ring. Admired by freedom lovers and criminals alike, PGP is one thing:uncrackable, or as close to it as a secret code has ever been. Even U.S.government snoopers can't break it. And that places Mr. Zimmermann - apaunchy, bearded, 40-year-old computer consultant who is fast becoming afolk hero on the information highway - in peril. A federal grand jury in San Jose, Calif., is examining weather he brokelaws against exporting encryption codes. The Federal Bureau of Investigationsuspects that Mr. Zimmermann had a role in putting PGP on the Internet, theworld-wide web of computer networks, making it easy for foreign governmentsand terrrorists to use it and render their computer traffic impervious toU.S. spying. Mr. Zimmermann's lawyer says his client could face charges carrying aprison term of up to 51 months. The world-wide use of Mr. Zimmermann's software has altered forevernotions of government surveillance, electronic privacy and export bans oncryptography. Until recently, difficult codes could always be decipheredby stealing the key that unraveled the encryption puzzle. During WorldWar II, for example, the Allies captured a German encrypting Enigma machine,allowing them to crack Nazi communications. U.S. convoys taking munitionsto Britain used it to help them elude German U-boats. Keys Are the Key But PGP, like a growing number of encryption programs, takes advantage ofa new, mathematically sophisticated encrypting technology that requires twodifferent keys, both of which are necessary to unlock the puzzle. The senderneeds only one to send a message. The receiver decodes the message with thesecond key - which never needs to leave his computer, where it can beprotected by passwords from easy pilfering. Although the mathematics aredaunting, the program makes the process quick and straightforward. In an age when computers can whip up codes of devilish complexity andzip them around the globe for anyone with a personal computer, the lot ofthe encryption policeman is not a happy one. The internet alone reaches 20million people. "The genie is out of the bottle," says Leonard Mikus, president ofViaCrypt, a Phoenix company that sells a $100 version of PGP in the U.S."There's no way anybody can stop the technology." The Personal Touch The availability world-wide of encryption programs makes export controls"a farce," says Stephen Walker, a former top National Security Agencycryptographer who is now president of Trusted Information Systems Inc., aresearch firm in Glenwood, Md. He says he knows European governmentofficials who use PGP for their personal e-mail. "We have to recognizewhat's out there." Mr. Zimmermann, a twice-arrested anti-nuclear-war activist, became anelectronic freedom-fighter in 1990. At that time, the FBI and the NSA werepushing for a law that would ban certain forms of encryption, and forcecomputer makers to build into their machines hardware that would allowlaw-enforcement agencies to decipher any code that was used. The proposaloutraged confidentiality-minded corporations and computer users alike.Eventually, it was dropped. But while the issue was still open, Mr. Zimmermann took it upon himselfto thwart the government's purpose by working on what came to be PGP - animpenetrable code that could be used by virtually anyone. "I did it toinoculate the body politic" from the danger of government prying, he says. Mr. Zimmermann stopped consulting and holed up in the computer-filledworkroom in the back of a bungalow in Boulder, where he lives with his wifeand two children. He said he spent six months of 12-hour days writing theprogram, drained his family's savings and missed five months of mortgagepayments. He finished the program in June 1991, and named it Pretty GoodPrivacy - in deference to Ralph's Pretty Good Grocery in humorist GarrisonKeillor's Prairie Home Companion radio show. When Mr. Zimmermann was through, he gave the encryption program tofriends. One of them, whom he won't identify, placed it on the Internet,sometime around June or July 1991, he says. Once there, any computer userin the world with access to the Internet could download it. Almostimmediately, many did. But federal laws covering munitions prohibit exporting encryption softwarewithout a license. A year ago, U.S. Customs Service agents asked Mr.Zimmermann how his software went overseas. In September the U.S. Attorney'soffice in San Jose, which has expertise on computer crimes because of itsproximity to Silicon Valley, told Mr. Zimmermann that he was a target of aninvestigation. Mr. Zimmermann says he neither sent PGP overseas, nor postedit on computer systems. RSA Data Security Inc. is also angry at Mr. Zimmermann. Thecomputer-security firm says that in creating PGP, Mr. Zimmermann used one ofits patented cryptographic algorithms without permission, after RSA haddenied him a free license. "We sometimes joke that PGP stands for `Pretty Good Piracy,' " says JamesBidzos, president of the Redwood City, Calif., firm. "What he did wassimple. In this business, you simply don't rip off people's intellectualproperty." RSA, which sells its technology to most of the major sofwaremakers and makes an encryption program called MailSafe, hasn't sued Mr.Zimmermann. But it has asserted its legal rights in letters to anyone itcatches using PGP. As a result, few companies use PGP and many universitiesand commercial on-line services keep it off their computers. Mr. Zimmermann says that technically he hasn't violated RSA patentsbecause he didn't sell the software until he signed the deal with ViaCrypt,which does have a license to use the algorithm. He notes that the on-linedocumentation for PGP suggests that people who use the program should contactRSA about a license. For many individuals, PGP has become something of a standard forencrypted e-mail on the Internet. A Glendale, Calif., college student whogoes by the name Monk on the Internet says, "It's free; it's solid; itpromotes privacy. How can you argue with it?" While the NSA wants to keepcontrol of encryption, "This teeny little company with a wonderful hero haschanged that," says Thomas Lipscomb, president of InfoSafe Corp., a New Yorkdeveloper of security devices for CD-ROM publishers. Fear that hackers may intercept e-mail has spawned a grass-roots cult ofPGP users in the Internet community. Craig McKie, a sociology professor atCarleton University in Ottawa, encrypts chapters of a new book with PGP ashe sends them to his publisher, fearing that otherwise, "a gazillion copieswould go flying off into the night." Lance Cottrell, an astronomer at theUniversity of California, San Diego, says he uses PGP to share unpublishedobservations with collaborators to keep others from claim-jumping adiscovery. PGP also helps make the otherwise leaky internet safe for commerce.Members of the Electronic Frontier Foundation, a group that advocateselectronic free speech, can pay dues by sending PGP-encrypted credit-cardnumbers over computer networks. S. Soloway Inc., a Palo Alto, Calif.,accounting firm, scrambles backup tapes with PGP, so that clients needn'tworry about lost confidentiality if the tapes are lost or stolen. KennethBass, a Washington lawyer, communicates with some clients and otherattorneys in PGP code. For human-rights advocates, the consequences of compromised sources canbe devastating. Daniel Salcedo, who works for the Human Rights Project ofthe American Association for the Advancement of Science in Washington,teaches activists in El Salvador and Guatemala to use PGP. "In thisbusiness, lots of people have been killed," Mr. Salcedo says. Alan Dawson, a writer living in Thailand, says rebels opposing the regimein neighboring Burma are using PGP to encrypt information sent among rebelgroups. Before use of PGP became widespread, Mr. Dawson wrote Mr.Zimmermann, "captured documents have resulted directly in arrests, includingwhole families and their torture and death." But investigators say PGP and other encryption systems aid crime.William Spernow, a computer-crime specialist with Search Group, a federallyfunded police-training firm in Sacramento, Calif., predicts criminals willroutinely encrypt information within two years. "This could signal the endof computer forensics before it even gets off the ground," he says. Mr. Bidzos of RSA says that he has had several calls from police in theMiami area asking for help in decrypting information on computers seized indrug raids. He says the encryption is unbreakable. Mr. Spernow studied onecase where a criminal conducted a fraud by keeping a double set of books -the real set encrypted in PGP. Mr. Zimmermann says he is disturbed by criminal use of encryption, butthinks the benefit of providing electronic privacy to everyone outweighsthe costs. "It is impossible to obtain real privacy in the information agewithout good cryptography," he says. Encryption also raises some eyebrows inside corporations. Mr. Bass, theWashington lawyer, notes that most companies assert the right to reademployees' e-mail, since it is composed on their computers and travels theirnetworks. "What will they do when people start encrypting messages to eachother?" he asks. Without e-mail encryption, widespread surveillance would be easier. Intheory, CIA, FBI and police computers could tap telephone cables and lookfor key words such as "missile" or "bomb" to find people who needed closerwatching. Mr. Zimmermann says: "This is analogous to drift-net fishing." Computerized encryption "is a technology that for a change benefits ourcivil liberties," he adds. "The government law-enforcement agencies havebenefited from many technologies," such as telephones that made wire-tapping undetectable. In fact, Mr. Zimmermann is currently seeking fundingfor a project to create a phone that uses a personal computer equipped witha microphone and a speaker, to encrypt voice conversations just as PGPencrypts data exchanges. Mr. Zimmermann has been suspicious of the government for a long time.After growing up in Boca Raton, Fla., where a children's book on secretwriting first interested him in codes, he moved to Boulder in 1978 andworked as a computer engineer. After he was laid off by Storage TechnologyCorp. in 1985, along with 3,000 others, he became a consultant specializingin telecommunications and data security. In the 1980s he became worried about the nuclear-arms race. He and hiswife investigated moving to New Zealand. But they stayed in Boulder, anantiwar hotbed, where he lectured on arms policy. Mr. Zimmermann says that he has not been active on the internet and adds,"I'm not a cipherpunk - I wear a suit when I visit clients." But he sayshe agrees with the electronic free-speech ideals of the cipherpunks, theInternet habitues who fill cyberspace with blistering criticisms about theU.S. government's proposal to promote use of the so-called "Clipper chip."The chip would let companies and individuals encrypt sensitivecommunications, but the government would hold a key making it possible -with court permission - to decipher them for law-enforcement ornational-security purposes. Mr. Zimmermann thinks the Clipper project confirms the need for PGP byshowing the government's desire to read electronic mail. "They're treatingus like an enemy foreign population," he says. --PGP PUBLIC KEY via finger! JAFEFFM Speaking & Thinking For Myself! * eagle@deeptht.armory.com email info@eff.org **** O U T L A W S On The E L E C T R O N I C F R O N T I E R ********* Committed to Free Public Internet Access for World Peace ***** WT02-B12-141IA087-000631-B026-195http://res2.resnet.upenn.edu:80/cis590/reading.171.html 130.91.195.242 19970122071308 text/html 25239HTTP/1.0 200 OKDate: Wed, 22 Jan 1997 07:13:10 GMTServer: Apache/1.1.1Content-type: text/htmlContent-length: 25067Last-modified: Tue, 22 Nov 1994 06:33:32 GMTMy Testimony before the Committee on Science, Space and Technology 3 May 1994 Testimony before theCommittee on Science, Space and TechnologySubcommittee on Technology, Environment and AviationU.S. House of Representatives Hearing onCommunications and Computer Surveillance, Privacy and Security May 3, 1994 David J. FarberThe Alfred Fitler Moore Professor of Telecommunication SystemsUniversity of Pennsylvania200 S. 33 rd StreetPhiladelphia PA 19104-6389Net: farber@cis.upenn.edu I. Introduction Good morning Mr. Chairman and members of the subcommittee. I want to thankthe Committee for inviting me to testify today. I should start off by stating that the views I will give are my own, andnot necessarily those of any organizations that I am affiliated with --although I hope they agree with my views. I am speaking merely as aprofessional with long experience in the computer and communicationsfield. My background has been focused on the understanding of and the developmentof technology in the computer and communications area. I started my careerin 1956 with a BS in General Engineering from Stevens Institute ofTechnology. Due to the influence of a friend, I interviewed Bell TelephoneLaboratories even though I was accepted into graduate school. I accepted avery challenging job at Bell Labs helping design the worlds firstelectronic switching system which was later installed at Morris,Illinois. It was the ENIAC of the computer-based telephone systems we havetoday. I later went on to do pioneer work in programming languages andafter a period at the RAND Corp. I left industry to join the University ofCalifornia at Irvine (UCI) as a faculty member. At UCI I was responsiblefor the conceptualization of the first operational distributed computersystem sponsored by the NSF -- the DCS system which was the first use ofclient-server ideas, along with the first micro kernel and the firstring-type Local Area Network. On my journey to the University ofPennsylvania where I hold the Chair of The Alfred Fitler Moore Professorof Telecommunication Systems, I collaborated in the creation and operationof CSNET and the NREN as well as co-authoring the proposal for theGigabit Testbeds. I have served on more industrial and government advisorycommittees than is reasonable and am a Fellow of the IEEE. I serve on theBoard of Trustees of both the Electronic Frontier Foundation and theInternet Society. My career has been focused on the understanding of, and the developmentof, technology in the communications area. I have co-founded several ofthe data networks which have led to the National InformationInfrastructure and have taken part in the creation of some of thetechnology that makes it possible. For the last several years I have alsobeen increasingly involved with the policy problems and opportunitiesthat this technology has created. So while my remarks will focus largelyon the technical aspects of the Clipper and the Digital Telephonyinitiatives I would like to start out by expressing some of my views onpolicy and also my views as a concerned citizen. II. Public Policy Challenges Posed By New Information & CommunicationTechnologies We are at a critical stage in the evolution of a capability that couldrival the industrial revolution in bringing both good and bad to thecitizens of this nation. The industrial revolution brought unheard ofprosperity to parts of the world and pain and suffering also. Theinformation revolution, and it is a revolution, can bring a burst ofprosperity and vigor to a world which is increasingly stuck in a morass ofslow growth, regionalization and trade conflicts. The information revolution is a stew based on a blend made possible byincreasingly complex communications technology mixed with increasinglymore powerful computers. The National Information Infrastructure (NII) andit's sister the Global Information Infrastructure (GII) are among theexciting developments arising out of this technology "stew". All in all,we have an unprecedented transfer of power into the hands of the publicand the government that results from these technologies. Computer powerthat served the entire technical staff of Bell Labs when I was there isnow available in my hand. Communications capabilities only dreamed of inthe Saturday movie serials is now readily available worldwide. This vastlyincreased power in the hands of the public has created difficulties forthe policy makers. While technology increases in power at a rate of twotimes per year, our ability to understand the policy implications ofthis, sadly, grows very slowly. This has shown itself recently in the debate about the Clipper encryptioninitiative and the Digital Telephony proposals both put forward by theClinton/Gore administration and backed heavily by the law enforcementcommunity. A careful look at each of these initiatives illuminates thefundamental national issues that are being fought out. It is critical that this discussion be brought out into that part of thepolicymaking process which has always represented the citizens -- theCongress. I take as one of my guidelines in thinking about these issues,a quote by Ben Franklin -- the Founder of the University I am at -- "Theythat can give up essential liberty to obtain a little temporary safetydeserve neither liberty nor safety." A. Clipper and the proposed escrow system The proposed key escrow system that is part of the "Clipper" proposal forproviding securable telephony has been subject to many and often louddebates in the press and in the Internet world. Many worry that such anescrow system could be vulnerable to misuse by a future administration oroverzealous law enforcement organizations. The result of any such misusewould be a major blow to the privacy rights of our citizens. Thecounter-argument is based on arguments that it is no worse than we nowhave -- namely no cryptographic protection in widespread use, and a fearof increasing difficulties due to technology and the ease of computersupported voice encryption. Clearly the issues are basic to the way wewill live in the future that is, what will happen to both our liberty andour safety. Currently the discussants have taken extreme positions -- asis normal for the beginning of such a critical discussion. Neither side iscapable of explaining to the other the reasons for their support of orconcerns about the proposal. Thus I believe that we must carefully examine the proposed escrow systemto insure that we have not done the trade that Franklin warned us about,but rather, that we have used all available technology to ensure that weend up with more safety and more liberty. The Administration's Clipper proposal to create an escrowed cryptographicsystem for telephony came out of the blue, at least as far as mycommunity is concerned. When I sent out the first announcement of theClipper proposal to my "interesting people" mailing list (a list that goeswidely to senior people in academia, government and industry) my onlycomment was "basically the issue is 'do you trust your government'". Oneof the replies I received from a 23 year old person I know well said that"to my generation, the term 'trust government' has no meaning". Sad buttrue!!. The Clipper announcement was sketchy, lacking substance and real form. Weall "waited for the beef" but there was unfortunately no such beef. Themain ingredient of the initiative and it's most controversial aspect --the escrow system -- was not yet really designed. The reaction was, to putit mildly, mostly shock and outrage and even sadness. There wereinsufficient details about the Clipper system to enable us to make acompetent technical evaluation of the overall security of the proposal,including all of its escrow management procedures. Those of us in industryand in academe, see our role as helping to assess for both the corporatecommunity and individual users, the security and privacy of computer andcommunications systems. To this date, we have been unable to perform thisfunction because most of the details of Clipper are shrouded in secrecy. B. Where are we and where can we go One of the facts of life in the Information Age is that powerful toolssuch as encryption are and will be increasingly more available tolaw-abiding citizens, business users, people all over the world, and, ofcourse, to criminals. This does pose challenges to law enforcement, butthere's nothing we can do to stop this technology. All that thegovernment can do is to slow things down. We have to face it. Perhaps wecan slow it down and leave it to our children to face these facts of life.But in my view we have created the world that presents these challengesand we should attempt to solve the problems and to leave a better world toour children. We should not, however, underestimate the depth of the problem thatsophisticated encryption technology and the information age thrusts uponus. On the one hand, individual citizens and large corporationsdesperately need encryption to protect their personal privacy andcorporate security. On the other hand, this same technology, if used bycriminals, can make law enforcements efforts to conduct investigationsmore difficult. So, we need technology and public policy in response tothis dilemma which assure privacy and security, enables law enforcement tocontinue to do its job, and, at the same time, respects fundamental civilliberties which are at the heart of our constitutional system ofgovernment. In my technical judgment, the solution to this problem willnot come easily and will certainly not come in one simple step. The position of the Administration worries many in the technical communitysince they feel it is but the first step to the banning of any form ofencryption except that approved and escrowed by the government. TheClinton Administration says "not on our watch" and I believe them.However, our grandchildren will not have them on the watch when they growup. So, we need a lasting and effective solution to this problem, not aquick fix that is technologically unsound and unwise as a matter of publicpolicy. C. Open Technical Processes Are Best For Solving Hard Problems Even those of us who disagee about Clipper, agree that we are faced with ahard technical and policy problem. So, the question we should be askingis: how does the communications world solve hard problems and are we ontrack with Clipper? A long history of setting technical standards in thecommunications industry has shown that solving hard technical problemsrequires an open design process. The protocols which are the basis of theInternet were not created by ten people in a "smoke-filled room". Theyevolved openly and sometimes noisily in a highly stressed and highlyproductive set of interactions. They took over the world and created thebasis for the National Information Infrastructure. An examination of theinternet standards activity clearly shows the payoff in openness. The Internet Engineering Task Force (IETF), an open organization attendedby all the players with stakes in internet developments, has often facedthe situation where two group develop their ideas in different fashions:One group meets in an open public fashion, with constant interactions withdifferent ideas and different economic imperatives of thoseparticipating. Another group goes off and sits in smoke-filled roomsdesigning alternatives in a closed environment. When both are shown to theIETF as a whole, the open design always wins. It has all the rough spotssmoothed out and arguments done prior to disclosure. The closed designgets sunk on having to do the smoothing when it is too late. MultimediaMail, a major future use of the NII, is a good case in point. There aremany others examples. Clipper is in the same boat. While I recognize that a small part ofcryptography will always be classified, most of the development of theproposed escrow system has been taking place in those room ( notsmoke-filled any more). This process must be brought out into the sunshineof the technical and policy community. Proposals like Clipper must beevolved, if they are to have any chance of success, with the co-operationand understanding of the industrial and academic community and theirenthusiastic cooperation rather than their mistrust. This penchant foropenness must not be seen as a power struggle between industry andgovernment, or as an excuse for revisiting a decision that technologistsdislike for political reasons. Rather it is a reflection of a deep faithin open design processes and a recognition that closed processesinvariably lead to solutions which are too narrow and don't last. A Strawman Proposal To make my thinking more concrete I have included a much abbreviateddesign that is predicated on a desire to properly control andauthenticate the use of taps and decryption devices to ensure their useonly under proper judicial supervision. It is intended to provide agreatly improved and protected mechanism to ensure that proper judicialcontrol is kept and that auditable records exist. I personally believethere are technical safeguards that can be engineered into a key escrowsystem that could greatly increase privacy and security for users, whileensuring that legitimate law enforcement access is maintained. The approach requires a change in the warrant mechanism as well as otherchanges that may require legislative action. I firmly believe that anapproach toward the creation of a freely exportable cryptographic systemthat allows and perhaps even encourages, but does not demand, escrowedkeys could, given the right actions on the part of the congress greatlyimprove the first amendment rights and the custom of personal privacy thatexists in the United States and at the same time provide law enforcementwith all the lawful access to crypto protected communications that ourconstitution allows. The proposed design allows the user of an escrowed crypto-device (ECD) tochoose to have his keys escrowed with a set of escrow approved holdingorganizations (EAHO). An EAHO must conform to a set of rules and auditsthat define its proper handling of key security, physical and electronicsecurity, management strength, and the ability to obtain a bond to protectthe owners of the ECD from illegal actions on the part of EAHO employees.Thus the credibility of the EAHO is examined by the accrediting agency andthe organization which provides bonding. Given that the component keys (CK) have been transported to the chosenEAHOs, the rest of this note describes the process that would be followedin my proposed approach. When a law enforcement organization (LEO) wants to decrypt a protectedconversation, it go through the normal mechanism to find the ECD unitsbeing used. The main difference from the existing process is that thewarrant they must obtain in order for the EAHOs to release their componentkeys is as follows. The LEO obtains a warrant from a judicial source. This warrant isregistered as to the date of issue (could use the Bellcore spin-offcompany) and contains within the warrant the specifics of ECD that will bemonitored as well as the length of time of thevalidity of theauthorization. The warrant is electronic in form and is then encrypted andsigned by the judicial source. It is sent to the LEO. The LEO then sendsthe warrant along with its additional information to each of the escroworganizations -- this transmission signed by the LEO. The EAHOs check thevalidity of the LEO, and decrypt the warrant for validity, date andduration. Given this is OK, it sends its part of the key along with theoriginal warrant back to the LEO encrypted under the LEO's public key andsigned by the EAHO. The LEO now can authenticate the EAHO. When the LEO has all parts of thecomponent keys, it ships the messages obtained from the EAHOs -- namelythe key parts and the warrant to the decryption "box" where the validityof the warrant, its time of origination and length is again checked beforeany decryption taking place. If any of these conditions fail, the requestfor decryption is rejected. This alternative to Clipper will protect user privacy, ensure legitimatelaw enforcement access, and has the important advantage of allowingtechnology and standards to develop in an open, market-drive process. I would note, too, that the Clinton Administration has shown some interestin pursuing open solutions such as the one I have outlined here. Thissentiment is extremely encouraging to me and I would urge the subcommitteeto explore this option further with Administration officials.1 D. What's my bottom line on Clipper Escrow key systems may offer a middle of the road solution to blend theimperatives of technology with the stated but as yet un-substantiatedneeds of law enforcement. However, in no case, should an escrow system beconsidered unless it: * results in an environment which considerable increases the citizensprotection against illegal wiretaps and * provides for enabling laws, which would be necessary to establish theelectronic warrant system and auditability, must legislate against themandatory use of clipper technology and * removes export controls on cryptography so as to establish a viablemarket for American companies to produce products. III. Digital Telephony I will enumerate my objections to the proposal from a technical/economicpoint of view. I join others in attacking it from aprivacy/freedom/necessity standpoint. In the Clipper controversy, one could find some benefits to the nation ina properly designed system. In the case of the Digital Telephony proposalit is difficult to see where there can be a silver lining. The Digital Telephony proposal calls for the manufacturers of telephonecentral office switches, tandom switches and SS7 signaling systems to makemajor design changes to their software systems. These changes wouldprovide, to law enforcement at remote sites, electronic notification ofcalls to and from selected numbers/individuals as the individuals wanderthrough the complex communications structure that has been created in theUnited States. I, and many others, expect that the law would have to be extended to coverPBXs and even personal computers as they are used more and more aspersonal communications devices. As a colleague of mine has often said "What guarantees that the job of lawenforcement should be easy?". Yet law enforcement noting the increasedcomplexity of the telecommunications systems and maybe even noticing theability of all the components of the NII to carry such communications, hasdemanded the right to peek into our minds and to easily find out whom wecall and who calls us. I have often been credited with using the term "the Full SoftwareEmployment Act of 1994" when I talk about the Digital Telephony proposal.The proposers talk about costs in the multi hundreds of millions ofdollars to be borne by the Government for the first three years. Afterthat all is left open. As one who has in his time designed and built complex systems and whounderstands the structure of the current telecommunications structure myreactions are as follows. Rational estimates obtained from sources in the industry talk aboutnumbers from $1.5 to $3 billion per year. I consider that low. Thecomplexity of just the Plain Old Telephone System software is enormous.Re-designing large and often the most complex parts of it will not be easynor inexpensive. One must potentially re-engineer the cellular system withits multiple manufacturers plus the local and toll and tandem switchingcenters. The fact that they are programmed devices makes it feasible butnot cheap. The potential for decreased reliability of the nationaltelephone grid caused by the large scale changes (presently undefined) tothe software architecture could cause major dangers to the health andeconomy of the country. If you watch the bugs (errors) that aredistributed in well tested and much similar systems (like DOS or MACOS)you can appreciate the opportunities for chaos -- and it must be done inthree years. One should carefully note that the national communications system ismarginally reliable at this time. A National Research Council report on itcautioned that it was poorly equipped to survive in the event ofcatastrophies. The recent set of fiber cuts and the resultant severedisruption of the nation's business is a portent for the future. To spendmoney that is in short supply satisfying a poorly articulated and poorlyjustified "problem" with wire tapping is to place the nation's economichealth in danger, for communication is the veins that carry the nation'seconomic blood -- information. >From the standpoint of the future evolution of our NII, the DigitalTelephony proposal presents a major drag. Whenever a new feature is beingconsidered for implementation and marketing, one very important issue willbe how much it will cost to implement it in such a manner as to pass thehurdles of the proposal. That could price many good ideas that wouldimprove the usefulness of our NII off the feasibility horizon. Not onlywould our citizens not have access to these new and useful services butthey would not be implemented in US manufactured systems and thus couldmake our systems less sellable in competition with those of foreignmanufacturers of communications equipment for off shore sales. Note thatoff shore sales in the developing parts of the globe represent majormarkets which we could lose. IV. Summary * The Information Age poses hard problems for privacy protection,securityand law enforcement * Increasing amounts of personally sensitive and proprietary informationon global, digital networks creates need for security through encryption. * Technical knowledge of how to create powerful and practicallyunbreakable encryption technology is available throughout the world. * Powerful encryption poses real challenges for law enforcement andnational security efforts. * These challenges will not be solved by just a single chip such asClipper or even just a single legislative act such as the proposed DigitalTelephony bill. * As a closed, secret, inflexible standard, Clipper will not be widelyaccepted by the market * Security systems must be trusted by the broad user community. Clipperwill never be so trusted because the design of its internal algorithm issecret * Open systems are the only lasting solution to hard technical problems * The history of the computer and communications industry has shown thathard technical problems require open flexible solutions arrived at in anopen manner. * The federal government should lead the way toward an open solution,rather than trying in vain to force a closed solution on the problem. * Real alternative to publicly revealed Clipper system design exist,whichmeet law enforcement goals while protecting privacy, civil liberties andpreserving technological flexibility. V. Conclusion There should be no doubt that new computer and communciationstechnologies pose challenges for the law enforcement and national securitycommunities. By the same token, for the National InformationInfrastructure to succeed, and for US companies to be able to compete inthe world market -- the Global Information Infrastructure -- user securityand privacy must be protected through robust, open cryptography standards.The Congress and the Administration should lead the way toward solutionsthat are open, provide for flexibility in the future, and seek anappropriate balance of individual privacy and the legitimate needs of lawenforcement. I thank this subcommittee again for its foresight andguidance in holding this hearing and look forward to working with you inthe future. FOOTNOTE 1 I would like to explicitly support an idea originated by Steve Walker ofTrusted Information Systems, who proposes the voluntary establishment ofsoftware interface standards to crypto devices and crypto software so thatmanufacturers around the world, but especially in the United States, cancreate software systems that can be used with nationally required cryptosystems around the world. Such an initiative would greatly enhance theprivacy of individuals and the market for such systems. It would alsocreate a major opportunity for American companies to market to the world.Such an initiative would assist in the creation of the GII supported bythe Vice President WT02-B12-142IA087-000631-B026-231http://res2.resnet.upenn.edu:80/cis590/reading.172.html 130.91.195.242 19970122071359 text/html 24545HTTP/1.0 200 OKDate: Wed, 22 Jan 1997 07:13:59 GMTServer: Apache/1.1.1Content-type: text/htmlContent-length: 24373Last-modified: Tue, 22 Nov 1994 06:33:32 GMTTestimony of Jerry Berman before Committee on Science, Space and Technology Testimony of Jerry J. Berman, Executive DirectorElectronic Frontier Foundation before the Committee on Science, Space and Technology Subcommittee on Technology, Environment and Aviation U.S. House of Representatives Hearing on Communications and Computer Surveillance, Privacy and Security May 3, 1994 Mr. Chairman and Members of the Committee I want to thank you for the opportunity to testify today oncommunications and computer surveillance, privacy, and security policy.The Electronic Frontier Foundation (EFF) is a public interest membershiporganization dedicated to achieving the democratic potential of newcommunications and computer technology and works to protect civil libertiesin new digital environments. EFF also coordinates the Digital Privacy andSecurity Working Group (DPSWG), a coalition of more than 50 computer,communications, and public interest organizations and associations workingon communications privacy issues. The Working Group has strongly opposedthe Administration's clipper chip and digital telephony proposals. EFF is especially pleased that this subcommittee has taken aninterest in these issues. It is our belief that Administration policydeveloped in this area threatens individual privacy rights, will thwart thedevelopment of the information infrastructure, and does not even meet thestated needs of law enforcement and national security agencies. A freshand comprehensive look at these issues is needed. I. Background on digital privacy and security policy From the beginning of the 1992 Presidential campaign, PresidentClinton and Vice President Gore committed themselves to support thedevelopment of the National Information Infrastructure. They recognizethat the "development of the NII can unleash an information revolution thatwill change forever the way people live, work, and interact with eachother." They also know that the information infrastructure can onlyrealize its potential if users feel confident about security measuresavailable. If allowed to reach its potential, this information infrastructurewill carry vital personal information, such as health care records, privatecommunications among friends and families, and personal financialtransactions. The business community will transmit valuable informationsuch as plans for new products, proprietary financial data, and otherstrategic communications. If communications in the new infrastructure arevulnerable, all of our lives and businesses would be subject to bothdamaging and costly invasion. In launching its Information Infrastructure Task Force (IITF) theClinton Administration recognized this when it declared that: The trustworthiness and security of communications channels and networksare essential to the success of the NII.... Electronic information systemscan create new vulnerabilities. For example, electronic files can bebroken into and copied from remote locations, and cellular phoneconversations can be monitored easily. Yet these same systems, if properlydesigned, can offer greater security than less advanced communicationschannels. [Agenda for Action, 9]Cryptography -- technology which allows encoding and decoding of messages-- is an absolutely essential part of the solution to information securityand privacy needs in the Information Age. Without strong cryptography, noone will have the confidence to use networks to conduct business, to engagein commercial transactions electronically, or to transmit sensitivepersonal information. As the Administration foresees, we need network standards and transmission codes that facilitate interconnectionand interoperation between networks, and ensure the privacy of persons andthe security of information carried.... [Agenda for Action, 6]While articulating these security and privacy needs, the Administration hasalso emphasized that the availability of strong encryption poseschallenges to law enforcement and national security efforts. Though thevast majority of those who benefit from encryption will be law abidingcitizens, some criminals will find ways to hide behind new technologies. II. Current cryptography policy fails to meet the needs of the growinginformation infrastructure As a solution to the conflict between the need for user privacy andthe desire to ensure law enforcement access, the Administration hasproposed that individuals and organizations who use encryption deposit acopy of their private key -- the means to decode any communications theysend -- with the federal government. In our view, this is not a balanced solution but one thatundermines the need for security and privacy without resolving importantlaw enforcement concerns. It is up to the Congress to send theAdministration back to the drawing board. A. Current Export Controls and New Clipper Proposal Stifle Innovation Two factors are currently keeping strong encryption out of thereach of United States citizens and corporations. First, generaluncertainty about what forms of cryptography will and will not be legal toproduce in the future. Second, export controls make it economicallyimpossible for US manufacturers that build products for the globalmarketplace to incorporate strong encryption for either the domestic orforeign markets. Despite this negative impact on the US market, exportcontrols are decreasingly successful at limiting the foreign availabilityof strong encryption. A recent survey shows that of the more than 260foreign encryption products now available globally, over 80 offerencryption which is stronger than what US companies are allowed to export.Export controls do constrain the US market, but the international marketappears to be meeting its security needs without help from US industry.The introduction of Clipper fails to address the general uncertainty in thecryptography market. Announcement of a key escrow policy alone is notsufficient to get the stalled US cryptography market back on track. B. The secrecy of the Clipper/Skipjack algorithm reduces public trustand casts doubt on the voluntariness of the whole system Many parties have already questioned the need for a secretalgorithm, especially given the existence of robust, public-domainencryption techniques. The most common explanation given for use of asecret algorithm is the need to prevent users from bypassing the key escrowsystem proposed along with the Clipper Chip. Clipper has always beenpresented by the Administration as a voluntary option. But if the systemis truly voluntary, why go to such lengths to ensure compliance with theescrow procedure? C Current plans for escrow system offer inadequate technical securityand insufficient legal protections for users The implementation of a nationwide key escrow system is clearly acomplex task. But preliminary plans available already indicate severalareas of serious concern: 1. No legal rights for escrow users: As currently written, the escrowprocedures insulate the government escrow agents from any legal liabilityfor unauthorized or negligent release of an individual's key. This iscontrary to the very notion of an escrow system, which ordinarily wouldprovide a legal remedy for the depositor whose deposit is released withoutauthorization. If anything, escrow agents should be subject to strictliability for unauthorized disclosure of keys. 2. No stability in escrow rules: The Administration has specificallydeclared that it will not seek to have the escrow procedures incorporatedinto legislation or official regulations. Without formalization of rules,users have no guaranty that subsequent administrations will follow the samerules or offer the users the same degree of protection. This will greatlyreduce the trust in the system. 3. Fixed Key: A cardinal rule of computer security is that encryptionkeys must be changed often. Since the Clipper keys are locked permanentlyinto the chips, the keys can never be changed. This is a major technicalweakness of the current proposal. 4. Less intrusive, more secure escrow alternatives are available: TheClipper proposal represents only one of many possible kinds of key escrowsystems. More security could be provided by having more than two escrowagents. And, in order to increase public trust, some or all of theseagents could be non-governmental agencies, with the traditional fiduciaryduties of an escrow agent. D. Escrow Systems Threaten Fundamental Constitutional Values The Administration, Congress, and the public ought to have theopportunity to consider the implications of limitations on cryptographyfrom a constitutional perspective. A delicate balance betweenconstitutional privacy rights and the needs of law enforcement has beencrafted over the history of this country. We must act carefully as we facethe constitutional challenges posed by new communication technologies. Unraveling the current encryption policy tangle must begin with onethreshold question: will there come a day when the federal governmentcontrols the domestic use of encryption through mandated key escrow schemesor outright prohibitions against the use of particular encryptiontechnologies? Is Clipper the first step in this direction? A mandatoryencryption regime raises profound constitutional questions. In the era where people work for "virtual corporations" and conductpersonal and political lives in "cyberspace," the distinction betweencommunication of information and storage of information is increasinglyvague. The organization in which one works may constitute a single virtualspace, but be physically dispersed. So, the papers and files of theorganization or individual may be moved within the organization by means oftelecommunications technology. Instantaneous access to encryption keys,without prior notice to the communicating parties, may well constitute asecret search, if the target is a virtual corporation or an individualwhose "papers" are physically dispersed. Wiretapping and other electronic surveillance has always beenrecognized as an exception to the fundamental Fourth Amendment prohibitionagainst secret searches. Even with a valid search warrant, law enforcementagents must "knock and announce" their intent to search a premises beforeproceeding. Failure to do so violates the Fourth Amendment. Until now,the law of search and seizure has made a sharp distinction between, on theone hand, seizures of papers and other items in a person's physicalpossession, and on the other hand, wiretapping of communications. Seizureof papers or personal effects must be conducted with the owner's knowledge,upon presentation of a search warrant. Only in the exceptional case ofwiretapping, may a person's privacy be invaded by law enforcement withoutsimultaneously informing that person. Proposals to regulate the use of cryptography for the sake of lawenforcement efficiency should be viewed carefully in the centuries oldtradition of privacy protection. E. Voluntary escrow system will not meet law enforcement needs Finally, despite all of the troubling aspects of the Clipperproposal, it is by no means clear that it will even solve the problems thatlaw enforcement has identified. The major stated rationale for governmentintervention in the domestic encryption arena is to ensure that lawenforcement has access to criminal communications, even if they areencrypted. Yet, a voluntary scheme seems inadequate to meet this goal.Criminals who seek to avoid interception and decryption of theircommunications would simply use another system, free from escrowprovisions. Unless a government-proposed encryption scheme is mandatory,it would fail to achieve its primary law enforcement purpose. In avoluntary regime, only the law-abiding would use the escrow system. III. Recent policy developments indicate that Administration policy isbad for the NII, contrary to the Computer Security Act, and requiresCongressional oversight Along with the Clipper Chip proposal, the Administration announceda comprehensive review of cryptography and privacy policy. Almostimmediately after the Clipper announcement, the Digital Privacy andSecurity Working Group began discussions with the Administration on issuesraised by the Clipper proposal and by cryptography in general.Unfortunately, this dialogue has been largely one-sided. EFF and manyother groups have provided extensive input to the Administration, yet theAdministration has not reciprocated -- the promised policy report has notbeen forthcoming. Moreover, the National Security Agency and the FederalBureau of Investigation are proceeding unilaterally to implement their owngoals in this critical policy area. Allowing these agencies to proceed unilaterally would be a gravemistake. As this subcommittee is well aware, the Computer Security Act of1987 clearly established that neither military nor law enforcement agenciesare the proper protectors of personal privacy. When considering the law,Congress asked, "whether it is proper for a super-secret agency [the NSA]that operates without public scrutiny to involve itself in domesticactivities...?" The answer was a clear "no." Recent Administrationannouncements regarding the Clipper Chip suggest that the principleestablished in the 1987 Act has been circumvented. As important as the principle of civilian control was in 1987, itis even more critical today. The more individuals around the country cometo depend on secure communications to protect their privacy, the moreimportant it is to conduct privacy and security policy dialogues in public,civilian forums. The NII can grow into the kind of critical, national resource whichthis Administration seeks to promote only if major changes in currentcryptography and privacy policy. In the absence of such changes, digitaltechnology will continue to rapidly render our commercial activities andcommunications -- and, indeed, much of our personal lives -- open toscrutiny by strangers. The Electronic Frontier Foundation believes thatAmericans must be allowed access to the cryptographic tools necessary toprotect their own privacy. We had hoped that the Administration was committed to making thesechanges, but several recent developments lead us to fear that the efforthas been abandoned, leaving individual agencies to pursue their own policyagendas instead of being guided by a comprehensive policy. The followingissues concern us: * Delayed Cryptography Policy ReportThe policy analysis called foralong with the April 16, 1993 Presidential Decision Directive has not beenreleased, though it was promised to have been completed by early fall of1993. We had hoped that this report would be the basis for public dialogueon the important privacy, competitiveness, and law enforcement issuesraised by cryptography policy. To date, none of the Administration'spolicy rationale has been revealed to the public, despite the fact thatagencies in the Executive Branch are proceeding with their own plan * Escrowed Encryption Federal Information Processing Standard (FIPS)approved against overwhelming weight of public commentsThe PresidentialDecision Directive also called for consideration of a Federal InformationProcessing Standard (FIPS) for key-escrow encryption systems. This processwas to have been one of several forums whereby those concerned about theproposed key-escrow system could voice opinions. EFF, as well as over 225of our individual members, raised a number of serious concerns about thedraft FIPS in September of this 1993. EFF expressed its opposition togovernment implementation of key-escrow systems as proposed. We continueto oppose the deployment of Skipjack family escrow encryption systems bothbecause they violate fundamental First, Fourth, and Fifth amendmentprinciples, and because they fail to offer users adequate security andflexibility.Despite overwhelming opposition from over 300 commenters, theDepartment of Commerce recently approved FIPS 185. * Large-Scale Skipjack Deployment AnnouncedAt the December 9, 1993meeting of the Computer Systems Security and Privacy Advisory Board, an NSAofficial announced plans to deploy from 10,000 to 70,000 Skipjack devicesin the Defense Messaging System in the near future. The exact size of theorder was said to be dependent only on budget constraints. TheAdministration is on record in the national press promising that nolarge-scale Skipjack deployment would occur until a final report of theAdministration Task Force was complete. Ten thousand units was set as theupper limit of initial deployment. Skipjack deployment at the levelplanned in the Defense Messaging System circumvents both the FIPS noticeand comments process which has been left in a state of limbo, as well asthe Administration's promise of a comprehensive policy framework. * New FBI Digital Telephony Legislation ProposedThe FBI recentlyproposed a new "Digital Telephony" bill. After initial analysis, westrongly oppose the bill, which would require all common carriers toconstruct their networks to deliver to law enforcement agencies, in realtime, both the contents of all communications on their networks and the"signaling" or transactional information. In short, the bill lays the groundwork for turning the NationalInformation Infrastructure into a nation-wide surveillance system, to beused by law enforcement with few technical or legal safeguards. This imageis not hyperbole, but a real assessment of the power of the technology andinadequacy of current legal and technical privacy protections for users ofcommunications networks. Although the FBI suggests that the bill is primarily designed tomaintain status quo wiretap capability in the face of technologicalchanges, in fact, it seeks vast new surveillance and monitoring tools. Lengthy delays on the promised policy report, along with theseunilateral steps toward Clipper/Skipjack deployment, lead us to believethat Administration policy is stalled by the Cold War-era national securityconcerns that have characterized cryptography policy for the last severaldecades. EFF believes that it would be a disastrous error to allow nationalinformation policy -- now a critical component of domestic policy -- to bedictated solely by backward-looking national-security priorities andunsubstantiated law-enforcement claims. The directions set by thisAdministration will have a major impact on privacy, information security,and the fundamental relationship between the government and individualautonomy. This is why the Administration must take action--and do sobefore the aforementioned agencies proceed further--to ensure thatcryptography policy is restructured to serve the interests of privacy andsecurity in the National Information Infrastructure. We still believe theAdministration can play the leadership role it was meant to play in shapingthis policy. If it does not, the potential of the NII, and of fundamentalcivil liberties in the information age, will be threatened. IV. Congressional oversight of cryptography & privacy policy isurgently needed to right the balance between privacy, competitiveness & lawenforcement needs All participants in this debate recognize that the need for privacyand security is real, and that new technologies pose real challenges forlaw enforcement and national security operations. However, the solutionsnow on the table cripple the NII, pose grave threats to privacy, and failto even meet law enforcement objectives. In our judgment, theAdministration has failed, thus far, to articulate a comprehensive set ofpolicies which will advance the goals upon which we all agree. Congress must act now to ensure that cryptography policy isdeveloped in the context of the broader goal of promoting the developmentof an advanced, interoperable, secure, information infrastructure. In order to meet the privacy and security needs of the growinginfrastructure, Congress should seek a set of public policies which promotethe widespread availability of cryptographic systems according to thefollowing criteria: * Use Voluntary Standards to Promote Innovation and Meet DiverseNeeds: The National Information Infrastructure stretches to encompassdevices as diverse as super computers, handheld personal digital assistantsand other wireless communications devices, and plain old telephones.Communication will be carried over copper wires, fiber optic cables, andsatellite links. The users of the infrastructure will range fromelementary school children to federal agencies. Encryption standards mustbe allowed to develop flexibly to meet the wide-ranging needs allcomponents of the NII. In its IITF Report, the Administration finds that standards also must be compatible with the large installed base ofcommunications technologies, and flexible and adaptable enough to meet userneeds at affordable costs. [AA, 9]The diverse uses of the NII require that any standard which the governmentseeks to promote as a broadly deployed solution should be implementable insoftware as well as hardware and based on widely available algorithms. * Develop Trusted Algorithms and End-to-End Security: Assuringcurrent and future users of the NII that their communications are secureand their privacy is protected is a critical task. This means that theunderlying algorithms adopted must have a high level of public trust andthe overall systems put in place must be secure. * Encourage National and International Interoperability: The promiseof the NII is seamless national and international communications of alltypes. Any cryptographic standard offered for widespread use must allow UScorporations and individuals to function as part of the global economy andglobal communications infrastructure. * Seek Reasonable Cooperation with Law Enforcement and NationalSecurity Needs: New technologies pose new challenges to law enforcementand national security surveillance activities. American industry iscommitted to working with law enforcement to help meet its legitimatesurveillance needs, but the development of the NII should not be stalled onthis account. * Promote Constitutional Rights of Privacy and Adhere to TraditionalFourth Amendment Search and Seizure Rules: New technology can either be athreat or an aid to protection of fundamental privacy rights. Governmentpolicy should promote technologies which enable individuals to protecttheir privacy and be sure that those technologies are governed by lawswhich respect the long history of constitutional search and seizurerestraints. * Maintain Civilian Control over Public Computer and CommunicationsSecurity: In accordance with the Computer Security Act of 1987,development of security and privacy standards should be directed by thecivilian V. Conclusion Among the most important roles that the federal government has inNII deployment are setting standards and guaranteeing privacy and security.Without adequate security and privacy, the NII will never realize iteconomic or social potential. Cryptography policy must, of course, takeinto account the needs of law enforcement and national security agencies,but cannot be driven by these concerns alone. The Working Group, alongwith other industry and public interest organizations, is committed toworking with the Administration to solving the privacy and securityquestions raised by the growing NII. This must be done based on theprinciples of voluntary standards, promotion of innovation, concern for lawenforcement needs, and protection of constitutional rights of privacy.* * * * * WT02-B12-143IA087-000631-B026-261http://res2.resnet.upenn.edu:80/cis590/reading.173.html 130.91.195.242 19970122071423 text/html 5051HTTP/1.0 200 OKDate: Wed, 22 Jan 1997 07:14:24 GMTServer: Apache/1.1.1Content-type: text/htmlContent-length: 4880Last-modified: Tue, 22 Nov 1994 06:33:33 GMT50 percent increase in electronic surveillance in 1993 Date: Fri, 13 May 1994 09:18:42 -0400From: Joshua Marcus <josh>Posted-Date: Fri, 13 May 1994 09:18:42 -0400To: farberSubject: 50 percent increase in electronic surveillance in 1993 I thought you might find this AP clipping of interest, especiallyin the context of the pro-Clipper argument that there's really minimaleavesdropping going on, despite all the static. AP 05/12 11:10 EDT V0936 Copyright 1994. The Associated Press. All Rights Reserved. WASHINGTON (AP) -- A nearly 50 percent increase in wiretaps and microphonesaimed at suspected drug traffickers pushed federal eavesdropping to a recordhigh during the first year of the Clinton administration. Overall, electronic monitoring by federal agents grew by almost a third in1993, the largest increase in a decade, according to figures released by theAdministrative Office for U.S. Courts. No single event produced the 1993 increase, federal officials say. Rather,they attribute it to progress in a decade-long effort to concentrateinvestigations on the kingpins of sophisticated drug rings. "It takes time to get something in place in any federal agency," said RobertC. Bonner, who stepped down as head of the Drug Enforcement Administration inNovember 1993. "It's like turning a battleship." Attorney General Janet Reno said today that drug investigators complained toher last year that some U.S. attorney's offices had few prosecutors experiencedin wiretap cases. "We've tried to increase the training so people with wiretapexpertise are available throughout the country," she said. "That may be one ofthe reasons for the increase." Federal court orders approving telephone taps or electronic bugs fornarcotics investigations grew to 333 from 226 the year before. The 1993 total of 450 federal surveillance orders was the highest since a1968 law authorized federal wiretapping. They represented a 32.4 percentincrease over the 340 orders in 1992. The last year with a bigger increase in total federal eavesdropping orderswas 1984, when there were 289, or 38.9 percent more than the 208 a year earlier.Drug enforcement also was the engine then: 1984 was the first full year of workfor a nationwide network of organized crime drug enforcement task forces,combining the efforts of 11 federal offices. "Agents are learning they can use wiretaps effectively in these cases so theFBI and DEA are doing more and more," said Frederick Hess, head of the JusticeDepartment office that reviews all federal requests to courts for surveillanceorders. Somewhat bigger jumps occur in years when more agents finish long-terminvestigations at the same time and begin new ones, Hess added. DEA once had "a reputation of concentrating on street-level buy-bustoperations," Bonner said. By late 1991 Bonner formulated and in 1992-3implemented a strategy of focusing on kingpins of major regional andinternational cocaine and heroin rings. By late 1993, DEA was operating four times as many drug wiretaps as the FBIand for first time had more active drug wiretaps than the FBI had in all typesof criminal investigations, Bonner said. The FBI, which pioneered investigative attacks on the leadership of criminalenterprises, particularly with electronic surveillance, brought that expertiseto its first drug investigations in the early 1980s. "The DEA and FBI have moved away from drug interdiction because we have moreimpact through wiretap and undercover techniques that keep us more informed ofthe inner workings of the organizations," said Tom Martin, who heads an FBIheadquarters unit that coordinates drug task forces. Among surveillances completed in 1993, a microphone placed inside a NewJersey lawyer's office in a racketeering case operated for 435 days, overheard65 people and cost the government $517,673 -- the year's longest and mostexpensive federal eavesdropping. Hess said it was in the Camden, N.J., office of Salvatore Avena, lawyer toreputed Philadelphia mob boss John Stanfa. Stanfa, Avena and 22 others wereindicted on racketeering-related charges March 17. The government told the courtthe law office was used for meetings, at which the murder of rivals was planned,"to evade electronic surveillance by fraudulently creating the appearance thatthese were legally proper meetings." The microphone picked up Avena telling Stanfa in a demonstration of loyalty,"If you want me to put my brains in the toilet, I'll put my brains in thetoilet," prosecutors said. There was a 10 percent decrease in electronic surveillance by state and locallaw officers during 1993, from 579 to 526. New York, with 204 state courtorders, New Jersey, with 121, and Pennsylvania, with 61, accounted for 73percent of the state surveillances. --Josh WT02-B12-144IA087-000631-B026-288http://res2.resnet.upenn.edu:80/cis590/reading.174.html 130.91.195.242 19970122071440 text/html 6542HTTP/1.0 200 OKDate: Wed, 22 Jan 1997 07:14:43 GMTServer: Apache/1.1.1Content-type: text/htmlContent-length: 6371Last-modified: Tue, 22 Nov 1994 06:33:34 GMTUK's Independent on Clipper as published in the Daily Yomiuri [sent by Japanese IPer] Posted-Date: Fri, 13 May 1994 00:35:31 -0400 from "View from Europe: The Independent", supplement to The DailyYomiuri, 5/13/94, page 11a: SPOOKS ALL SET TO HACK IT ON THE SUPERHIGHWAY -- Europe fears US plans to let spy agencies monitor electronic mailfor criminial content will be open to abuse, writes LEONARD DOYLE A row is brewing between Europe and America over US plans toallow intelligence agencies to monitor information on computerchannels. Washington believes E-mail -- electronic messages travellingat the speed of light on the information superhighway -- is a conduitfor messages without fear of detection. The US plan for a Clipper chip, which lets intelligenceagencies crack encrypted computer messages, has raised fears amongEuropean business that sensitive information would no longer be secretif it were vetted by the CIA, the FBI, or GCHQ, the BritishGovernment's eavesdropping facility. E-mail is rapidly taking over from "snail-mail," as postalservices are dismissively known. There are an estimated 20 million users on the worldwide webof computer networks known as Internet. But in 10 years it ispredicted 80 percent of trade information will be sent by this method. The Clinton administration, concerned that terrorists,money-launderers, and drug dealers will use E-mail to send encryptedinformation to associates, wants to outlaw the use of privateencruption on international computer networks. The global censorship plan has run up against opposition fromEuropean and American businesses that use encryption to send sensitiveinformation. In a position paper to a committee of European Unionintelligence experts, which has been obtained by the Independent, theEuropean organisation representing users of computer security hasrejected the Clinton initiative as "totally unacceptable." The statement by the Information Security Business AdvisoryGroup (Ibag) warns European governments to ignore overtures from theUS government aimed at restricting access to the informationsuperhighway to users who use encryption that the government agenciescan decode. The European position is that "industry needs to know when itssensitive data has been compromised [by the security services orothers]" and that the US eavesdropping initiative will greatly reducethe benefits of the information superhighway. Companies "will berestricted to a very restricted list of 'approved' algorithms[encryption methods]" greatly adding to business costs and makinginternational cooperation difficult. Ibag recently informed the senior officials group oninformation security that the planned US-style restrictions, or theeven stricter French system under which those using cyphers mustdisclose the keys to the authorities, are "totally unacceptable" toindustry. The European group has proposed that companies deposit thekeys to their encryption cyphers with "trusted third parties" ratherthan with governments. With this system, when intelligence agencieswant to tap messages, the company will have to be notified. Chriss Sund, a computer-security expert, said companies facedreal dangers of economic espionage by governments. "There was a general instinct among companies to distrust theFrench," he said, who he claimed used government controls onencryption "to their advantage." Stephen Dorril, an expert on the intelligence services, claimsthat the US proposal is designed to facilitate economic espionage. GCHQ, which has been cooperating hand-in-glove with the US forthe past 50 years, finds itself caught in the middle of this EU-USdispute. Britain will eventually have to square cooperation onintelligence and encryption across the Atlantic with the demands ofits European partners. Under the US initiative, use of computer or voice encruptionwhich cannot readily be hacked into by the secruity services ofcooperating governments will be deemed suspcious and worthy ofsurveillance. These users will be denied access to the informationsuperhighway. The US has decided to replace private encryption withthe Clipper chip. This enables government agencies to listen in onconversations and intecept and decode data flows at will. HowEuropean governments intend to tackle the problem of terrorists andother criminals using encruption to stay ahead of the law is notknown, but there has traditionally been a close working relationshipbetween the National Security Agency in the US and the GCHQ inBritain. The clash over encryption could have serious implications forthe development of the information superhighway, which has been hailedin Brussels and Washington as a way of increasing competitivesness anddelivering a boost to the economics of the industrialised world. If European businesses are blocked from using the USinformation superhighway because they will not bow to US pressure, theEU may be forced to develop its own independent system, adding to thecost and hastening the division of the world into three rival tradingblocs, the US, the EU, and Asia. Sidebars: * How E-mail helps criminals avoid detection - Today when a user transmits messges in code on the Internet, theinternational computer network, government intelligence servicescannot listen in. - Modern encryption cannot be cracked but if users are forced to usethe Clipper chip, intelligence services could then eavesdrop. - The US has introduce the Clipper chip, a way of encryptingmessages while allowing government intelligence services access totransmissions. This is possible through a "key" used to encrypt themessage. The government holds a duplicate key that allows it todecode transmissions. - Europe is opposed to the Clipper chip because it fears that theFBI or CIA could target European businesses. A suggested alternativeis that the "keys" to coded messages should be deposited with anon-government trusted third party. * Dangerous traffic on the information superhighway: - Terrorism - Drug trafficking - Neo-Nazi organisations - Pornography - Industrial espionage - Mondey laundering WT02-B12-145IA087-000631-B026-324http://res2.resnet.upenn.edu:80/cis590/reading.175.html 130.91.195.242 19970122071515 text/html 5051HTTP/1.0 200 OKDate: Wed, 22 Jan 1997 07:15:14 GMTServer: Apache/1.1.1Content-type: text/htmlContent-length: 4880Last-modified: Tue, 22 Nov 1994 06:33:35 GMT50 percent increase in electronic surveillance in 1993 Date: Fri, 13 May 1994 09:18:42 -0400From: Joshua Marcus <josh>Posted-Date: Fri, 13 May 1994 09:18:42 -0400To: farberSubject: 50 percent increase in electronic surveillance in 1993 I thought you might find this AP clipping of interest, especiallyin the context of the pro-Clipper argument that there's really minimaleavesdropping going on, despite all the static. AP 05/12 11:10 EDT V0936 Copyright 1994. The Associated Press. All Rights Reserved. WASHINGTON (AP) -- A nearly 50 percent increase in wiretaps and microphonesaimed at suspected drug traffickers pushed federal eavesdropping to a recordhigh during the first year of the Clinton administration. Overall, electronic monitoring by federal agents grew by almost a third in1993, the largest increase in a decade, according to figures released by theAdministrative Office for U.S. Courts. No single event produced the 1993 increase, federal officials say. Rather,they attribute it to progress in a decade-long effort to concentrateinvestigations on the kingpins of sophisticated drug rings. "It takes time to get something in place in any federal agency," said RobertC. Bonner, who stepped down as head of the Drug Enforcement Administration inNovember 1993. "It's like turning a battleship." Attorney General Janet Reno said today that drug investigators complained toher last year that some U.S. attorney's offices had few prosecutors experiencedin wiretap cases. "We've tried to increase the training so people with wiretapexpertise are available throughout the country," she said. "That may be one ofthe reasons for the increase." Federal court orders approving telephone taps or electronic bugs fornarcotics investigations grew to 333 from 226 the year before. The 1993 total of 450 federal surveillance orders was the highest since a1968 law authorized federal wiretapping. They represented a 32.4 percentincrease over the 340 orders in 1992. The last year with a bigger increase in total federal eavesdropping orderswas 1984, when there were 289, or 38.9 percent more than the 208 a year earlier.Drug enforcement also was the engine then: 1984 was the first full year of workfor a nationwide network of organized crime drug enforcement task forces,combining the efforts of 11 federal offices. "Agents are learning they can use wiretaps effectively in these cases so theFBI and DEA are doing more and more," said Frederick Hess, head of the JusticeDepartment office that reviews all federal requests to courts for surveillanceorders. Somewhat bigger jumps occur in years when more agents finish long-terminvestigations at the same time and begin new ones, Hess added. DEA once had "a reputation of concentrating on street-level buy-bustoperations," Bonner said. By late 1991 Bonner formulated and in 1992-3implemented a strategy of focusing on kingpins of major regional andinternational cocaine and heroin rings. By late 1993, DEA was operating four times as many drug wiretaps as the FBIand for first time had more active drug wiretaps than the FBI had in all typesof criminal investigations, Bonner said. The FBI, which pioneered investigative attacks on the leadership of criminalenterprises, particularly with electronic surveillance, brought that expertiseto its first drug investigations in the early 1980s. "The DEA and FBI have moved away from drug interdiction because we have moreimpact through wiretap and undercover techniques that keep us more informed ofthe inner workings of the organizations," said Tom Martin, who heads an FBIheadquarters unit that coordinates drug task forces. Among surveillances completed in 1993, a microphone placed inside a NewJersey lawyer's office in a racketeering case operated for 435 days, overheard65 people and cost the government $517,673 -- the year's longest and mostexpensive federal eavesdropping. Hess said it was in the Camden, N.J., office of Salvatore Avena, lawyer toreputed Philadelphia mob boss John Stanfa. Stanfa, Avena and 22 others wereindicted on racketeering-related charges March 17. The government told the courtthe law office was used for meetings, at which the murder of rivals was planned,"to evade electronic surveillance by fraudulently creating the appearance thatthese were legally proper meetings." The microphone picked up Avena telling Stanfa in a demonstration of loyalty,"If you want me to put my brains in the toilet, I'll put my brains in thetoilet," prosecutors said. There was a 10 percent decrease in electronic surveillance by state and locallaw officers during 1993, from 579 to 526. New York, with 204 state courtorders, New Jersey, with 121, and Pennsylvania, with 61, accounted for 73percent of the state surveillances. --Josh WT02-B12-146IA087-000631-B026-351http://res2.resnet.upenn.edu:80/cis590/reading.176.html 130.91.195.242 19970122071535 text/html 6933HTTP/1.0 200 OKDate: Wed, 22 Jan 1997 07:15:33 GMTServer: Apache/1.1.1Content-type: text/htmlContent-length: 6762Last-modified: Tue, 22 Nov 1994 06:33:36 GMTJacking in from the SNAFU Port: CyberWire Dispatch // Copyright (c) 1994 // Jacking in from the SNAFU Port: Washington, DC -- Matthew Blaze never intended to make the frontpage of the New York Times. He was just doing his job: Nosearound inside the government's most secret, most revered encryptioncode to see if he could "break it." Blaze, a researcher for AT&T Bell Labs, was good at this particularjob. Maybe a bit too good. Although he didn't actually "break" thecode, he did bend the fuck out of it. That feat landed him a frontpage story in the June 9 issue of the New York Times. What Blaze found -- and quietly distributed among colleagues andfederal agencies in a draft paper -- was that design bugs inSkipjack, the computer code that underlies the Clipper Chipencryption scheme, can be jacked around, and re-scrambled so thatnot even the Feds can crack it. This of course defeats the wholepurpose of the Clipper Chip, which is to allow ONLY the governmentthe ability to eavesdrop on Clipper encoded conversations, faxes,data transmissions, etc. What Blaze's research attacks is something called the LEAF, short for "LawEnforcement Access Field." The LEAF contains the secret access code neededby law enforcement agents to decode the scrambled messages. Blazediscovered that the LEAF uses only a 16- bit checksum, which is a kind ofself-checking mathematical equation. When the checksum equations match up,the code is valid and everything's golden. The cops get to unscramble theconversations and another kiddie porn ring is brought to justice. (This iswhat the FBI will tell you... again and again and again and... ) But you can generate a valid 16-bit checksum in about 20 minutes,according to those crypto-rebels that traffic the Internet's Cypherpunksmailing list. "A 16-bit checksum is fucking joke," one cryptographicexpert from the list told Dispatch. "If it weren't so laughable, I'd beinsulted that all this tax payer money has gone into the R&D of somethingso flawed." But the New York Times got the story *wrong* or at least it gave only partof the story. "What the New York Times story didn't say was that thefindings... had nothing to do with the Government standard, which coversvoice, facsimile and low-speed data transmission," said an AT&T spokesman.AT&T was the first company to publicly support the Clipper Chip. A stancethat was essentially bought and paid for by the U.S. government with thepromise it would get big government contracts to sell Clipper equippedphones to Uncle Sam, according to documents previously obtained byDispatch. The AT&T spokesman said the "frailty" that Blaze discovered doesn'tactually exist in the Clipper Chip applications. "Our scientists,working with National Security Agency (NSA) scientists, wereconducting research on proposed future extensions of the standard,"he said. Those "future extensions" are the so-called Tessera chip, intended to beembedded in a PCMCIA credit card sized device that fits into a slot in yourcomputer. When the NSA trotted out its Tessera card, it invited Blaze, among others,to review the technology, essentially becoming a beta-tester for the NSA.No formal contract was signed, no money changed hands. Blaze took on thejob in a volunteer role. Using a prototype Tessera chip installed on aPCMCIA card, he broke the damn thing. AT&T claims the whole scenario is different from the Clipper because theLEAF generated by Clipper "is a real time application... with Tessera it'sstatic," the spokesman said. He said Tessera would be used to encryptstored communications or Email. "And with Tessera, the user has theability to get at the LEAF," he said, "with Clipper, you don't." Blaze will deliver his paper, titled "Protocol Failure in the EscrowedEncryption Standard," this fall during the Fairfax Conference. Hisfindings "should be helpful" to the government "as it explores futureapplications," of its new encryption technology the AT&T spokesman said."In our view, it's better to learn a technology's limitations while there'stime to make revisions before the Government spends large sums to funddevelopment programs." This is an important, if subtle statement. The Clipper Chip neverunderwent this type of "beta-testing," a fact that's drawn the ire ofgroups such as Computer Professionals for Social Responsibility (CPSR) andthe Electronic Frontier Foundation (EFF). When the White House began totake hits over this ugly situation, it agreed to have an independent panelof experts review the classified code to check for any trapdoors. Those experts claim they found nothing fishy, but their report -- alas--has also been classified, leading to further demands for openness andaccountability. The White House is stalling, naturally. But in an apparent about face, the NSA allowed an "open" beta- testing forTess and -- surprise -- we find out there are bugs in the design. Okay, Pop Quiz time: Does the existence of "Blaze Bug" make you feel: (A)More secure about the government's claim that Clipper will only be used tocatch criminals and not spy on the citizenry. (B) Less secure abouteverything you've ever been told about privacy and encryption by theClinton Administration. (C) Like this entire episode is really anextended "Stupid Pet Tricks" gag being pulled by David Letterman. If you're still unsure about Clipper, check this quote from the AT&Tspokesman: "It's worth noting that Clipper Chip wasn't subjected to thistype of testing." Ah-huh... any questions? The NSA is trying to downplay the news. "Anyone interested incircumventing law enforcement access would most likely choose simpleralternatives," said Michael Smith, the agency's planning director, asquoted by the New York Times. "More difficult and time-consuming efforts,like those discussed in the Blaze paper, are very unlikely to be employed." He's right. Those "simpler alternatives" include everything from privateencryption methods to not using a Clipper equipped phone or fax in thefirst place. (Of course, the FBI keeps insisting that criminals won't useany of this "simpler" knowledge because they are "dumb.") Despite the NSA's attempt to blow off these findings, the agency isgrinding its gears. One NSA source told Dispatch that the Blazepaper is "a major embarrassment for the program." But thesituation is "containable" he said. "There will be a fix." Dispatch asked if there would be a similar review of the Clipper protocolsto see if it could be jacked around like Tess. "No comment," was all hesaid. Meeks out... WT02-B12-147IA087-000631-B026-392http://res2.resnet.upenn.edu:80/cis590/classnote.940203.html 130.91.195.242 19970122071627 text/html 6448HTTP/1.0 200 OKDate: Wed, 22 Jan 1997 07:16:26 GMTServer: Apache/1.1.1Content-type: text/htmlContent-length: 6277Last-modified: Tue, 22 Nov 1994 06:30:40 GMT CIS590: Feb 3rd 1994 CIS590: Feb 3rd 1994 Guest speakers were decided upon.Prof. Farber give an overview of the issues surrounding the Clipperchip, and a syllabus was arrived at: Technology Regulation Export Control Privacy Law Privacy Application Cultural Ethics Intellectual Property Technology Clipper: what is involved RSA and Diffie-Hellman public key systems described more fully in the PGP documentation. DES, the Data Encryption Standard Public Domain Systems Digital Signature Standard Spread Spectrum A signal is broken up and redundantly distributed across certain channels in a spectrum. A receiving unit can reassemble the message if it knows which channels to listen to. This isn't exactly encryption but works in the same spirit. Nontrivial to tap. Used in cordless phone systems, etc. Regulation of Cryptography National (within USA) there may be weak controls during wartime, but there is nothing very strong. International (non USA) in France, any use of cryptography is illegal, save whichever schemes are approved by the government, and for which a set of decoding keys are registered with and held by the government. Export Control It is illegal in the USA to export any cryptography technology, except some really weak stuff. [I believe this is under a munitions act. -meng] also, there are export contorls on high performance electronics: the Pentium qualifies as high performance. COCOM is a group of largely Western governments agreeing not to sell technology to hostile countries. Import controls on the other hand are much weaker. One may import stuff which one may not export. As a result, USA companies are in a bad situation commercially. It makes no sense to create two sets of software, one which may be exported, the other for USA use only. Export controls are well nigh impossible to implement: consider the ease of FTP. Privacy Law There are several overlapping levels and areas in which privacy lawsapply. Note that in fields as new as this, the law is what courtsdecide, not what is written. Relevant legislation are the ElectronicCommunication Privacy Act, and the Electronic Communicaton Mail Act.The former is worded to send a clear message: government employeescharged under the Act may not use federal funds to help defendtheir cases. This is significant because normally the JusticeDepartment helps defray costs. Here, one is left to hang. Constitutional Nothing in the Constution mentions the right to privacy. Relevant Amendments, however, do have a bearing: First Amendment: the right to free speech would imply that one has also the right to the converse: the right to not be overheard. Fourth Amendment: illegal search and seizure could conceivably extend to information. Fifth Amendment: the right not to incriminate oneself. State Federal Privacy Application There are a number of distinct places in which different laws andstandards apply. Three are of interest: Home. Maximal privacy is expected. Workplace. Less privacy. There are two subcases: Real workplaces, in a job setting. Does the employer have the right to monitor employee communication? "Common sense" says no, but courts may differ. The computer is owned by the company. Schools. Universities, unlike high schools and elementary schools, do not have the right of "loco parentis". Students are paying customers, and part of what they pay for is an email account. Public Spaces. Very little privacy can be expected. Cultural Ethics Unlike the rapid pace of case law, popular opinion is very slow tochange. A study of attitudes in American history is relevant. Intellectual Property What is ownership? In cyberspace, vessels of value are whollyintangible. John Perry Barlow's articleis very relevant to this issue. Miscellaneous Topics Economics At least three economic issues are relevant: Cost to maintain the system Cost to install the chip Cost of using the system 2 hour presentations will be given in the major topics: Technology (Feb 17) Alex Mallet, ale@seas Derron Simon, dsimon@seas Terri Bissonette, bissonne@gradient.cis.upenn.edu Regulation (Feb 24) Nathan Gasser, gasser@seas Meng Weng Wong, mengwong@seas Karla Eusebio, karla@gradient.cis Export Control (March 17) Lisa Weitzman, weitzmal@gradient.cis.upenn.edu Mary Palan, mpalan@gradient.cis.upenn.edu Privacy Law (March 24) Phil Kovacs, kovacs@ben.dev.upenn.edu Sam Alcoff, alcoff@eniac.seas.upenn.edu Privacy Application (March 31) Mahesh Prakriya, prakriya@gradient.cis Nizar Hirani, hirani@gradient.cis.upenn.edu Intellectual Property (April 7) Scott Herskowitz, srh@seas Sang Lee, lees@seas Chris Chang, chrisc@seas Cultural Ethics (unassigned) Other (unassigned) Andrew Hooper, ahooper@eniac.seas.upenn.edu (absent) Jeff Chung, jdchung@seas (late) Dhaneesh kumbhani@seas (absent) Dave millar@pobox (absent) Sarah pong@seas (floated off) Carter Page, cpage@seas (floated off) go back to main CIS590 page go back to class notes pageWT02-B12-148IA087-000631-B027-250http://res2.resnet.upenn.edu:80/cis590/ 130.91.195.242 19970122071941 text/html 2299HTTP/1.0 200 OKDate: Wed, 22 Jan 1997 07:19:43 GMTServer: Apache/1.1.1Content-type: text/htmlContent-length: 2174 CIS590: Computers, Ethics, and Society CIS590: Computers, Ethics, and Society This course will investigate the various issues and facets of Computer Crime and Computer Ethics. Some topics to be researched include: general ethics (utilitarian, kantian, nicomachean), privacy, data protection, employee privacy, data regulation, artificial intelligence, information technology and the third world, the "look-and-feel" issue, computer malfunction liability, computer crime (electronic trespassing), and the Professional Responsibility of the Computer User. Announcements You are reminded to check the newsgroup upenn.cis.cis590 for the latest information. Readings and References An overview of the topic of regulation. Summaries presented by Meng, Dhaneesh, and Nate are available. Intellectual Property presentation by Carter Page, Sang Lee, Scott Herskowitz, and Chris Chang. go to the readings distributed by Professor Farber. go to the class notes of each class go to the net resources found on the Clipper Chip go to the guest list of invited speakers. this archive is maintained on a purely voluntary basis by Meng Weng Wong. please email mengwong@seas.upenn.edu with comments. Disclaimer: This document in no way represents the University ofPennsylvania, or David Farber, or even myself. mengwong@seas.upenn.eduWT02-B12-149IA088-000636-B042-203http://migration.ucdavis.edu:80/ 128.120.36.171 19970122184248 text/html 2438HTTP/1.0 200 OKMIME-Version: 1.0Server: WebSTAR/1.3.1 ID/6378Message-ID: Date: Wednesday, 22-Jan-97 18:43:45 GMTLast-Modified: Tuesday, 21-Jan-97 21:06:52 GMTContent-type: text/htmlContent-length: 2183 Migration Dialogue Migration Dialogue Migration Dialogue promotes an informed discussion of the issues associated withinternational migration by providing unbiased and timely information on immigration andintegration issues. Four Migration Dialogue activities are summarized below: thenewsletters Migration News and Rural Migration News, the work of University ofCalifornia researchers, and seminars for European and American opinion leaders. Migration News Rural Migration News Migration Dialogue Briefs, Seminars, Speakers University of California CIIP-CPS More About Migration Dialogue What's New January 7, 1997 - January issue of Migration News is avaiable. December 2, 1996 - December issue of Migration News is available. Try the Migration News search engine. November 5, 1996 - November issue of Migration News is available. October 17, 1996 - October issue of Rural Migration News is available. A total of people have accessed thispage since October 1, 1995. [ Feedback (migrant@primal.ucdavis.edu) ] WT02-B12-150IA088-000636-B042-209http://migration.ucdavis.edu:80/mn/mntxt.htm 128.120.36.171 19970122184259 text/html 4971HTTP/1.0 200 OKMIME-Version: 1.0Server: WebSTAR/1.3.1 ID/6378Message-ID: Date: Wednesday, 22-Jan-97 18:43:57 GMTLast-Modified: Tuesday, 21-Jan-97 21:07:07 GMTContent-type: text/htmlContent-length: 4716 Text Based version of Migration News Migration News Migration News summarizes the most important immigration and integration developments of the preceding month. Migration News Rural Migration News Migration Dialogue Acitivities University of California CIIP-CPS Archive By Month or Search by keyword(s). Data Links Subscribe Vol. 4, No. 1 January 1997 NORTH AMERICA Immigration, Naturalization Up in FY96 Ethnic Voting in 1996 Expanding Access to Asylum Implementing Welfare Changes INS: Management Woes/Enforcement Mexico: Dual Citizenship and NAFTA Canada: Immigration Goals-Reality Gap Caribbean Migration to the US Affirmative Action and Official English EUROPE EU Proposes Common Immigration Policy Labor Mobility and Social Dumping Germany-Kohl: Immigration Affects Unemployment France: Tougher Immigration Laws/Enforcement? Italy: Legalization Finally Approved Czech Immigration/Bulgarian Emigration Swiss Referendum on Asylum Greece/Cyprus Russia and Central Asian Republics UK Employer Sanctions ASIA Asian Labor Migration Malaysia: New Agency and Crackdown Japan: Boat People and Citizenship Hong Kong and China Philippines: Regulating Migrant Conditions Indonesia: Substitute Natives for Foreigners Korea To Increase Foreign Trainees Singapore Steps up Enforcement OTHER Australia/New Zealand US and World Population Immigration into Venezuela RESOURCES [ About ] [Feedback (migrant@primal.ucdavis.edu) ] [MD Home ] Supporters [ German Marshall Fund of the US ] [ PewCharitable Trusts ] [ UC Center for German and European Studies ] WT02-B12-151IA088-000636-B042-211http://migration.ucdavis.edu:80/rmn/rmntxt.htm 128.120.36.171 19970122184305 text/html 3876HTTP/1.0 200 OKMIME-Version: 1.0Server: WebSTAR/1.3.1 ID/6378Message-ID: Date: Wednesday, 22-Jan-97 18:44:04 GMTLast-Modified: Tuesday, 21-Jan-97 21:07:07 GMTContent-type: text/htmlContent-length: 3621 Text Based version of Rural Migration News Rural Migration News Rural Migration News summarizes the most important immigration andintegration developments affecting rural America during the precedingquarter. Migration News Rural Migration News Migration Dialogue Acitivities University of California CIIP-CPS Archives By Region or by Month Changing Face of Rural America Links 1. LMI-Ag Data 1. CARUCOM 2. CENSUS 3. CA 881 Commodity Wage Data 87-95 Search Subscribe October 1996 RURAL COMMUNITIES Immigrants in Midwestern Meatpacking Latinos in Southern Poultry Immigrants in Rural California Latinos in the Northeast Rural Renaissance? Hispanic Housing Discrimination FARM WORKERS Non UFW Elections at Stawberry Farms in 1996 Northeastern/Midwestern Farm Workers Farm Workers in Idaho and Arizona Florida Farm Workers Labor Law Enforcement ALRB/NLRB/Court Decisions IMMIGRATION Immigration and Welfare Changes Immigration Changes Welfare Changes Naturalization Controversy Poverty in America OTHER How We Eat Mexican Tomatoes and Avocados Tomatoes Avocados FVH Agriculture Marketing Orders RESOURCES [ About ] [Feedback (rural@primal.ucdavis.edu) ] [ MD Home ] Supporters [ Gianinni ] [ Kellogg ] [ Mellon ] [ Rosenberg Foundations ] WT02-B12-152IA088-000636-B042-214http://migration.ucdavis.edu:80/mda/mdtxt.htm 128.120.36.171 19970122184313 text/html 2514HTTP/1.0 200 OKMIME-Version: 1.0Server: WebSTAR/1.3.1 ID/6378Message-ID: Date: Wednesday, 22-Jan-97 18:44:11 GMTLast-Modified: Tuesday, 21-Jan-97 21:07:11 GMTContent-type: text/htmlContent-length: 2259 Text Based version of Migration Dialogue Migration News Rural Migration News Migration Dialogue Acitivities University of California CIIP-CPS Migration Dialogue Activities Migration Dialogue is a not-for-profit organization that prepares and distributes timely and unbiased information on international migration, sponsors an annual three-day seminar for American and European opinion leaders to consider migration issues, and maintains a list of speakers willing to discuss migration issues. Migration Briefs are 50 to 75 page monographs that explore the tradeoffs inherent in making decisions about migration. Each helps readers to think through issues such as the linkages between population growth and immigration, refugees and foreign policy, and migration and the environment. International Migration: A Global Challenge Immigration to the United States: Journey to an UncertainDestination MD Seminars are intensive three-day discussions and field trips for American and European opinion leaders to consider, in an off-the-record setting, comparative immigration issues. Chicago April 23-25, 1996 Paris Sept 15-18, 1995 San Diego Nov 19-21, 1994 Nurnberg Oct 23-26, 1993 Migration Speakers is a balanced selection of non-partisan speakers on migration, with a list of supporting materials. Migration Dialogue Speakers Bureau [ About Migration Dialogue Activities ] [ Feedback (migrant@primal.ucdavis.edu)] [ MD Home ] WT02-B12-153IA088-000636-B042-218http://migration.ucdavis.edu:80/cc/cctxt.htm 128.120.36.171 19970122184320 text/html 3798HTTP/1.0 200 OKMIME-Version: 1.0Server: WebSTAR/1.3.1 ID/6378Message-ID: Date: Wednesday, 22-Jan-97 18:44:19 GMTLast-Modified: Tuesday, 21-Jan-97 21:07:07 GMTContent-type: text/htmlContent-length: 3543 Text Based version of UC CIIP CPS Migration News Rural Migration News Migration Dialogue Acitivities University of California CIIP-CPS University of California University of California CIIP and University of California CPS are programsthat support immigration research of UC faculty and graduate students anddiscuss the policy implications of research with state policy makers. Comparative Immigration andIntegration Program The Center for German and European Studies, a systemwide program housed on theUC-Berkeley campus, in January 1994 supported the creation of the ComparativeImmigration and Integration Program to promote interdisciplinary and comparativeresearch on immigration and integration issues facing industrial democracies inNorth America and Europe. The CGES-CIIP each year funds 10 to 20 faculty researchers, and 10 to 20graduate student projects, and holds two to three research work shops. UCfaculty and graduate students interested in comparative migration issues areinvited to participate in the CIIP's research seminars and in the annual RFPcompetition; both are announced in Migration News.For further information, please contact Gia White at the Center for German andEuropean Studies-- gia@uclink.berkeley.edu California Policy Seminar The California Policy Seminar established an Immigration Policy Panel co-chairedby Manuel Garcia y Griego (UCI) and Philip Martin (UCD) in 1995 to help policymakers and opinion leaders understand how immigration and integration issues areaffecting California's economy, politics, and society. The panel supportsresearch, the preparation of option papers, and holds seminars on immigrationissues in Sacramento for state employees who deal with immigration andintegration issues. Announcements Seminar Reports Working Papers/Reports CGES-CIIP October 1996 CGES-CIIP January 1996 CGES-CIIP August 1995 CGES-CIIP April 1995 CGES-CIIP March 1995 CGES-CIIP October 1994 CGES-CIIP April 1994 CGES-CIIP January 1994 Links Announcements Seminar Reports Working Papers/Reports Links CPS Homepage CA Policy Sem ImmigrationPanel October 4, 1996 June 10, 1996 [ Feedback (migrant@primal.ucdavis.edu) ] [ MD Home ] WT02-B12-154IA088-000636-B042-221http://migration.ucdavis.edu:80/about.htm 128.120.36.171 19970122184327 text/html 1001HTTP/1.0 200 OKMIME-Version: 1.0Server: WebSTAR/1.3.1 ID/6378Message-ID: Date: Wednesday, 22-Jan-97 18:44:25 GMTLast-Modified: Tuesday, 21-Jan-97 21:07:09 GMTContent-type: text/htmlContent-length: 747 More About Migration Dialogue About Migration Dialogue More about Migration News ... More about Rural Migration News ... More about Migration Dialogue ... More about University of California CIIP-CPS ... Migration Dialogue HomeWT02-B12-155IA088-000636-B042-222http://migration.ucdavis.edu:80/cgi/mnsearch.html 128.120.36.171 19970122184334 text/html 1793HTTP/1.0 200 OKMIME-Version: 1.0Server: WebSTAR/1.3.1 ID/6378Message-ID: Date: Wednesday, 22-Jan-97 18:44:33 GMTLast-Modified: Tuesday, 03-Dec-96 01:38:14 GMTContent-type: text/htmlContent-length: 1538 Migration News - Search Page Migration News - Search Page Please enter one or more key words seperated by 'and' or 'or'. Example: anartica and penguin Search: Select "substring" if you want to search for parts of words as well. Substring How many hits do you want on each page? 101520 Home This search page was brought to you by ICATT iHound. WT02-B12-156IA088-000636-B042-224http://migration.ucdavis.edu:80/apple.html 128.120.36.171 19970122184341 text/html 771HTTP/1.0 200 OKMIME-Version: 1.0Server: WebSTAR/1.3.1 ID/6378Message-ID: Date: Wednesday, 22-Jan-97 18:44:40 GMTLast-Modified: Wednesday, 03-Jul-96 23:52:53 GMTContent-type: text/htmlContent-length: 515 Thanks Apple Computer The Migration Team would like to thank Apple Computer fordonating this server. This powerful Macintosh Workgroup Server 6150 will put to rest the Macintosh IIci. We brushed the dust off the ci and gave it a farewell salute. The new machine will now have it's turn. Surf on... The Migration Team UC Davis WT02-B12-157IA088-000636-B042-228http://migration.ucdavis.edu:80/By-Month/By_Month.html 128.120.36.171 19970122184348 text/html 2855HTTP/1.0 200 OKMIME-Version: 1.0Server: WebSTAR/1.3.1 ID/6378Message-ID: Date: Wednesday, 22-Jan-97 18:44:46 GMTLast-Modified: Tuesday, 03-Dec-96 01:10:53 GMTContent-type: text/htmlContent-length: 2600 Migration News Arhive Migration News Archive Volume 1 1994 February March April May June July August September October November December Volume 2 1995 January February March April May June July August September October November December Volume 3 1996 January February March April May June July August September October November December HomeWT02-B12-158IA088-000636-B042-230http://migration.ucdavis.edu:80/Data/Data.html 128.120.36.171 19970122184356 text/html 578HTTP/1.0 200 OKMIME-Version: 1.0Server: WebSTAR/1.3.1 ID/6378Message-ID: Date: Wednesday, 22-Jan-97 18:44:54 GMTLast-Modified: Saturday, 27-May-95 18:44:02 GMTContent-type: text/htmlContent-length: 323 Migration News All Data are Excel 5.0 spreadsheets test sheet Back to Migration News Home PageSearch ? WT02-B12-159IA088-000636-B042-233http://migration.ucdavis.edu:80/Migration-Links/Migration_related_Links.html 128.120.36.171 19970122184404 text/html 4259HTTP/1.0 200 OKMIME-Version: 1.0Server: WebSTAR/1.3.1 ID/6378Message-ID: Date: Wednesday, 22-Jan-97 18:45:02 GMTLast-Modified: Tuesday, 21-Jan-97 21:07:07 GMTContent-type: text/htmlContent-length: 4004 Other Migration-related Links Other Migration-related Links Academic Sites North America The Center for Migration, Ethnicity and Citizenship Immigration History Research Center Office of Population Research Federal Publications Inc. Immigration Europe Center for Law on Immigration and Asylum Centre for Refugee Studies Centre for Research in International Migration and Ethnic Relations Europisches Forum fr Migrationsstudien Integrating the East: The Labor Market Effects of Immigration Migration and Ethnic Relations Migration Research Unit Race and Ethnic Studies Asia Asian Research Center for Migration Scalabrini Migration Center Advocacy Groups Carswell, Canada's largest publisher of professional information Forced Migration Projects The Federation For American Immigration Reform Immigration Central Immigration - Community Mexican Newspapers & Magazines Index Siskind, Susser, Haas & Chang - Immigration and Nationality Law Think Tanks U. S. Immigration Resources Witness, Online Documentary Series Government California Department of Finance Consulate General of Mexico in New York House Immigration Law Immigration And Naturalization Service Statistics Singapore Thomas: Legislative Information on the Internet U.S. Census Bureau U.S. Commission on Immigration Reform International Organizations European Union ILO International Organization for Migration OECD News and Events OECD Washington Center United Nations High Commissioner for Reguees United Nations Publications and Sales World Bank Back to Migration News Home PageWT02-B12-160IA088-000636-B042-236http://migration.ucdavis.edu:80/Subscription.html 128.120.36.171 19970122184412 text/html 1751HTTP/1.0 200 OKMIME-Version: 1.0Server: WebSTAR/1.3.1 ID/6378Message-ID: Date: Wednesday, 22-Jan-97 18:45:09 GMTLast-Modified: Thursday, 03-Oct-96 01:00:18 GMTContent-type: text/htmlContent-length: 1495 Subscriptions Migration News summarizes the most important immigration and integration developmentsduring the preceding month. Topics are grouped by region:  North America, Europe, Asia, and Other.There are three versionsof Migration News.  The paper copy has about 8,000 words; the email version 12,000 to 14,000 wordsand the gopher version 14,000 to 18,000 words.  The purpose of Migration News is to provide summariesof recent immigration developments that can be read in 60 minutes or less.  Many issues also includea special report, abstracts of selected papers, and articles and information on recent researchpublications.  Distribution is by email.Current and back issues can be accessed via Internet on the Migration News Home Page---http://migration.ucdavis.edu gopher://dual.ucdavis.eduThere is no charge for the email Migration News.  A paper copy of Migration News is available by mailfor $30 domestic and $50 foreign.  Make checks payable to UC Regents and send to:Philip Martin,Department of Agricultural EconomicsUniversity of California, Davis California 95616 USA. Migration News is produced with the support of the University of California-Berkeley Center for Germanand European Studies and the German Marshall Fund of the United States.To subscribe send your email address to:  migrant@primal.ucdavis.edu Back to Migration News Home PageWT02-B12-161IA088-000636-B042-239http://migration.ucdavis.edu:80/archive/mn_97/jan_97-01.html 128.120.36.171 19970122184420 text/html 5416HTTP/1.0 200 OKMIME-Version: 1.0Server: WebSTAR/1.3.1 ID/6378Message-ID: Date: Wednesday, 22-Jan-97 18:45:17 GMTLast-Modified: Tuesday, 21-Jan-97 21:07:08 GMTContent-type: text/htmlContent-length: 5161 Immigration, Naturalization Up in FY96 MIGRATION NEWS. Vol. 4, No. 1 January, 1997. North America. Immigration, Naturalization Up in FY96 There were 720,461 people admitted as immigrants in FY95, down 10percent from 804,416 in FY94; an estimated one million people were admitted asimmigrants in FY96. Much of the drop in FY95 was due to INS problems inimplementing the so-called 245i adjustment procedure under which persons in theUS can adjust their status to become immigrants rather than return to theircountries of citizenship before immigrating to the US. The INS argued in March 1996, in support of those in Congress who wanted toconsider legal and illegal immigration separately, that there was no need toreduce legal immigration, since immigration levels were already falling. InMay 1996, Congressional leaders of immigration subcommittees accused the INS ofmisleading the public about future immigration levels when releasing the FY95figures (MN, June 1996). The US government anticipates the arrival of 675,000 immigrants each year,including 480,000 family unification, 140,000 economic/employment-based and55,000 diversity immigrants. In addition, there also are refugees, the numberbeing determined each year by the President in consultation with Congress. Between 1986 and 1995, about 12 million immigrants were admitted legally tothe US--some were in the US earlier and had their status legalized in thisperiod. The previous peak period of immigration was 1905-1914, when 10 millionimmigrants arrived. Most immigrants over the past 10 years--66 percent--were women and childrenand most of the adults were unskilled or had less than a high school education.About 75 percent of the immigrants were from Asian, Latin American or Caribbeancountries and 66 percent settled in California, New York, Texas, Florida,Illinois and New Jersey. About 2.7 million unauthorized immigrants were legalized. At least threemillion additional illegal aliens entered the US and stayed. A December 1996 poll by the Wall Street Journal/NBC News reported that 72percent of respondents would like to see immigration reduced. A similarquestion in 1965 found that 33 percent of Americans wanted to reduceimmigration. The INS in December released detailed immigration data for FY95 andreported that 166,482 immigrants intended to settle in California, down from208,498 in FY94. About 12 percent of US immigrants in FY95, and 21 percent ofCalifornia immigrants, were from Mexico. Some 1.3 million foreigners applied to become naturalized US citizens inFY96 and 1.1 million became US citizens. The INS estimates that 1.8 millionforeigners may apply for naturalization in FY97. In November 1995, the INS changed its naturalization procedures. INS nowrequires that, before naturalization, the FBI certify that the fingerprintssubmitted by the applicant are not associated with any crimes in the US.Previously, the INS merely assumed that there was no US crime if the FBI didnot produce evidence to the contrary within 120 days. The time between applying for naturalization and being sworn in as a UScitizen is usually less than six months. The tighter clearance procedure hasslowed the process, however, and some advocates have complained that welfarebenefits may be delayed as a result. INS workers in Miami, where 140,000 persons were naturalized in FY96,charged that 10,000 foreigners were naturalized without FBI fingerprint checks.The INS workers charged that swearing-in ceremonies were sometimes scheduledfor applicants one week after their initial INS interviews, so that there wasno time for background checks. Because the criminal checks may have been faulty, the INS, under thesupervision of accounting firm KPMG Peat Marwick, is reviewing all citizenshipcases completed in FY96. The Justice Department rejected a November 1, 1996 request to appoint anindependent prosecutor to investigate Citizenship USA. Acting on its own, the INS has begun to revoke the citizenship of criminalswho were naturalized. Under new regulations that have not yet been tested incourt, the INS, without judicial proceedings, is denaturalizing persons whoobtained citizenship by, for example, concealing criminal convictions. Some70,000 of the 1.1 million persons naturalized in FY96 had arrest records, butan arrest does not automatically disqualify an alien for naturalization. The Justice Department in December released $495 million to states asreimbursement for the cost of incarcerating illegal aliens, representing 60percent of the $825 requested by state and local governments. John B. Judis, "Huddled Elites," The New Republic, December 23, 1996. CeliaDugger, "Number Becoming Citizens Drops Sharply in New York," New York Times,December 14, 1996. Oxford Analytica. 1986. America In Perspective. Boston:Houghton-Mifflin. _______________________________WT02-B12-162IA088-000636-B042-241http://migration.ucdavis.edu:80/archive/mn_97/jan_97-02.html 128.120.36.171 19970122184709 text/html 3719HTTP/1.0 200 OKMIME-Version: 1.0Server: WebSTAR/1.3.1 ID/6378Message-ID: Date: Wednesday, 22-Jan-97 18:47:29 GMTLast-Modified: Tuesday, 21-Jan-97 21:07:08 GMTContent-type: text/htmlContent-length: 3464 Ethnic Voting in 1996 MIGRATION NEWS. Vol. 4, No. 1 January, 1997. North America. Ethnic Voting in 1996 Recently-naturalized US citizens voted overwhelmingly for Clinton inNovember 1996. An estimated 71 percent of Hispanics voted for Clinton. In California, Texas and Arizona, Latinos voted for Clinton in higherpercentages than the general population of those states. Only in tippingArizona to Clinton, however, does the Latino vote appear to have made acritical difference. In Florida, Dole won the Latino vote, but Clinton won thestate. Most newly naturalized Hispanics--about 61 percent in one survey--areregistered Democrats. Once registered as Democrats, Latinos rarely switchparty affiliation. Nine percent of US Latinos registered as Republicans and 30percent as Independents. However, it should be noted that younger Hispanics inthe southwest are increasingly registering as Republicans. On December 27, 1996, the Los Angeles Times reported that at least 19non-US citizens voted in the close race between Republican Robert K. Dornan andDemocrat Loretta Sanchez for a House seat. Sanchez won by 984 votes. TheSanchez victory is often cited as evidence of the growing importance of theHispanic vote. Dornan has filed a complaint with the House of Representativescontesting the results of the election. It is a felony under California law for a non-US citizen to vote orregister to vote. Those who acknowledged voting before being sworn in as UScitizens were taking naturalization classes at Hermanda Mexicana Nacional, aSanta Ana organization that registered least 916 people to vote, most justbefore the November 5, 1996 election. If an applicant brings evidence of passing an English and civics class froman organization such as Hermanda, the INS examiner normally does not ask manycivics questions during the mandatory interview. INS examiners, who conductedsome interviews in the Hermanda office, immediately tell the applicant whetherthey passed the test, but also tell applicants they are not citizens until theyare sworn in. Voter registration is done on the honor system. About 53 percent of Asian-Pacific voters voted for Clinton and 40 percentfor Dole. About 60 percent of the Asian-Americans were born abroad. Some spokesman for ethnic and immigrant rights organizations say thatimmigration restrictions, welfare cuts and Proposition 209 woke a sleepinggiant of Hispanic and Asian voters. For most voters, however, immigration wasnot the decisive factor in determining how to vote. A poll of 1,200 US votersfound that fewer than one percent based their vote on the candidates'immigration position. One indirect effect of immigration that may have influenced some electionoutcomes is the tendency of native-born whites to move away fromhigh-immigration areas. Some observers speculate, for example, that JesseHelms (R-NC) won re-election to the US Senate in part because of the influx ofwhites from New York and Florida. Peter Warren, Nancy Cleeland, and H. G. Reza, "Noncitizens Say They Votedin Orange County," Los Angeles Times, December 27, 1996. William Clayton,"Ethnic groups called untapped voter force," Houston Chronicle, December 18,1996. _______________________________WT02-B12-163IA088-000636-B042-244http://migration.ucdavis.edu:80/archive/mn_97/jan_97-03.html 128.120.36.171 19970122184804 text/html 5366HTTP/1.0 200 OKMIME-Version: 1.0Server: WebSTAR/1.3.1 ID/6378Message-ID: Date: Wednesday, 22-Jan-97 18:48:52 GMTLast-Modified: Tuesday, 21-Jan-97 21:07:07 GMTContent-type: text/htmlContent-length: 5111 Expanding Access to Asylum MIGRATION NEWS. Vol. 4, No. 1 January, 1997. North America. Expanding Access to Asylum Since 1994, when the US recognized persecution because ofhomosexuality as grounds for asylum, some 60 foreigners have been given asylumin the US on that basis. US interest groups have lobbied to extend asylumeligibility to women trying to escape forcible subjugation at the hands ofmale-dominated Islamic societies and to Chinese men and women who oppose theirgovernment's one-child-per-family policy. In October 1995, a New York immigration judge granted asylum to aheterosexual man from Togo on the grounds of his HIV infection and AIDS-relatedillnesses. The man entered the US in April 1991, applied for political asylumand was rejected and then applied for asylum claiming persecution as a memberof a "particular social group"-- HIV-infected persons in Togo and the IvoryCoast. An HIV-positive man from Brazil was granted asylum by an immigrationjudge in San Francisco in August, 1996. In January 1996, a presidential commission recommended that HIV infectionbe made a basis for asylum in the US. However, a 1993 law specifically barsaliens with HIV or AIDS from entering the United States. Rep. Lamar S. Smith(R-TX), chairman of the House Judiciary subcommittee on immigration, says thatgranting asylum based on homosexuality, as some immigration judges have beendoing, is "stretching the law." Granting asylum on the basis of HIV infectionis, according to Smith, "a violation of the law." A Russian lesbian is asking a federal appeals court to grant her asylum inthe US, claiming that she faces institutionalization and electroshock therapyif she returns home. According to her lawyer, this is the first time a federalappeals court will consider sexual orientation as a basis for asylum. Other countries that grant asylum based on sexual orientation include:Australia, Canada, Germany, Ireland, New Zealand, Belgium, Finland, GreatBritain and Netherlands. The 1996 immigration law includes a provision that permits up to 1,000persons each year to be accepted as refugees because their country restrictedtheir child-bearing rights in the name of population control. Most of the 282Chinese on the Golden Venture, which ran aground in New York Harbor on June 6,1993, requested political asylum based on fear of forced abortion orsterilization. As of December 1996, 99 of those on the Golden Venture havebeen returned to China, 60 are being detained, 38 are free on bond, 35 weregranted asylum, 14 minors were released to US relatives, 12 emigrated and theothers escaped or disappeared. An Armenian women persecuted for practicing transcendental meditation inArmenia was granted asylum in the US. Refugees are screened outside the US to determine if they are persecuted insuch a way that they should be brought to the US for protection. The numberadmitted to the US each year is negotiated annually by the President andCongress. Asylum applicants are a self-selected group; their number depends onhow many foreigners already inside the US borders request protection and getit. The Geneva Convention obliges signatories to protect persons fleeing"persecution or a well-founded fear of persecution on account of race,religion, nationality, membership in a particular social group, or politicalopinion." In Florida, the INS announced that 14 Cubans who arrived in Key West byboat would be returned to Cuba. Since May 1996, Cubans intercepted at sea havebeen returned to Cuba, but those who made it to the US were allowed to stayuntil the new INS policy went into effect on December 5, 1996. Under the newpolicy, Cubans who reach the US will be returned if the Cuban governmentaccepts their return. In December, the US flew to Guam 5,000 Kurds and their families who hadworked with US aid agencies in northern Iraq. They are to eventually arrive inthe US. The US has already evacuated 2,700 Iraqis and Kurds who workeddirectly or indirectly for the US government. Britain and other European countries have refused to allow immigration byIraqis associated with their aid programs. On December 25, 1996, Turkish Prime Minister Necmettin Erbakan announcedthat Turkey was ending its involvement in the US-orchestrated effort to assistKurds in northern Iraq known as "Operation Provide Comfort." Over USobjections, Turkey and Iran signed trade agreements meant to double the volumeof trade between Turkey and Iran to $2 billion per year. Frank Wright, "Finding the right password to freedom," Star Tribune,December 26, 1996. "Cubans Reaching U.S. Illegally Will Now Be Sent Back toIsland," Reuters, December 24, 1996. William Branigin, "More Than 60Homosexuals Claiming Persecution Have Been Granted Asylum in US," WashingtonPost, December 17, 1996. _______________________________WT02-B12-164IA088-000636-B042-247http://migration.ucdavis.edu:80/archive/mn_97/jan_97-04.html 128.120.36.171 19970122184814 text/html 7820HTTP/1.0 200 OKMIME-Version: 1.0Server: WebSTAR/1.3.1 ID/6378Message-ID: Date: Wednesday, 22-Jan-97 18:49:11 GMTLast-Modified: Tuesday, 21-Jan-97 21:07:07 GMTContent-type: text/htmlContent-length: 7565 Implementing Welfare Changes MIGRATION NEWS. Vol. 4, No. 1 January, 1997. North America. Implementing Welfare Changes On November 27, 1996, the New York Times reported that the Clintonadministration was proposing changes in the August 1996 welfare law that wouldcost about $13 billion of the $55 billion expected to be saved over six years.Among the changes under discussion is making legal immigrants eligible for FoodStamps. Immigrant advocacy groups want the Clinton administration to return tothe previous system, so that legal immigrants participate in Food Stamps on thesame basis as US citizens. The Congressional Budget Office says that one million immigrants may loseFood Stamps under the welfare law as approved in August 1996 and that it wouldcost roughly $3.7 billion over six years to restore their eligibility. The Clinton administration is implementing the new welfare law in a mannerthat some in Congress say is unlawful. The law permits legal immigrants toreceive Food Stamps after 40 quarters of US work. The USDA is reportedlypermitting legal immigrant couples to combine their work quarters and, if thecouple has 40 quarters of US work, they are deemed eligible for Food Stamps. Other reports say that, if an applicant for Food Stamps asserts that he hasworked 40 quarters in the US, he is granted Food Stamps. There is not yet aquick way for Food Stamp officials to check on applicant workexperience. The Congressional Budget Office estimated that up to 500,000 legalimmigrants could lose Supplemental Security Income payments under the newwelfare law. A report from Massachusetts, where SSI payments average $500 permonth, says that retirement homes have organized English and civics classes tohelp immigrants to naturalize. Persons over 50 and in the US more than 15years are allowed to take the test in their native language. Since 1979, Special Order 40 in Los Angeles has prohibited city employees,including the Los Angeles Police Department, from reporting suspected illegalaliens to the INS. The policy prevents officers from asking anyone about theirimmigration status, checking with the INS or turning suspects accused of minorviolations over to INS officials. However, several city council members want to change the policy in order todeal with the violent 18th Street Gang. As many as 60 percent of the estimated20,000 18th Streeters in Southern California are illegal immigrants. The new welfare law requires state and local government agencies to reportsuspected illegal immigrants to the Immigration and Naturalization Serviceevery three months. Los Angeles-area police agencies say that many illegal immigrant suspectsflee to Mexico to avoid apprehension and that some of the worst criminals driftback and forth between Southern California and Mexico, heading south for refugeand are then being drawn back by the possibility of criminal profit. Beginning November 30, 1996 foreign exchange students on F-1 visas must paypublic school districts the full cost of their education before they can enterthe US, and they can remain in the US only 12 months. Some Asian parents senttheir children-- parachute kids-- to US relatives to attend US high schools toimprove their chances of getting into the best US universities. One 1990estimate was that there were 40,000 parachute kids from Taiwan aged eight to 18were living in the United States. The US State Department issues 400,000 F-I visas per year, most forcollege-age students. Foreign students who attend elementary or adult schools without payingtuition can be barred from the US for five years. California. A California court on November 26, 1996 prohibitedCalifornia from declaring pregnant illegal alien women ineligible forstate-funded prenatal care. California tried to deny benefits to illegal alienwomen on December 1, 1996 under an emergency rule, but the judge ruled thatthere was no emergency. California will now go through the normal process ofissuing regulations to remove illegal alien women from the program, a processthat takes three to six months. The new welfare law requires states to get welfare recipients into jobs inorder to receive federal funds. A study of the one million California adultsreceiving AFDC payments found that almost half did not have high schooldiplomas and almost half did not have cars or access to reliabletransportation. One-third have not held a job during the past five years and11 percent have never worked. The effort to move these largely unskilled workers into jobs has beencalled the greatest challenge facing the state. Democrats appear to favor apackage of education and training programs to pull recipients into the labormarket, while Republicans favor reducing benefits to push recipients into thelabor market. In San Francisco, where 35 percent of the residents are foreign-born,supervisors declared the city a "safe zone" for immigrants and pledged toencourage naturalization and to provide translation services at city meetingsupon request. The supervisors pledged not to "discriminate on the basis of aperson's immigration status" in the provision of city services. Massachusetts. Massachusetts mails welfare checks to 1,400 poorillegal immigrant parents to support their US-born, US-citizen children and isconsidering whether to turn their names over to the INS as required by law. Anillegal alien is not eligible for the state's $93 per month adult benefit, butcan receive $486 per month to support two children. The state assigns illegalparents fictitious Social Security numbers for tracking purposes. Critics say that this system makes it impossible to determine if the alienis earning money and that subsidizing even indirectly illegal immigrantsfrustrates immigration controls. Immigration advocates say that ending privacyprotections for undocumented parents will create hardships for their US-citizenchildren. Massachusetts, as well as other states, are expected to give their lists ofillegal alien parents collecting welfare on behalf of their US citizen childrento the INS, but it is not clear what action, if any, the INS will take. Florida/Virginia. Florida plans in Spring 1997 to refer welfarerecipients to jobs once held by illegal immigrants, following Virginia'sagreement with the INS in October 1996 to try to fill jobs opened by INS raidswith welfare recipients. Virginia expects to fill 300 to 400 jobs that pay $7to $8 per hour in hotels, restaurants and construction but, after two months,the INS had not yet notified Virginia of any job openings. Bill Douhat, "Give illegals' jobs to welfare recipients," Palm Beach Post,December 29, 1996. Lisa Richardons and David Reyes, "Task force tackles welfarereform, "Los Angeles Times, December 18, 1996. Geoff Boucher and DexterFilkins, "Homicide suspects often take refuge south of the border," Los AngelesTimes, December 16, 1996. Michael Grunwald, "Illegal alien list dilemma forreformers; Overhaul mandates INS access to names of welfare recipients," BostonGlobe, December 12, 1996. Robert Pear, "Clinton Considers Move to Soften Cutsin Welfare, "New York Times, November 27, 1996. _______________________________WT02-B12-165IA088-000636-B042-254http://migration.ucdavis.edu:80/archive/mn_97/jan_97-05.html 128.120.36.171 19970122184823 text/html 5947HTTP/1.0 200 OKMIME-Version: 1.0Server: WebSTAR/1.3.1 ID/6378Message-ID: Date: Wednesday, 22-Jan-97 18:49:20 GMTLast-Modified: Tuesday, 21-Jan-97 21:07:07 GMTContent-type: text/htmlContent-length: 5692 INS: Management Woes/Enforcement MIGRATION NEWS. Vol. 4, No. 1 January, 1997. North America. INS: Management Woes/Enforcement INS field managers have accused William S. Slattery, thethird-ranking official in the INS, of improper associations with Korean garmentshop owners. Slattery allegedly curtailed INS raids on Korean garmentfactories in New York in 1993 after he attended social events with factoryowners, including a golf outing and a trip to a sauna, at the invitation of aKorean-American businessman. Slattery says that he stopped the inspections of the Koreans garments shopsfor 30 days to investigate Koreans' charges that INS agents were discriminatingagainst them in raiding the factories to look for illegal aliens. An INS official in New Jersey was convicted in November 1995 on corruptioncharges. In San Diego, a former Immigration and Naturalization ServiceInspector who extorted sexual favors from Mexican women was sentenced to nineyears in prison. Enforcement. The INS announced that it was adding agents at theborder to prevent a "post-holiday rush" of illegal immigrants who go home toMexico for Christmas and return to the United States after New Year's. Inearly 1996, illegal immigrants with phony papers swamped ports of entry. In San Diego, a Mexican citizen was indicted for using authenticimmigration documents to smuggle aliens into the US. According to theindictment, the documents were purchased on the streets of the US and alienswishing to enter the US were matched with the documents on file. Customerswere solicited and photographed as they arrived at the Tijuana bus station andthen matched with appropriate documents. In St. Louis, the INS apprehended 29 illegal immigrants from India workingat hotels and doughnut shops. In Omaha, the INS apprehended 78 illegalimmigrants earning about $6 hourly from Deffenbaugh Industries, the city'strash hauler; 70 returned voluntarily to Mexico. An INS agent fired his gun ata car fleeing the work site, which led Latino advocates to denounce the INSunder the banner "INS behavior is garbage." The local Mexican AmericanCommission complained that firing a gun at a car fleeing an INS raid equatesillegal alien employment with bank robbery. In Georgia, 71 mostly Mexican construction workers working on a newhospital were apprehended by the INS. The raid was conducted afterFayetteville officials complained to the INS that illegal immigrants wereworking there. They were being paid $8 to $15 per hour. State police in Colorado tried to turn over to the INS 10 suspected illegalaliens that it had found in a van headed to Georgia. But the INS advised thepolice that, if the vehicle was in good condition, it should be allowed tocontinue to Georgia because no agents, buses, vans or jail space were availablein Colorado to handle the illegal aliens. Police report that in metropolitan Salt Lake City, 80 percent of thosearrested on drug charges are illegal immigrants. A Latino theater group inSalt Lake City performed a play centered on the INS scaring away theunauthorized shepherds abiding in the field. Iowa United Methodist Church leaders urged congregations to offer sanctuaryto Hispanics threatened with deportation by the INS. The church argues thatthe INS violates the workers' human rights by staging surprise inspections ofmeatpacking plants. The church says that many of the workers were drawn toIowa by company promises of secure work and good wages. There are 203,000Methodists in 900 churches in Iowa. The owner of four Chinese restaurants in Norfolk, Virginia pleaded guiltyto hiring illegal immigrants from Mexico and Central America and was sentencedto probation. The owner was charged with the lowest offense in the federalcode, a Class 4 misdemeanor, which carries a maximum sentence of six months injail. The owner knowingly hired illegal aliens, paid them with cash and housedthem above the restaurant. The workers were provided room and board and $600to $700 a month in cash for working 12-hour days, six or seven days aweek. In Los Angeles, the INS arrested three suspected smugglers and found 43illegal immigrants in south central Los Angeles. The 43 Mexicans had paid $400to be smuggled through eastern San Diego county and were being held in the safehouse in Los Angeles until friends or relatives made final payments. A survey of Fresno county business leaders found that 75 percent believeillegal immigration should be reduced. The INS and some US attorneys are searching out and prosecuting criminalaliens who are deported and later return to the US. Persons deported from theUS usually sign a deportation warrant that bars a return to the UnitedStates. Ellen Miller, "Troopers free 10 illegal immigrants," Denver Post, December17, 1996. Lynn Waltz, "Restaurants' owner pleads guilty to hiring illegalworkers," Virginian-Pilot, December 14, 1996. William Simbro, "Methodistleaders' plea: Give shelter to Hispanics," Des Moines Register, December 13,1996. Cindy Gonzalez, "INS Official, Latinos Discuss Shooting," Omaha WorldHerald, December 13, 1996. William Branigin, "Field Managers Accuse INSOperations Director of Cronyism, Seek His Ouster," Washington Post, December 61996. Sanford Nax, "Survey finds optimism about Valley economy, but fewerplans to hire workers," Fresno Bee, December 3, 1996. _______________________________WT02-B12-166IA088-000636-B042-258http://migration.ucdavis.edu:80/archive/mn_97/jan_97-06.html 128.120.36.171 19970122185026 text/html 2761HTTP/1.0 200 OKMIME-Version: 1.0Server: WebSTAR/1.3.1 ID/6378Message-ID: Date: Wednesday, 22-Jan-97 18:51:01 GMTLast-Modified: Tuesday, 21-Jan-97 21:06:52 GMTContent-type: text/htmlContent-length: 2506 Mexico: Dual Citizenship and NAFTA MIGRATION NEWS. Vol. 4, No. 1 January, 1997. North America. Mexico: Dual Citizenship and NAFTA The Mexican Senate and Chamber of Deputies approved legislation onDecember 10, 1996 that would permit Mexicans who become naturalized US citizensto retain their Mexican citizenship. When two-thirds of Mexico's 31 statelegislatures approve dual citizenship, the new law will go into effect,probably sometime in 1997. An estimated two million Mexican-born persons who have become naturalizedUS citizens could recover their Mexican citizenship and 3.5 million otherMexican-born persons in the US could become US citizens without losing theirMexican citizenship. Mexico has not yet decided how to deal with the tax andmilitary service obligations of citizens abroad, or whether to allow absenteevoting. Dual nationals are persons who owe allegiance to more than one countrybecause of birth, marriage, parentage or naturalization. Each country developsits own policies toward dual nationality. The US government tolerates but does not advocate dual nationality. A UCLA study concluded that "the impact on trade-related employment duringthe first three years after NAFTA is estimated to be, at the very least, a nearzero net impact, and more likely, a moderately positive number" of about 2,900net new US jobs since 1994. However, there were 28,200 jobs lost to increasedimports and 31,200 jobs gained due to increased exports. Tehuixtla, Mexico, a village in the state of Puebla 140 miles southeast ofMexico City, once again had annual visits from migrants who had moved to theNew York City area. During most of the year, the village has about 200residents, but at Christmas time, there are over 1,000. Remittances have financed construction of a stone church and a refurbishedhilltop shrine to the Virgin of Guadalupe. Many migrants have builtcement-and-tile houses that are crowned with satellite-dish antennas. Richard Stevenson, "Nafta's Impact on Jobs Has Been Slight, Study Shows,"New York Times, December 19, 1996. Hayes Ferguson, "Mexicans Looking at DualNationality," Times-Picayune Publishing, December 12, 1996. Mark Fineman,"Lawmakers in Mexico Approve Dual Nationality," Los Angeles Times, December 11,1996. _______________________________WT02-B12-167IA088-000636-B042-266http://migration.ucdavis.edu:80/archive/mn_97/jan_97-07.html 128.120.36.171 19970122185104 text/html 2765HTTP/1.0 200 OKMIME-Version: 1.0Server: WebSTAR/1.3.1 ID/6378Message-ID: Date: Wednesday, 22-Jan-97 18:51:58 GMTLast-Modified: Tuesday, 21-Jan-97 21:06:52 GMTContent-type: text/htmlContent-length: 2510 Canada: Immigration Goals-Reality Gap MIGRATION NEWS. Vol. 4, No. 1 January, 1997. North America. Canada: Immigration Goals-Reality Gap The ruling Liberal Party government in Canada promised to keepannual immigration at one percent of the population, which would imply about300,000 immigrants per year, but the government in October 1995 announced thatCanada's immigration target would be 220,000 immigrants in 1997. Canadaimposes a $975 landing fee on arriving immigrants. Canada had a national origins immigration policy and had a 99 percentEuropean-origin population until 1967 when immigration was opened to Asians andLatin Americans. In 1980, about 150,000 immigrants arrived in Canada.Immigration fell to 80,000 per year in the mid-1980s and rose to over 250,000per year in the early 1990s. By the year 2000, an estimated 18 percent ofCanada's residents will be "visible minorities." Canada in November announced that it had broken up a smuggling ring thatwas bringing 30 to 40 southeast Asians each month to Toronto for $30,000 to$35,000 each. Another gang brought Chinese immigrants to the US via Bangkokand Hong Kong to Vancouver. Most applied for asylum in Vancouver, thentraveled east to be smuggled into the US through an Indian reservation thatstraddles the border. Canada's economy is booming, but unemployment remains at about 10percent--the longest stretch of unemployment above nine percent since the GreatDepression. Federal and state governments have reduced spending. Nine of the10 provinces--all except British Columbia--have eliminated or are on target toeliminate their budget deficits. Vancouver has the second-largest Chinese community in North America withthree Chinese daily papers, three mainly Chinese radio stations and two TVstations. Chinese immigrants are sometimes accused of cutting down the treeson their lots, which prompted the city government to permit each neighborhoodto enact its own building codes. Howard Schneider, "Good Neighbors' Bad Luck Stirs Ire Over CanadianImmigration Policy," Washington Post, December 18 1996. David Armstrong, "NewAsian face of Vancouver," San Francisco Examiner, December 16, 1996. CraigTurner, "Canada's Rising Economy Leaves the Jobless Behind," Los Angeles Times,November 9, 1996. _______________________________WT02-B12-168IA088-000636-B042-273http://migration.ucdavis.edu:80/archive/mn_97/jan_97-08.html 128.120.36.171 19970122185112 text/html 3989HTTP/1.0 200 OKMIME-Version: 1.0Server: WebSTAR/1.3.1 ID/6378Message-ID: Date: Wednesday, 22-Jan-97 18:52:10 GMTLast-Modified: Tuesday, 21-Jan-97 21:06:52 GMTContent-type: text/htmlContent-length: 3734 Caribbean Migration to the US MIGRATION NEWS. Vol. 4, No. 1 January, 1997. North America. Caribbean Migration to the US The 15 independent Caribbean nations, plus several dependencies,have total population of about 36 million and some of the highest emigrationrates in the world. The largest four sources of immigrants to the US from theCaribbean are Cuba, the Dominican Republic, Jamaica and Haiti. There are also US-citizen migrants to the mainland US from PuertoRico--migrants from Caribbean islands who cannot get to the US sometimesmigrate to Puerto Rico and the US Virgin Islands. Caribbean island immigrants in the US are concentrated along the EastCoast, especially Miami and New York City. Some 125,000 Cubans embarked from Mariel for the US in a "freedom flotilla"after Castro released them from the Peruvian Embassy on April 1, 1980. About2,500 others were added: criminals released from Cuban jails and mentalpatients. Most Marielitos have integrated successfully. Some 1,400, however, are inUS jails for crimes they committed in the US. Incarcerating Marielitos whocommitted crimes in the US has cost the US government an estimated $500 millionsince 1980. In 1984, there were an estimated 2,700 hard-core Marielito criminals in theUS and the US persuaded Cuba to accept the return of 1,300 Marielitos. New York City says that several hundred Dominicans wanted for crimescommitted in the United States have returned home and the US wants some of themextradited to the US for trial. There are one million Dominicans in the US,most in the New York City area. One candidate for New York City mayor, Ruth Messinger, took a trip to theDominican Republic and Haiti to increase her appeal to newly-naturalized UScitizens from these countries in New York. In Broward County in South Florida, there are an estimated 170,000Hispanics, 12.5 percent of the county's residents. In nearby Palm BeachCounty, Hispanics number 95,282, or 9.8 percent of the population.Sociologists say that in these diversified communities, Hispanic parents tryingto instill their cultural values in their children run into many pressures toassimilate. The pressures include the demand for conformity to US culture andanti-immigrant sentiment encountered by the children. Many Hispanic children end up living in two different worlds, each with adifferent set of values. Recent studies have found that children of Hispanicparents lose that culture by the third or fourth generation. The adjustmentpatterns, says one intercultural expert, are no different from those ofEuropean immigrants of the past century. The church is one of the institutions which is a refuge from pressure toconform. Hispanics, who make up 35 percent of the parishioners in CoralSprings, celebrate Mass in Spanish and the holidays of every Latin Americancountry. Charles A. Radin, "From Haiti to Boston," Boston Globe, December 15, 1996.Larry Rohter, "Dominican President Doubts NYC Police Station in His Country,"New York Times, November 23, 1996. George John, "Caribbean: Still a long wayto integration," Inter Press Service, November 20, 1996. Luis Lopez Portillo,"Growing Up in Two Worlds," Sun-Sentinel, November 4, 1996. Marie Arana-Ward,"Three Marielitos, Three Manifest Destinies," Washington Post, July 9, 1996.William Branigin, "Atlanta's 'Slave Labor' Secret," Washington Post, July 9,1996. Howard French, "Islands Export: People," New York Times, May 6,1992. _______________________________WT02-B12-169IA088-000636-B042-282http://migration.ucdavis.edu:80/archive/mn_97/jan_97-09.html 128.120.36.171 19970122185121 text/html 3712HTTP/1.0 200 OKMIME-Version: 1.0Server: WebSTAR/1.3.1 ID/6378Message-ID: Date: Wednesday, 22-Jan-97 18:52:19 GMTLast-Modified: Tuesday, 21-Jan-97 21:07:07 GMTContent-type: text/htmlContent-length: 3457 Affirmative Action and Official English MIGRATION NEWS. Vol. 4, No. 1 January, 1997. North America. Affirmative Action and Official English Affirmative Action. On December 23, 1996, a San Franciscofederal judge blocked enforcement of Proposition 209, saying in a 67-pageopinion that there is a "strong probability" that opponents will show that theanti-affirmative action measure is an unconstitutional violation of the equalprotection clause of the Constitution. According to civil rights groups,Proposition 209 violates the equal protection guarantees by preventing womenand minorities from seeking government programs to remedy discrimination thatremain available to others, including veterans and the aged, unless that canget another constitutional amendment approved by voters. In other words, if veterans or athletes can still have preference for jobsor university admissions by law and regulation, the court must decide ifeliminating preferences for women and minorities in the state's constitution isa violation of the US Constitution. Official English. On December 4, 1996, the US Supreme Court heardarguments on a case, Arizonans for Official English, to determine whetherArticle 28, an amendment to Arizona's Constitution, approved by voters in 1988,can prevent a state employee from speaking a language other than English on thejob, except when teaching English and dealing with crime and similaremergencies (Arizonans for Official English v Arizona, 95-974). The US Supreme Court must first decide whether Arizonans for OfficialEnglish has standing to bring the case and then, whether English-speakingrequirement violates the free speech rights of state employees. The Arizona trial court found that the amendment violated the free speechrights of a bilingual employee who chose to write her reports in Spanish. TheNinth Circuit Court of Appeals upheld that ruling in a 6 to 5 vote. In one precedent, Meyer v Nebraska, 1923, the Supreme Court overturned astate law that prohibited the teaching of German even in privateschools. There are 23 states and 40 cities that have official English statutes,although most are symbolic. A 1995 poll found that 73 percent of US voterswant to make English the official language of the US. According to the 1990 Census of Population, 14 percent of US residents agedfive and over speak a language other than or in addition to English at home--seven percent of those born in the United States, many of whom are the childrenof immigrants, and 80 percent of the foreign-born. Of those speaking a foreignlanguage, 55 percent speak Spanish. Barry Chiswick estimates that foreign-born men of the same age andeducation have about 20 percent lower earnings if they speak English poorlythan if they are more fluent. Macia Dolan, "U.S. Judge Blocks Enforcement of Prop. 209 in State," LosAngeles Times, December 24, 1996. Barry R. Chiswick, "Speaking English inAmerica," Washington Times, December 3, 1996. Chiswick, Barry and Paul Miller.1996. The Languages of the United States: What Is Spoken and What It Means.READ -- The Institute for Research in English Acquisition and Development. Fall1996. Vol. III, no. 2 _______________________________WT02-B12-170IA088-000636-B042-287http://migration.ucdavis.edu:80/archive/mn_97/jan_97-10.html 128.120.36.171 19970122185131 text/html 4251HTTP/1.0 200 OKMIME-Version: 1.0Server: WebSTAR/1.3.1 ID/6378Message-ID: Date: Wednesday, 22-Jan-97 18:52:30 GMTLast-Modified: Tuesday, 21-Jan-97 21:07:07 GMTContent-type: text/htmlContent-length: 3996 EU Proposes Common Immigration Policy MIGRATION NEWS. Vol. 4, No. 1 January, 1997. Europe. EU Proposes Common Immigration Policy The EU's Inter-Governmental Conference (IGC), which met in DublinDecember 13 and 14, discussed a 140-page Irish proposal to abolish all bordercontrols within the EU by 2001 and to bring immigration, asylum and visa issuesunder the control of collective EU decision-making procedures, with restrictednational veto rights. Under the Maastricht II proposal, EU nations would first eliminate borderchecks on EU nationals and third-country nationals moving within the EU. EUnations would agree on a common list of countries whose nationals would needvisas to enter the EU and would standardize asylum and entry/residenceprocedures. The European Commission would obtain the right to implement thiscommon EU migration policy. The proposal would create a citizenship of the European Union, intended to"complement and not replace national citizenship." The proposal identifies thefreedom of citizens to live and work throughout the Union as a key EUpriority. Britain and Denmark are opposed to the replacement of national laws by anEU immigration regime. The UK still checks incoming EU citizens at entry portssuch as Dover despite the expectation that the European Court in Luxembourgwill rule that Britain's passport checks on other EU citizens violates theMaastricht agreement. In Dublin, EU leaders instructed the drafters of Maastricht II to"establish it as a clear principle that no national of a member state of theUnion may apply for asylum in another member state, taking into accountinternational treaties." The proposal hints at the possible incorporation into the EU treaty of the1985 Schengen agreement. Under that agreement, which exists independently ofthe EU, checks on incoming persons have been eliminated at the borders andairports between France, Germany, the Netherlands, Belgium, Greece, Italy,Luxembourg, Austria, Spain and Portugal. Five Nordic nations that have had apassport-free travel zone since 1958-- Finland, Denmark and Sweden, and non-EUNorway and Iceland--joined the Schengen group December 19, 1996. In March 1996, France reinstituted border checks at its crossings withBelgium, Luxembourg and the Netherlands in order to enforce its drug laws, andin December 1996, Spain and Portugal agreed to re-build check points alongtheir border to combat illegal immigration. German Chancellor Helmut Kohl andFrench President Jacques Chirac have proposed that the EU tackle anxiety overcross-border crime by instituting common border controls, immigration, visa andasylum policies. In Dublin, 11 Eastern European nations expressed an interest in joining theEU. If all 11 were admitted, the EU's population would expand from 370 millionto 470 million. Some EU nations want to slow expansion, pointing out that the averageincome of the 11 is one-third of EU levels, and that 80 percent of the EU'sbudget already goes for payments to poorer member countries, principallyPortugal, Greece, Spain and Ireland, and for agricultural subsidies. Sarah Helm Brussels, "EU blocks citizens' right to claim asylum," TheIndependent, December 18, 1996. "Nordic nations join passport-free Schengentravel zone," Agence France Presse, December 16, 1996. Jeremy Gaunt, "EUSummit Set to Offer Taste of Things to Come," Reuters, December 11, 1996.Alexander MacLeod, "Britain Steps Away From a Frontier-Free Europe," ChristianScience Monitor, December 11, 1996. "Germany, France propose that EU tacklecitizens' fear of crime," Agence France Presse, December 9, 1996. John Palmer,"EU nearing moment of truth on treaty, warns Santer," The Guardian, December 6,1996. _______________________________WT02-B12-171IA088-000636-B042-293http://migration.ucdavis.edu:80/archive/mn_97/jan_97-11.html 128.120.36.171 19970122185141 text/html 5411HTTP/1.0 200 OKMIME-Version: 1.0Server: WebSTAR/1.3.1 ID/6378Message-ID: Date: Wednesday, 22-Jan-97 18:52:39 GMTLast-Modified: Tuesday, 21-Jan-97 21:07:07 GMTContent-type: text/htmlContent-length: 5156 Labor Mobility and Social Dumping MIGRATION NEWS. Vol. 4, No. 1 January, 1997. Europe. Labor Mobility and Social Dumping The EU guarantees nationals of member nations "four freedoms"--freemovement of goods, capital, services and workers. This means, for example,that a French worker seeking a job in Germany cannot be discriminated againstbecause he is not German. Europe is known as an area of low mobility as workers tend to remain inindustrial areas that have lost their major employers rather than moving toareas that offer jobs. This helps to keep unemployment rates high. However, the boom in construction in Germany after unification has causedworkers to move across EU borders and tensions have arisen as a result.Germany has high hourly wages and very high payroll taxes, so that employersfind it profitable to hire EU workers from countries with lower wage andpayroll taxes. German construction unions have argued since 1995 that, from the first dayof employment, foreign workers on German construction sites should receive thesame wages and benefits as German workers. The UK, Portugal and many Germanemployers disagree, and they prevented the EU from adopting a "no socialdumping" clause until at least 1998. After lengthy discussions, German employers and unions agreed that, fromJanuary 1, 1997 through August 1997, all construction workers employed inGermany must be paid at least $10.95 per hour in the former West Germany and$10.07 per hour in the former East Germany. Minimum wages for German workersunder union contract are higher, $16.07 in former West Germany. Workers underGerman union contracts are also entitled to 30 days of paid vacation, onemonth's pay as a Christmas bonus, an extra $1.29 hour in winter and payrolltaxes that are 20 percent of gross wages. Non-German workers do not necessarily get paid vacations and other benefitsand they are usually willing to work long hours and weekends to maximize theirearnings. The New York Times on December 11, 1996 quoted German constructionemployers as saying that they could not operate without British and otherforeign workers. There are about 200,000 unemployed German constructionworkers and an estimated 500,000 legal and illegal foreign constructionworkers, including 80,000 British and Irish workers. In November, 1995 the French minister for European affairs accused aBritish firm of social dumping when it sent letters to 100 winter resorts inFrance pointing out the cost savings they could achieve by utilizing Britishworkers. According to the British firm, an employer paying a worker L1,000(US$1,600) per month must pay an additional 20 percent or L200 in payrolltaxes, but a French employer paying a worker L1000 needs to pay another L1000in various payroll taxes. British workers abroad often have some of their paydeposited in UK accounts. French firms could thus save money by hiring British workers on six to12-month contracts and the British workers, whose British employers would payBritish health care taxes, would be covered under the French health care systemunder European law. A British firm offered to provide French builders withBritish workers willing to work 50 hours weekly at regular pay, while Frenchlaw requires overtime pay after 39 hours per week. In March 1996, EU employment ministers agreed that EU workers posted toanother EU country must usually be paid the same wages as local workers fromthe first day of their employment abroad. EU nations may, however, permitlower wages to be paid to intra-EU migrants for their first month in another EUcountry. EU member nations have two years to approve national implementinglegislation. On December 2, 1996, European Union social affairs ministers accepted areport that linked Europe's unemployment problem with the generous socialprotection provided there. The report urges EU governments to avoid "excessivecharges on taxes and labor" which could have a "detrimental impact onemployment." The Federation of German Trade Unions on November 16, 1996 revised itsprogram on the social market economy adopted in 1981 and acknowledged thatGermany's current economic system has produced affluence. The Federation alsoendorsed more collective bargaining flexibility, ending its policy that allagreements be negotiated between a national union and a national employergroup. On demographer noted that, in 1950, both India and Europe had about 160million working age residents. By 2050, under current trends, Europe will haveabout 150 million working age residents and India 870 million. John d'Arcy, "French crack down on cheap UK labor," Contract JournalDecember 12, 1996. Edmund Andrews, "The Upper Tier of Migrant labor," New YorkTimes, December 11, 1996. Caroline Southey, "Call for social security systemsreform," Financial Times, December 3, 1996. _______________________________WT02-B12-172IA088-000636-B042-303http://migration.ucdavis.edu:80/archive/mn_97/jan_97-12.html 128.120.36.171 19970122185202 text/html 6368HTTP/1.0 200 OKMIME-Version: 1.0Server: WebSTAR/1.3.1 ID/6378Message-ID: Date: Wednesday, 22-Jan-97 18:52:59 GMTLast-Modified: Tuesday, 21-Jan-97 21:07:07 GMTContent-type: text/htmlContent-length: 6113 Germany-Kohl: Immigration Affects Unemployment MIGRATION NEWS. Vol. 4, No. 1 January, 1997. Europe. Germany-Kohl: Immigration Affects Unemployment In a debate on the government's proposed 1997 budget, ChancellorHelmut Kohl said that immigration has made it difficult to reduce unemployment,which was 10.1 percent in October, 1996. Kohl said: "I don't want to suggestthat immigration is the major reason for unemployment, but it should be takeninto account when one makes comparison with other European countries."According to Kohl, over 2.5 million immigrants arrived in Germany over the pasteight years, almost 25 years after guest worker recruitment ended. Of Germany's 81 million residents, about seven million areforeigners. In early December, a repatriation agreement signed by the Bosnian andGerman governments removed the last legal obstacles to forcible expulsions andGermany sent thousands of letters to some of the 350,000 Bosnians ordering themto leave Germany. Under German law, the states or Laender are responsible forreturning Bosnians. Kohl has been warning for a year that Germany no longercan serve as the safe haven for nearly half of all Bosnian refugees outside theformer Yugoslavia. On December 4, German police forcibly placed 24 Bosnians on a charterflight to be flown back to Bosnia. The controversial action followed months ofcomplaints by Germany's 16 state governments that they can no longer toleratethe social and economic burdens of supporting the 350,000 Bosnians currently inGermany. Berlin claims that supporting 36,000 ex-Yugoslavians costs DM500million per year. Since October, 1996, some 35 Bosnians have been forcibly deported and 2,500have voluntarily returned. According to German officials there will be no moremass returns until February 1997. In September, the German interior ministers of the Laender agreed torepatriate the Bosnians in two phases; the first to be returned are unmarriedpersons and couples without children. Many have already received lettersordering them to leave Germany. After May 1, 1997, the remainder of theBosnians will be ordered to leave Germany. Critics of German policy say that dumping a large number of refugees on thedoorstep of the Sarajevo government while the political situation remains sounstable will reduce the prospects for peace in Bosnia. A South African soccer/football player was the first person to become aGerman citizen under a new law that gives 10 athletes per year preferentialaccess to German citizenship. Rules such as the 10-year residence requirementwere waived so that a South African player could join the German nationalteam. In 1946, three million Czechs of German origin-- Sudeten Germans-- wereexpelled from Czech territory and their property expropriated. The unmetGerman demand that the Czechs apologize for "ethnic cleansing" has so farprevented the full normalization of relations. On December 20, 1996, Germanyand the Czech Republic signed a declaration aimed at mending bilateralrelations. In the declaration, Germany expressed contrition for the invasion andoccupation of Czechoslovakia from 1939 to 1945. The Czechs regret theexpulsion of the Sudeten Germans at the end of the war. Both sides agreed tocreate a Czech-German Future Fund that will finance environmental, historicaland scientific projects, especially those that in some way help the victims ofthe Third Reich. The Czech Republic is the last of the countries occupied by Nazi Germany tofully normalize its relationship with Germany. The declaration does not address land ownership questions. The Czechsupreme court in 1995 upheld a 1945 decree that stripped Czechs of ethnicGerman origin of their property and gave an amnesty to Czechs accused ofcommitting crimes of revenge against them. Czechs and Slovaks formed Czechoslovakia in 1918 and Ruthenia joined in1919. Before that, Bohemia, Moravia and Slovakia had been parts of theAustro-Hungarian Empire. Between World War I and World War II, Czechoslovakiawas 52 percent Czech, 23 percent German and 16 percent Slovak. The three million Sudeten Germans, who wield considerable influence withinthe Christian Social Union, have demanded compensation for lost property andthreatened to hold up Prague's candidacy for membership in the EU and NATO.They are the most powerful group of expellees (Vertriebene), the 12 millionGermans expelled from the eastern lands at the end of the war who became strongsupporters of the ruling Christian Democratic/Christian Socialistcoalition. Czech Prime Minister Vaclav Klaus has refused to open a dialogue with theSudeten Germans, saying that "never, not in my wildest dreams" would he consentto meet with those who welcomed Hitler's invading army. A profile of a Vietnamese cigarette vendor in Germany who was returned toHanoi emphasized that selling untaxed cigarettes was more profitable thanworking in Vietnam. There are an estimated 40,000 Vietnamese in Germany whoare to be returned under a September 1995 agreement by 2000. Some 2,500 Vietnamese were to be returned by December 1995, but as ofDecember 1996, only 1,500 were returned. Most Vietnamese are returned in smallgroups, on commercial flights, accompanied by German borderpolice. Ken Stier, "Vietnamese land softly at home," DeutschePresse-Agentur, December 24, 1996. Lucy Smy and Frederick Studemann, "Bonntells Yugoslav refugees: time to go" Financial Times, December 24, 1996.William Drozdiak, "Sudeten Germans Seek Amends for Expulsion," Washington Post,December 8, 1996. William Drozdiak, "Germany Steps Up Expulsion of BonsnianRefugees," Washington Post, December 5, 1996. "Kohl draws attention to'immigration factor' on joblessness," Agence France Presse, November 27,1996. _______________________________WT02-B12-173IA088-000636-B042-308http://migration.ucdavis.edu:80/archive/mn_97/jan_97-13.html 128.120.36.171 19970122185417 text/html 6257HTTP/1.0 200 OKMIME-Version: 1.0Server: WebSTAR/1.3.1 ID/6378Message-ID: Date: Wednesday, 22-Jan-97 18:54:32 GMTLast-Modified: Tuesday, 21-Jan-97 21:07:07 GMTContent-type: text/htmlContent-length: 6002 France: Tougher Immigration Laws/Enforcement? MIGRATION NEWS. Vol. 4, No. 1 January, 1997. Europe. France: Tougher Immigration Laws/Enforcement? After African immigrants occupied a church in the summer of 1996 toprotest French immigration laws, the French government promised to legitimizethe status of persons who entered France illegally and had French-bornchildren. Under current law, they cannot obtain regular residence papers, butthey also cannot be deported. Instead of following the government's lead to be generous in such cases,granting legal status after 15 years of crime-free illegal residence in France,the lower house of the French Parliament, after three days of debate inmid-December, amended the proposal to require private citizens to notify localauthorities whenever they have non-EU foreigners in their homes. FrenchInterior Minister Jean-Louis Debre said: "I am for zero illegalimmigration...The state must be given the means to deter foreigners who want toenter France without resources, papers or jobs." Debre said that US-style immigration quotas could cause diplomatic problemswith France's ex-colonies in Africa. Many deputies asserted that there are five million foreigners among the 56million French residents, including one million illegal immigrants. Thegovernment proposed that illegal children under 16 years old who canprove residence in France from the age of six would receive a one-yearresidence permit. Foreign spouses of French citizens would not be grantedresidence permits until they have been married for two years. On December 18, the French Council of State warned the government thatmandatory notification of non-residents' stays may be unconstitutional. Underthe proposal, mayors could ask police to verify that a visitor had left aprivate home after his visa expired. Meanwhile, well-publicized expulsions continue. On December 23, illegalimmigrants were flown to Romania, the 32nd airlift since the election ofPresident Jacques Chirac in May 1995. Some 20,000 foreigners have been removedfrom France since May 1995, including 12,000 so far in 1996. Some 1,000 alien smugglers and 1,000 French employers, have beenarrested since May 1995; 38 illegal sweatshops were ordered closed. In earlyDecember, police broke up a ring smuggling illegal Asian immigrants intogarment shops in Parisian suburbs. On December 5, 1996 at the 19th Franco-African summit in Ouagadougou,Burkina Faso, President Chirac told 49 African leaders that acceleratedeconomic development is the only possible way to stop "the problem of excessiveimmigration" to France and other industrial countries. On December 13, over 50 illegal African immigrants occupied UNESCO's Parisoffice for six hours to demand residence papers from the French government.The immigrants are part of the group that occupied a Paris church for twomonths this summer. France signed a deportation agreement with Hungary on December 16 thatallows each country to return illegal aliens to the other. French President Jacques Chirac on December 10 vowed to crack down ondiscrimination and punish racism. In an International Human Rights Dayaddress, Chirac attacked the anti-immigrant National Front party. Chirac urgedFrench residents not to show hostility towards the country's Muslim communitydespite an early December bombing that was possibly the work of the AlgerianMuslim fundamentalist rebels. The National Front mayor of Toulon gave a literary award to actressBrigitte Bardot rather than writer Marek Halter because, the mayor said, Halterwas "in favor of immigration and we are against it." Bardot, an ardent animalrights crusader, is charged with inciting racial discrimination after speakingout against Muslims for sacrificing sheep during their springtime holiday ofEid al-Adha, a sacrifice that begins a feast culminating the holy month and theannual pilgrimage to Mecca, Saudi Arabia. Bardot wrote "My homeland, my earth, is again invaded, with the blessing ofsuccessive governments, by an overpopulation of foreigners, notably Muslim."She called Le Pen "a very fine man" in her best-selling autobiography. On December 24, 1996, the French government said it received a letter fromIslamic guerrillas that threatened to "destroy" France unless the countryhalted all aid to its former colony and freed fundamentalist prisoners. ADecember 3, 1996 bombing killed four people on an underground Paris commutertrain. One of the 188 Islamic militants who won a seat in Algeria's 430-memberlegislature in December 1991 applied for asylum in the US and had hisapplication rejected in October 1996. The Algerian was expelled from France in1992 and is now being detained in the US. An Algerian civil war broke out in 1992 after the government canceled the1992 runoff election that the opposition appeared poised to win. Algeriabecame independent from France in 1962 after a war that divided the French muchas the Vietnam War did Americans. "Assembly clears bill to tighten already strict immigration law," ChicagoTribune, December 20, 1996. Angeline Oyog, "French Parliament Opens Bit ofCurb Migrants' Rights," Inter Press Service, December 17, 1996. "PlannedImmigration Law Questioned," Chicago Tribune, December 18, 1996. "Hungary andFrance to Sign Deportation Agreement," MTI Econews, December 15, 1996."African immigrants occupy UNESCO Paris offices," Reuters, December 13, 1996.Marie-Benedicte Allaire, "France's Chirac urges crackdown on racism," Reuters,December 10, 1996. Noiriel, Gerard. The French Melting Pot: Immigration,Citizenship, and National Identity. Minneapolis: University of MinnesotaPress. 1996. _______________________________WT02-B12-174IA088-000636-B042-319http://migration.ucdavis.edu:80/archive/mn_97/jan_97-14.html 128.120.36.171 19970122185437 text/html 2544HTTP/1.0 200 OKMIME-Version: 1.0Server: WebSTAR/1.3.1 ID/6378Message-ID: Date: Wednesday, 22-Jan-97 18:55:33 GMTLast-Modified: Tuesday, 21-Jan-97 21:07:07 GMTContent-type: text/htmlContent-length: 2289 Italy:  Legalization Finally Approved MIGRATION NEWS. Vol. 4, No. 1 January, 1997. Europe. Italy: Legalization Finally Approved Beginning in November 1995, the Italian government issued six 60-daydecrees that permit illegal immigrants to remain in the country if theyregister with local police. Some 250,000 migrants registered. Italy's Constitutional Court in October 1996 said that the governmentcannot keep issuing decrees; it must have the Italian Parliament approve anamnesty law. The National Alliance, part of the main center-right FreedomAlliance opposition, first offered 7,000 amendments to prevent theconsideration of a bill that would put the legalization into law, but theItalian Chamber of Deputies on December 4 approved the legalization plan by a261-126 vote. The vote means that illegal foreigners who registered can remain in Italyand that police may expel foreigners without appeal if they are considered athreat to public order. Lampedusa, an Italian island with 5,000 residents that is closer to Tunisiathan to Rome, received an estimated 3,000 illegal aliens so far in 1996. Manyof illegal aliens arrive from Tunisia via fishing boats. Until November 1996, a 1990 law made it illegal to enter Lampedusaunlawfully. Now, illegal entry is not an offense, but smuggling people ashoreis. Immigrants who illegally enter Lampedusa are asked to leave the Italianisland within 15 days. Many do, but continue their travels to other EU nationssuch as Germany or France. At a December summit, Albania and Italy pledged to increase cooperationbetween their police forces to fight organized crime and illegal immigrants.The details of the accord were not available. John Hooper, "Italy's Outcrop Offers Open Door to Illegals," The Guardian,December 13, 1996. "Italy and Albania reach accord on fighting illegalimmigration," BBC, December 11, 1996. "New Italian law means 250,000immigrants can stay," Reuters, December 5, 1996. Paul Holmes, "Italiangovernment seeks to salvage immigrant reprieve," Reuters, November 20, 1996. _______________________________WT02-B12-175IA088-000636-B042-326http://migration.ucdavis.edu:80/archive/mn_97/jan_97-15.html 128.120.36.171 19970122185446 text/html 2072HTTP/1.0 200 OKMIME-Version: 1.0Server: WebSTAR/1.3.1 ID/6378Message-ID: Date: Wednesday, 22-Jan-97 18:55:45 GMTLast-Modified: Tuesday, 21-Jan-97 21:07:07 GMTContent-type: text/htmlContent-length: 1817 Czech Immigration/Bulgarian Emigration MIGRATION NEWS. Vol. 4, No. 1 January, 1997. Europe. Czech Immigration/Bulgarian Emigration The Czech Republic has one of the lowest unemployment rates inEurope, three percent, which is attributed to low wages and a location thatattracts foreign investment, flexible labor markets with stingy unemploymentbenefits and a slow restructuring of old state-owned industries. There are 250,000 foreign workers, mostly from Eastern Europe, employed inthe Czech Republic. A Ukrainian worker employed for $2.50 per hour reportedthat he paid a labor broker 50 percent of his hourly wage. Some Czech officials worry that granting asylum to a Vietnamese politicalrefugee may lead to the occupation of Czech embassies in Asia by Vietnameseseeking asylum. Kim Long applied for asylum at the Czech embassy in Thailand,was granted refugee status by UN authorities in Bangkok and allowed to flyPrague, where he was granted asylum. Long intends to try to migrate to Canada,where he has relatives. Educated Bulgarians are reportedly emigrating as fast as they can findcountries to take them. According to the most recent Bulgarian census, about500,000 of Bulgaria's 8.5 million residents have emigrated since 1990, withmost moving to the US (35 percent), Germany, the UK and Austria. In 1995, morethan 7,000 professors and researchers, who average $50 per month in Bulgaria,emigrated. A survey found that 40 percent of Bulgaria's scientists areplanning to emigrate. "Czechs afraid of influx of Vietnamese economic refugees," CTK NationalNews Wire, December 18, 1996. _______________________________WT02-B12-176IA088-000636-B042-341http://migration.ucdavis.edu:80/archive/mn_97/jan_97-16.html 128.120.36.171 19970122185457 text/html 1494HTTP/1.0 200 OKMIME-Version: 1.0Server: WebSTAR/1.3.1 ID/6378Message-ID: Date: Wednesday, 22-Jan-97 18:55:54 GMTLast-Modified: Tuesday, 21-Jan-97 21:07:07 GMTContent-type: text/htmlContent-length: 1239 Swiss Referendum on Asylum MIGRATION NEWS. Vol. 4, No. 1 January, 1997. Europe. Swiss Referendum on Asylum On December 1, 1996 the Swiss voted 54 percent to 46 percent againsta measure that would prevented persons without documents from applying forasylum and given the government control over any wages earned byasylum-seekers. The Swiss People's Party drew up the immigration initiative in1991, when Switzerland had a record 42,000 asylum-seekers. There were 17,000applications for asylum in 1995. The Swiss government opposed the measure, arguing that it had alreadyreduced the number of asylum applications. The initiative received itsstrongest support in German-speaking cantons. Over 67 percent of Swiss voters rejected a change in labor laws which wouldhave opened the way for more overtime working and lifted a ban on Swiss womenworking night shifts. "Swiss Voters Reject Anti-Immigration Move," The Record, December 2, 1996.William Hall, "Business hits at results of Swiss poll on labour," FinancialTimes December 3, 1996. _______________________________WT02-B12-177IA088-000636-B042-351http://migration.ucdavis.edu:80/archive/mn_97/jan_97-17.html 128.120.36.171 19970122185511 text/html 1637HTTP/1.0 200 OKMIME-Version: 1.0Server: WebSTAR/1.3.1 ID/6378Message-ID: Date: Wednesday, 22-Jan-97 18:56:09 GMTLast-Modified: Tuesday, 21-Jan-97 21:07:07 GMTContent-type: text/htmlContent-length: 1382 Greece/Cyprus MIGRATION NEWS. Vol. 4, No. 1 January, 1997. Europe. Greece/Cyprus On June 19, Greece seized a Honduras-flag cargo ship carrying 136illegal Asian migrants just outside Piraeus. The mostly Indian and Pakistanimen said they had paid up to $6,000 each to be smuggled into the European Unionfor "a better life." Two Greeks were sentenced to four and one-half years in prison by an Athenscourt on November 14 after they were found guilty of using the hearse of XanthiMufti's office to transport illegal immigrants. The Mufti did not know aboutthe use of the hearse for smuggling. Cyprus plans to tighten its laws to allow prison terms of up to three yearsfor Cypriots employing foreigners without valid work permits. There are an estimated 30,000 foreigners employed in Cyprus, including12,000 illegal workers. Most workers are from Asia or the former USSR andemployed in agriculture or private households as domestics. "Two Greeks punished for transport illegal immigrants," Xinhua News Agency,November 14, 1996. "105 illegal Albanians arrested in Greece," Agence FrancePresse, November 1996. "Slave ship is seized in Piraeus," Lloyds List, June20, 1996. _______________________________WT02-B12-178IA088-000636-B042-361http://migration.ucdavis.edu:80/archive/mn_97/jan_97-18.html 128.120.36.171 19970122185630 text/html 6599HTTP/1.0 200 OKMIME-Version: 1.0Server: WebSTAR/1.3.1 ID/6378Message-ID: Date: Wednesday, 22-Jan-97 18:56:26 GMTLast-Modified: Tuesday, 21-Jan-97 21:07:11 GMTContent-type: text/htmlContent-length: 6344 Russia and Central Asian Republics MIGRATION NEWS. Vol. 4, No. 1 January, 1997. Europe. Russia and Central Asian Republics Moscow's mayor on December 22 said that Russia must introduce aquota system to regulate the migration of ethnic Russians from CIS countries toRussia. He also said that he was concerned about the forced assimilation ofethnic Russians in former Soviet Republics. In Sevastopol, Ukraine, where 75percent of the residents are ethnic Russians, all children are learningUkrainian in school. More than 300 persons from Azerbaijan have lived in a hotel in Moscow forseven years, with many reportedly afraid to leave the hotel for fear the policewill deport them back to Azerbaijan. The Azerbaijanis came to Moscow in 1989as Soviet citizens and now find themselves foreigners. In theory, thosefleeing conflicts are guaranteed either "forced migrant" or "refugee" status bythe Russian Constitution, but local laws often leave them with no officialstatus at all. A UN officer says that in some cities, refugees can not get permanentresidence registration unless they have refugee status, but they can not getrefugee status without residence registration. Many Russian cities still operate with the Soviet pass system. Moscow, forexample, requires residents to carry documents proving that they can work, thuspermitting police to use document checks to harass ethnic Caucasians, who areblamed for much of the city's crime. About seven percent of Russia's 150million residents live in Moscow. There are an estimated nine million displaced people in Russia, including3.5 million who escaped civil war or persecution. There are also an estimated 500,000 to one million illegal migrants fromChina, Afghanistan and Africa in Russia, according to governmentestimates. A Jewish family that was baptized as Catholic in Kazakstan 1990, emigratedto Israel in 1991, and in November 1996 had their application for citizenshiprejected by the Israeli High Court, which noted that the Law of Return,excludes Jews who have adopted another faith. The Law of Return permitsspouses and the immediate family of someone who is accepted as Jewish areallowed to qualify for Israeli citizenship. Under Jewish religious law, a Jew is defined as a person whose mother is aJew. The Law of Return was drafted to grant Israeli citizenship to those whowould have been persecuted as Jews under the Nazis and was extended to thegrandchildren of a Jew. Russia and Poland signed an agreement on a visa-free border for Polish andRussian citizens that has caused an "Eastern Flank scare" in Warsaw. Polishnewspapers are publishing stories about an impending flood of immigration fromCIS countries. Polish police believe the visa-free border will produce more"imported crime." Polish officials claim that over 1.5 million people are waiting in Russiafor a chance to immigrate to Western Europe. They fear that many Russians,Ukrainians and Belarusians may remain in Poland. Many Russian bazaars operate in Poland; the small scale "suitcase trade" isestimated at over one billion dollars a year. Originally peddlers broughtgoods with them to sell in Poland. Today there are illegal sewing factoriesaround Warsaw that employ hundreds of Russian, Belarusian, Ukrainian andLithuanian women to produce clothes. There may be 500,000 mostly illegal guest workers in Poland. Sweden, Denmark, Finland and Norway have agreed to grant asylum to 108refugees, primarily Kurds, who spent 16 days in 1995 being shuttled betweenRussia and Lithuania in a train because neither country would accept them.They were moved in April, 1995 to Latvia's Olaine internment camp near Riga andheld there for 20 months. The group's two-year ordeal began when they traveled overland to Moscow.From Moscow, the group went to Latvia and boarded a boat to Sweden, which ranaground on an Estonian island. They were returned to Riga, Latvia and hiduntil March 21, 1995, when they began their train journey as Latvia tried toexpel them. After a UNHCR complaint against Latvia for holding the Kurds in the traincarriages, which were unsanitary and unheated, they were moved to the Olaineprison, just outside Riga. Conditions in the internment camp were reportedlypoor; the camp had a faulty heating system and little food or medicine. Latviastill has no legislation on refugees and asylum seekers. The economies of Kyrgyzstan, Kazakhstan, Uzbekistan, Tajikistan andTurkmenistan shrank after Moscow eliminated subsidies in 1992 . All exceptTajikistan are expected to grow in 1996. Uzbekistan and Turkmenistan aretrying to shift from cotton to grains and to exploit their oil wealth, but mostproperty is still owned by the government, which also sets prices for manycommodities. Kyrgyzstan has come closest to a Polish-style quick free-markettransition. Several reports focused on potential environmental emigration from CentralAsia. In 1960, the Aral sea was the fourth largest lake in the world andsupported a thriving fishing industry. Water was diverted from the rivers thatflow into the Aral sea to irrigate cotton and today the Aral sea is one-thirdits 1960 size. The water for 54 million nearby residents has beenpoisoned. "Illegal immigration grows in Russia," Agence France Presse, December 30,1996. Lee Hockstader, "Moscow Is a Haven of Haves Amid Russia's Sea ofHave-Nots," Washington Post, December 27 1996. Sarah Koening, "RefugeesStraining Patience in Russia," New York Times, December 26, 1996. TengizRachkoria, "Repatriation of refugees discussed in Abkhazia," TASS, December 24,1996. Valery Masterov, "Poland Cautious Over Open Border with 'Eastern Flank,'"Moscow Times, December 19, 1996. "Refugees leave Latvia for Scandinavia,"Deutsche Presse-Agentur, December 16, 1996. Adrian Bridge, "Sweden endsrefugees' nightmare," The Independent, December 6, 1996. Serge Schmemann,"Israeli Immigrants: Catholic, Jewish and Stateless, All at Once," WashingtonPost, November 25, 1996. _______________________________WT02-B12-179IA088-000636-B043-3http://migration.ucdavis.edu:80/archive/mn_97/jan_97-19.html 128.120.36.171 19970122185715 text/html 2829HTTP/1.0 200 OKMIME-Version: 1.0Server: WebSTAR/1.3.1 ID/6378Message-ID: Date: Wednesday, 22-Jan-97 18:58:12 GMTLast-Modified: Tuesday, 21-Jan-97 21:07:11 GMTContent-type: text/htmlContent-length: 2574 UK Employer Sanctions MIGRATION NEWS. Vol. 4, No. 1 January, 1997. Europe. UK Employer Sanctions The UK's Home Affairs ministry mailed letters to 1.1 million Britishemployers in early December informing them that the employer sanctions includedin the 1996/97 Asylum and Immigration Act go into effect January 27, 1997.Employers found to have hired illegal alien workers over 16 can be fined up toL5000. The government estimates employer compliance costs at L0.68 or about $1per employee. An employer can escape employer sanctions if the employer can prove that hesaw and kept a copy of documentation which seemed to relate to the jobapplicant and appeared to him to prove they were entitled to work in the UK.The government said that "We are not expecting employers to act as immigrationofficers. We wouldn't expect an employer to detect a good forgery, for example.That is our business." Industries most likely to be affected by the new employer sanctions lawinclude farming, clothing, construction and catering. Some 10,000 illegal workers were apprehended in the UK in 1996 comparedwith 4,000 in 1988. In 1995, illegal entry action was initiated against 10,381people, up from 7480 in 1994. However, two thirds of the illegal aliensdetected in 1995 applied for asylum to prevent their removal from theUK. About 35 percent of the illegals in 1995 deceived an immigration officer atentry and 31 percent were smuggled into the UK. According to British press reports, "hundreds" of East Europeans are payingL150 to register with agencies in Eastern Europe for "no documentationrequired" jobs in the UK. Typically young people pay another L750 for touristor student visas and then arrive in the UK to work long hours on farms and infactories for L2 per hour, or about L80 to L100 per week. While working, theymust pay up to half their earnings for transportation andaccommodations. The British company that the workers thought they were working for assertedthat it had only rented housing and vans to subcontractors who were the actualemployers. "Illegal migrant suspects up 40 percent," Press AssociationNewsfile, December 29, 1996. "Discrimination fear over illegal workers' curbs,"Press Association Newsfile, December 3, 1996. Jo Knowsley, "Foreigners dupedand paid slave wages," Sunday Telegraph, October 20, 1996. _______________________________WT02-B12-180IA088-000636-B043-15http://migration.ucdavis.edu:80/archive/mn_97/jan_97-20.html 128.120.36.171 19970122185736 text/html 4060HTTP/1.0 200 OKMIME-Version: 1.0Server: WebSTAR/1.3.1 ID/6378Message-ID: Date: Wednesday, 22-Jan-97 18:58:32 GMTLast-Modified: Tuesday, 21-Jan-97 21:07:11 GMTContent-type: text/htmlContent-length: 3805 Asian Labor Migration MIGRATION NEWS. Vol. 4, No. 1 January, 1997. Asia. Asian Labor Migration Asian countries received $75 billion in remittances from workersabroad in 1995 compared with $54 billion in official foreign aid, according tothe Asian Development Bank. More Asian workers seem to be emigrating illegally to avoid the long waitfor work permits and the heavy commission charged by labor brokers. The FarEastern Economic Review in a May 23, 1996 cover story criticized immigrationcountries for restricting access to their labor markets and thus pushingmigrants into illegal status, where they can be exploited. The FEER reported aconservative 2.6 million migrant workers in East Asia. The ADB noted that many migrants go abroad illegally to avoid waits andfees and that a rising number of illegal workers are being apprehended inSingapore, Malaysia and Thailand. According to the FEER, Indonesian police areinvolved in smuggling workers to Malaysia. A special issue of the Asian and Pacific Migration Journal is devoted toDynamics of Labor Migration in Asia. The APMJ includes 10 papers that werepresented in March 1996 at a conference in Japan. Topics covered include laborcontractors in Japan, migrant worker policies and conditions in Korea andTaiwan, and the migration transition in Malaysia. Copies may be ordered fromthe Scalabrini Migration Center, fax 63(2)-721-4296, email smc@mnl.sequel.net,or web site http://www.sequel.net/~smc In another blow to the theory of the Asian economic miracle, it is arguedthat East Asian nations had high savings and rapid economic growth because theyhad relatively few young and old people to support. The percentage of thepopulation under 15 fell from 40 percent or more in the 1960s to 25 percent inKorea. According to NBER Working Paper 5560, the sharp drop in the dependencyratio (the number of workers to the young and old who need support) fueledsavings and investment at home and abroad. In this way, the global capitalmarket transfers investment funds from older savers in one country to youngerconsumers in another. The Asian economic miracle is reportedly built on high savings andinvestment rates, fiscal and monetary discipline, educated work forces and lowtaxes. One economic history of the world asserts that the center of gravity in theworld economy was in the Mediterranean in the 16th and 17th centuries, thenmoved to northern Europe in the 18th and 19th centuries and crossed theAtlantic to America in the 20th century. Based on present trends and policies,the 21st century could be the Asian or Pacific century. Annual economic growth in East Asia (excluding Japan) has averaged 8.5percent since 1985 and is forecast by the World Bank to grow at an eightpercent annual rate to 2005. At seven percent growth compounded, East Asiadoubles per capita output every decade. Economic integration in Asia means that Asian countries in 1995 accountedfor about 70 percent of foreign direct investment within the region and 50percent of all trade was intra-regional trade. "Immigrant workers' role in Asia's development," Xinhua News Agency,December 16, 1996. Martin, Philip, Andrew Mason, and Toshikazu Nagayama (Eds).1996. The Dynamics of Labor Migration in Asia. Special issue of the Asian andPacific Migration Journal. Vol 5, No 2-3. Higgins, Matthew and JeffreyWilliamson. 1996. Asian Demography and Foreign Capital Dependence. NBERWorking Paper 5560. Gary Silverman, "Vital and Vulnerable," Far EasternEconomic Review, May 23, 1996. _______________________________WT02-B12-181IA088-000636-B043-24http://migration.ucdavis.edu:80/archive/mn_97/jan_97-21.html 128.120.36.171 19970122185746 text/html 7553HTTP/1.0 200 OKMIME-Version: 1.0Server: WebSTAR/1.3.1 ID/6378Message-ID: Date: Wednesday, 22-Jan-97 18:58:43 GMTLast-Modified: Tuesday, 21-Jan-97 21:07:07 GMTContent-type: text/htmlContent-length: 7298 Malaysia: New Agency and Crackdown MIGRATION NEWS. Vol. 4, No. 1 January, 1997. Asia. Malaysia: New Agency and Crackdown The Malaysian government plans to establish a new agency in 1997 tohandle all matters pertaining to foreign workers. There have been allegationsthat the government's Foreign Workers' Task Force detains illegal foreignworkers from some employers and then releases them to other employers. The government announced on December 17 that 8,000 foreigners, including2,000 Indonesians, who were caught working illegally in the country will bedeported. Among the first to be deported will be those found unfit to workbecause they are suffering from infectious diseases, or are judged illiterateor too old. The 8,000 illegals are among the almost 11,000 foreigners now held in 10detention camps throughout the country after they were arrested for enteringwithout proper working permits in Malaysia. The remaining illegal immigrantswill be allowed to stay in the camps so that they can be recruited by potentialemployers. A government official also said that an independent inquiry failed to findany proof that the illegals are being mistreated in the detention camps. Beginning in January, 1997, Malaysia is stiffening penalties on smugglersand brokers, making those who harbor illegal aliens, including employers offive or more illegal aliens and landlords who rent to them, responsible for thecost of apprehending and returning them to their country of origin, as well asfines of M$50,000 ($20,000), two to five years in prison and six strokes of thecane. Making, forging or altering a visa, permit, pass or certificate can leadto fines of M$ 30,000 to M$ 100,000. Illegal foreigners face deportation after a first entry and subject toM$10,000 in fines, 10 years in jail and six strokes of the cane if they return.Employers found to have hired illegal alien workers face fines of M$10,000 toM$50,000 ($4,000 to $20,000). Late December press reports suggest that some foreigners are attempting toleave Malaysia before December 31, 1996. Illegal immigrants who enteredMalaysia before July 31, 1996 are allowed to register until December 31, 1996if they want to continue working in Malaysia. As of mid-December, 1996, about300,000 workers had been registered by 17,000 employers Malaysia built a $22 million, 17-mile wall-- eight feet tall, two feetthick and topped with barbed wire--on its northern border with Thailand todeter illegal immigration. One report says that 30,000 Bangladeshis are inThailand along the Malaysian-Thai border waiting for an opportunity to crossthe border. Some Bangladeshi politicians have reportedly called forrecognition of a right to migrate around the world in search of work. A nationwide crackdown on illegal immigrants is scheduled to begin onJanuary 1, 1997. Most reports say that there are about two million foreigners in Malaysia,half illegal, making them about 25 percent of the eight million labor force.Some 300,000 Malaysians are unemployed. The number of foreigners in Malaysiahas increased from an estimated 100,000 in the late 1970s to 600,000 in thelate 1980s. Many academics have urged the government to restrict the entry of foreignworkers and allow wage rates to increase in order to reduce labor shortages andspur productivity growth. The government seems to agree: "The future foreignworkers will be knowledge workers. The non-skilled workers will only be neededin the construction and plantation sectors." However, a gas station owner noted that, it is more expensive to buyself-service gas pumps than to hire Bangaldeshi attendants, who typically earnM$900 or $360 per month for 12 to 14 hour days, six days per week. Beginningon January 1, 1997, gas stations are supposed to begin to convert to selfservice. In mid-November, the Straits Times opened its article "Can KL shutfloodgates on foreign workers?" with this description of urban life: "Petrolis pumped by Bangladeshis, rubbish cleared by Indonesians, hotel rooms tidiedby Filipinos, restaurant meals served by Myanmar nationals and trousermeasurements taken by Pakistanis." Some 25,000 foreigners from 52 countries are working on the M$9 billionKuala Lumpur International Airport. As the number of foreigners increases, social issues have become moreimportant. One leader of a housing estate said of foreigners: "They are livingnext to us, marrying our daughters and making this place unsafe." In September,1996, 100 residents and 70 Bangladeshis clashed in the streets. Employers often house Bangladeshis, Nepalese and Myanmar nationals who donot speak Malay, Chinese or Tamil in housing estates with middle-classMalaysians. At least 2,000 Bangladeshi men have married local women since1990, most of them ethnic Indians. A typical political proposal is "Foreign workers are here to work. Theyshould not be allowed to mix with Malaysian women." The government announcedthat, like Singapore, foreigners who marry Malaysian women will notautomatically be allowed to stay in Malaysia. The Federation of MalaysianManufacturers wants foreign workers to be allowed to bring their wives toMalaysia so that the wives can work. In discussing a significant investment for a computerized method ofhandling ship containers, Prime Minister Datuk Seri Dr. Mahathir Mohamad saidthat "If we do not want foreign workers, then we will have to find ways toreplace them." The government has tried to offset publicity that says thatespecially Bangladeshis commit crimes and marry Malay women to get legalstatus. According to the government, foreigners were involved in less than sixpercent of all serious crimes committed in Malaysia in 1995 and only 1,000 to2,000 foreigners have married local women. However, 50 percent of the babies born in most government hospitals arefrom migrant parents and some worry about how Malays will react to foreignersif there is a recession. Malaysia announced plans to create a savings program that would encourageforeign workers to keep their savings in the country; remittances are estimatedto be M$2.5 billion ($1 billion) per year. In December, Malaysia unveiled its seventh five-year plan, which forecastseight percent annual economic growth between 1996 and 2000, down from 8.7percent per year during the first half of the 1990s. Manufacturing growth isto be maintained by increasing productivity, not adding workers. Malaysia's per capita income was about $4,000 in 1995. "Illegal workers try to flee Malaysia," Reuters World Service, December 29,1996. "New agency to tackle foreign-worker issues," Straits Times, December 19,1996. "Malaysia to begin deporting 8,000 illegal foreign workers," DeutschePresse-Agentur, December 17, 1996. Vijay Joshi, "Border wall stirs ire amongThais," Chicago Tribune, December 13, 1996. Brendan Pereira, "Can KL shutfloodgates on foreign workers?" Straits Times, November 17, 1996. _______________________________WT02-B12-182IA088-000636-B043-35http://migration.ucdavis.edu:80/archive/mn_97/jan_97-22.html 128.120.36.171 19970122185810 text/html 2645HTTP/1.0 200 OKMIME-Version: 1.0Server: WebSTAR/1.3.1 ID/6378Message-ID: Date: Wednesday, 22-Jan-97 18:58:59 GMTLast-Modified: Tuesday, 21-Jan-97 21:07:07 GMTContent-type: text/htmlContent-length: 2390 Japan: Boat People and Citizenship MIGRATION NEWS. Vol. 4, No. 1 January, 1997. Asia. Japan: Boat People and Citizenship A group of 24 Pakistanis arrived in Kagoshima on a freighter andreceived transit visas and then were detained on suspicion that they wereattempting to enter Japan to work. They boarded the cargo ship in China andSouth Korea masquerading as sailors, after buying sailors' ID cards from aPakistani company for about 500,000 yen each. A Japanese fishing boat carrying 100 Chinese thought to be trying to enterJapan was stopped on December 11, 1996. The city government of Hiroshima granted Japanese nationality on December19, 1996 to a child born of a Philippine woman and a Japanese father who wasmarried to another woman. The decision followed a court-mediated settlementworked out in the Hiroshima District Court between the mother and the Japanesegovernment. The Filipino woman came to Japan in 1988 but overstayed her visa. InSeptember 1991, she gave birth. In April 1992 she filed the lawsuit againstthe Japanese government to block her deportation. The court-mediated settlement followed a Justice Ministry announcement inJuly that it would grant legal residency in Japan to divorced, separated,widowed or otherwise single foreigners who are bringing up children who have atleast one Japanese parent. About half of Asian and Brazilian workers in Japan said they like Japan,according to a December 1996 survey of 900 workers from China, Taiwan, SouthKorea, the Philippines, Thailand, Malaysia, Myanmar, Indonesia and Brazil. Themigrant workers averaged 200,000 yen per month and their monthly pay rangedfrom 250,000 yen per month for workers from Brazil and Taiwan to 180,000 forFilipinos and 130,000 for Indonesians. Most Taiwanese, Filipinos, and Malaysians liked working in Japan, but amajority of Brazilian and Thai workers said that they were not satisfied inJapan. There are about 1.23 million foreigners living in Japan. "Japanese nationality given to child," Japan Economic Newswire, December20, 1996. "16 Pakistanis sent home for trying to work in Japan," JapanEconomic Newswire, December 19, 1996. _______________________________WT02-B12-183IA088-000636-B043-47http://migration.ucdavis.edu:80/archive/mn_97/jan_97-23.html 128.120.36.171 19970122190113 text/html 4556HTTP/1.0 200 OKMIME-Version: 1.0Server: WebSTAR/1.3.1 ID/6378Message-ID: Date: Wednesday, 22-Jan-97 19:01:52 GMTLast-Modified: Tuesday, 21-Jan-97 21:07:07 GMTContent-type: text/htmlContent-length: 4301 Hong Kong and China MIGRATION NEWS. Vol. 4, No. 1 January, 1997. Asia. Hong Kong and China After the 1989 Tiananmen Square massacre, the UK adopted the BritishNationality Selection Scheme to anchor 50,000 key people and their families inHong Kong, a total of 135,000, by granting them British nationality. There arefears that the sensitive list of those receiving British passports has beenleaked to China. China regards the holders of British passports obtained under a specialscheme as dual citizens and therefore not entitled to full consular protectionin Hong Kong. There is speculation about what will happen to Hong Kong residents livingoutside Hong Kong on July 1, 1997. Under Chinese guidelines, permanentresidents who emigrate and acquire foreign nationality can retain their rightof abode and access to foreign consular protection if they return and settle inHong Kong before July 1, 1997. British officials have asked China to assure Hong Kong residents who areoverseas that they do not have to be in Hong Kong on July 1, 1997 to preservetheir residence rights. If China does not grant this assurance, Britishofficials warn that there could be a rush by overseas Hong Kong people to theterritory on the eve of the handover. Emigration from Hong Kong is at its lowest level since the Tiananmen Squaremassacre of June 1989. A survey of five countries that have been magnets forHong Kong migrs found that only Australia has had anysignificant increase in arrivals in 1996 over 1995. The estimate of migration to Canada this year was 18,800 compared with19,000 last year and 32,600 in 1994, the survey said, quoting from figuresprovided by immigration lawyers. Immigration visas issued by the United Statestotaled 8,641 in the January-November period this year, compared with 11,018last year and 11,000 in 1994. Immigration analysts warn that the figures are deceptive because most ofthe would-be emigrants left the territory in the early 1990s, following theTainanmen Square crackdown. Many are now returning to Hong Kong because theyhave completed residency requirements abroad. With a foreign passport in caseof an emergency, Hong Kong emigrants feel safer about returning to Hong Kong. About 150 immigrants from China arrive in Hong Kong every day, 70 per centcome from Guangdong and 15 per cent from Fujian, as do 142,000 other entrants.About 60 illegal aliens are apprehended daily, down from 80 daily in 1995. Hong Kong police report that the number of illegal immigrants from China tothe territory declined 13 percent in the first 11 months of 1996. The policealso report that the number of crimes committed by illegal immigrants hasdeclined by 30 percent over the same period. After July 1, 1997, China plans to continue customs and immigrationcontrols on persons entering Hong Kong from China. Hong Kong's immigrationoffice currently has 5,700 officers. China has announced that the 139,000 Filipino workers in Hong Kong will beallowed to remain after Hong Kong reverts from British to Chinese rule onmidnight of June 30, 1997. There are 32,000 British nationals in Hong Kong andtheir employers will have to prove to local authorities that they cannot findlocal workers if they want to receive work permits after July 1, 1997. In December 1996, there were 11,000 Vietnamese in camps in HongKong. About 6.3 million people live in Hong Kong and Hong Kong attracted almost12 million tourists in 1997. Shenzhen, across the border from Hong Kong, gave 906 migrant families 15days to return to their villages of origin because they has too many children.The city revoked their work permits and ordered housing authorities to stoprenting them housing. Local residents often refer to migrants as "outsiders"and blame them for crime and congestion. "Hong Kong, China police discuss cooperation, crime situation," BBC,December 20, 1996. "Hong Kong emigration hits lowest level since Tiananmenmassacre," Agence France Presse, December 15, 1996. _______________________________WT02-B12-184IA088-000636-B043-58http://migration.ucdavis.edu:80/archive/mn_97/jan_97-24.html 128.120.36.171 19970122190149 text/html 3112HTTP/1.0 200 OKMIME-Version: 1.0Server: WebSTAR/1.3.1 ID/6378Message-ID: Date: Wednesday, 22-Jan-97 19:02:43 GMTLast-Modified: Tuesday, 21-Jan-97 21:07:08 GMTContent-type: text/htmlContent-length: 2857 Philippines:  Regulating Migrant Conditions MIGRATION NEWS. Vol. 4, No. 1 January, 1997. Asia. Philippines: Regulating Migrant Conditions There are an estimated 4.2 to 4.5 million Filipinos from apopulation of 70 million working abroad. Most of them are women, including 95percent of the 131,165 Filipino domestic workers in Hong Kong. According tothe Philippines' Overseas Workers Welfare Administration, at least 700 Filipinomigrants died in foreign countries 1996. Several Philippine politicians have proposed new programs, financed by feescharged to migrants, to better protect them overseas. However, many Filipinomigrants say that they already pay too many fees. Filipino domestics abroad already pay, for example, monetary insurance ofHK$32 once every two years; a lifetime welfare fee of HK$200 to cover legalaid, counseling, medical assistance, repatriation and burial fees, arepatriation fee of $ 120 once every two years and a yearly Medicare levy of$300. Each contract renewal costs $200 plus authentication fees of $425.Income tax of $132 is paid to the Philippine government on the $3,750 minimumwage. The Bangko Sentral ng Pilipinas estimated in October 1996 that 42 percentof remittances to the Philippines went through banks, and announced plans tocompete more effectively with the padala (courier) system for transferringmoney home. According to BSP, some 4.2 million Filipinos send home an average$350 per month, or a total of $12 billion per year, but only $7 billion isreflected in bank and balance of trade data. In 1982, President Marcos said the Overseas Contract Workers (OCW's)Program would be a temporary measure to alleviate unemployment while thecountry moved towards an industrial economy. About 45 percent of the Filipino labor force are employed in agriculture,but agriculture generates only about 25 percent of Philippine GDP. The 16,000Philippine sugar growers employ about 500,000 workers to produce two milliontons of sugar each year. However, the Philippine sugar industry is notefficient; in 1995, the Philippines was a net importer of sugar. The 1,500 Vietnamese boat people on the western island of Palawan who werepermitted to stay in the Philippines after the Catholic church promised to carefor them are seeking renewable six-month special work permits. Many want tomove to Manila. "Vietnamese boat people seek work permits in the Philippines," AgenceFrance Presse, December 16, 1996. Keith B. Richburg, "Philippine EconomyReviving," Washington Post, November 22 1996. "Domestics face the home truth,"South China Morning Post, November 11, 1996. _______________________________WT02-B12-185IA088-000636-B043-72http://migration.ucdavis.edu:80/archive/mn_97/jan_97-25.html 128.120.36.171 19970122190304 text/html 2957HTTP/1.0 200 OKMIME-Version: 1.0Server: WebSTAR/1.3.1 ID/6378Message-ID: Date: Wednesday, 22-Jan-97 19:03:07 GMTLast-Modified: Tuesday, 21-Jan-97 21:07:08 GMTContent-type: text/htmlContent-length: 2702 Indonesia:  Substitute Natives for Foreigners MIGRATION NEWS. Vol. 4, No. 1 January, 1997. Asia. Indonesia: Substitute Natives for Foreigners Beginning in 1997, all foreign workers in Indonesia will have to paya levy of US$100 per month. The money will be deposited in a skillsdevelopment fund, and used to run training programs to improve the skills ofIndonesian workers. When asked to provide an example of how the training fundsmight be used, the manpower minister said that journalists could improve theirEnglish "so that Indonesian reporters can reach the same standards as Americanreporters, can work in CNN and other such occupations." The government expects to raise US $50 million per year from the 57,000foreigners currently working in Indonesia, earning an estimated $2.4 billionper year. The announcement comes three months after the Indonesian Parliamentpassed a bill backing a five-fold increase in the annual municipal tax onforeigners living in Jakarta. In April 1996, the Indonesian government issued a list of industries thatwill be closed to foreign workers to reduce their number. Thirty percent ofthe foreigner workers in Indonesia are in mining, and 11,000 are SouthKoreans. Indonesia, which has almost 200 million residents scattered over 13,000islands speaking 350 languages, attracted $40 billion in foreign investmentcommitments in 1995. Not all these promised investments will be made.Indonesia is trying to walk a tightrope between holding down wages but nothaving trade sanctions slapped on Indonesia. In November, 1996, the IndonesianSupreme Court reversed an earlier decision and found some labor activistsguilty and in December, 1996, more labor union leaders went on trial. The ILO released a report that asserted that "The general situation ofworkers in Indonesia has not evolved but is still characterized by serious andworsening infringement of basic human and trade human rights... includingarrest, imprisonment and harassment of workers and trade union leaders."Minimum wages rose 30 percent in 1996. The last group of Vietnamese boat people left Galang Island on September 2,1996. The 8,000-hectare island will be developed into an industrial zone. Susan Sim, "Jakarta to charge levy on all foreign workers," Straits Times,December 11, 1996. "Last group of Vietnamese repatriated from Galang Island,"BBC, September 5, 1996. "Indonesia to bar foreign workers from some sectors,"Reuters, April 15, 1996. _______________________________WT02-B12-186IA088-000636-B043-91http://migration.ucdavis.edu:80/archive/mn_97/jan_97-26.html 128.120.36.171 19970122190420 text/html 2401HTTP/1.0 200 OKMIME-Version: 1.0Server: WebSTAR/1.3.1 ID/6378Message-ID: Date: Wednesday, 22-Jan-97 19:04:59 GMTLast-Modified: Tuesday, 21-Jan-97 21:07:08 GMTContent-type: text/htmlContent-length: 2146 Korea To Increase Foreign Trainees MIGRATION NEWS. Vol. 4, No. 1 January, 1997. Asia. Korea To Increase Foreign Trainees On December 6, 1996, Korea announced that it would increase thenumber of Chinese trainees in the country. About 12,0000 of the 80,000 foreignindustrial trainees in Korea are ethnic Koreans from China. A family of 17, the biggest group of North Korean defectors since theKorean War, arrived in Seoul in December 1996, six weeks after escaping acrossthe frozen Tuman River through China and Hong Kong. Their escape was financedby relatives in the United States. The family stayed with some of the twomillion ethnic Koreans in China, posing as rural migrant workers. About 150 North Koreans have defected to South Korea in the past threeyears, including about 30 in 1996. Hundreds of North Koreans reportedly resideillegally in China and Russia. Korea in December announced changes to its labor laws that would legitimizenew unions after 2000, but immediately give employers more freedom to dismissworkers after 60 days notice. Most wage negotiations are at the company leveland multiple unions in one company will not be permitted until 2002. Unionswill be permitted to engage in union activities, but civil servants will not beallowed to join unions. The Korean government has recognized the Federation of Korea Trade Unions,with 1.2 million members, but not the 500,000-member Korean Federation of TradeUnions. On December 27, over 350,000 Korean workers went on strike to protest theapproval of the new labor laws in a secret six-minute session of the NationalAssembly that began at 6am on December 26, with only members of the ruling NewKorea Party voting. The government said that it would not tolerate the illegalstrike. "Foreign bodies in South Korea," The Economist, December 14, 1996. BrianWilliams, "N. Koreans Make Daring Escape South," Washington Post, December 10,1996. _______________________________WT02-B12-187IA088-000636-B043-105http://migration.ucdavis.edu:80/archive/mn_97/jan_97-27.html 128.120.36.171 19970122190451 text/html 1829HTTP/1.0 200 OKMIME-Version: 1.0Server: WebSTAR/1.3.1 ID/6378Message-ID: Date: Wednesday, 22-Jan-97 19:05:45 GMTLast-Modified: Tuesday, 21-Jan-97 21:07:07 GMTContent-type: text/htmlContent-length: 1574 Singapore Steps up Enforcement MIGRATION NEWS. Vol. 4, No. 1 January, 1997. Asia. Singapore Steps up Enforcement A Korean joint venture firm, Ssangyong-Guan Ho Joint Venture, wasfined a record S$1.56 million for employing illegal foreign workers. After a3.5 day trial in August 1996, the firm was convicted of 50 charges of havingillegal aliens on a construction site and fined S$23,000 per illegal alien,plus S$412,000 for three-years of unpaid levies; 26 workers were employedwithout work permits. During a March 1996 raid, inspectors found 188 Indonesian and Malaysianworkers; 139 without valid entry permits and 49 without work permits. A new law went into effect in March 1996 that makes the general contractorresponsible for all violations of immigration laws at constructionsites. In December 1996, Singapore permitted janitorial service firms to recruitworkers not only in Malaysia, but also in Bangladesh, Thailand and thePhilippines for public sector cleaning jobs. About 32 of the 262 registeredcleaning contractors in Singapore are expected to qualify to recruit additionalforeign workers. The cleaning industry estimates the current shortage ofworkers at 30 per cent to 40 per cent. "$1.56 million fine against contractor," Straits Times, December 6, 1996.Dominic Nathan, "Relaxed labor restrictions welcomed," Straits Times, December5, 1996. _______________________________WT02-B12-188IA088-000636-B043-117http://migration.ucdavis.edu:80/archive/mn_97/jan_97-28.html 128.120.36.171 19970122190458 text/html 2821HTTP/1.0 200 OKMIME-Version: 1.0Server: WebSTAR/1.3.1 ID/6378Message-ID: Date: Wednesday, 22-Jan-97 19:05:57 GMTLast-Modified: Tuesday, 21-Jan-97 21:07:07 GMTContent-type: text/htmlContent-length: 2566 Australia/New Zealand MIGRATION NEWS. Vol. 4, No. 1 January, 1997. Other. Australia/New Zealand Australia's Minister for Immigration and Multicultural Affairs onDecember 13, 1996 promised a "a planned and balanced migration program" thatwould admit 74,000 immigrants per year. The new government abolished theOffice of Multicultural Affairs and the Bureau of Immigration and PopulationResearch. The fallout over a September 10, 1996 speech by a newly elected member ofParliament, Pauline Hanson, who said that Australia was "in danger of beingswamped by Asians" continued. Despite a joint parliamentary resolution thatreaffirmed a nondiscriminatory immigration policy, a poll by the Far EasternEconomic Review found that most senior Asian executives see Australia as lessattractive for investment because of the speech and they believe Prime MinisterJohn Howard's government has mishandled reactions to it. According to one poll, 48 percent of Australians agree that there are toomany Asian immigrants arriving. About five percent of Australia's residentsare "visible minorities." The Economist summarized one view of changing Australia. The old Australiawas based on five ideas: a "white Australia", trade protection, centralizedwage arbitration intended to ensure a decent standard of living for all, statepaternalism and the link to the British empire. Since 1975, the new Australiahas embraced multiculturalism, the dismantling of tariffs, tentative moves awayfrom centralized wage bargaining, a loss of faith in government and "nationalmaturity." According to the World Bank, Australia remains the richest country in theworld, when unexploited natural resources are taken into account. Australia's Department of Immigration and Multicultural Affairs maintains aweb site at http://www.immi.gov.au/ In New Zealand, two economists argued that the government's tightening ofbusiness migration laws has reduced the number of Asian investors. Immigrationrequirements imposed in 1996 include tougher English language standards andplace value on business experience. Of 997 immigrant approvals in October1996, 14 were for business investors. "A national identity crisis," The Economist, December 14, 1996. Cremer,Rolf and Bala Ramamsamy. 1996. Tigers In New Zealand? The Role of AsianInvestment In The Economy. _______________________________WT02-B12-189IA088-000636-B043-123http://migration.ucdavis.edu:80/archive/mn_97/jan_97-29.html 128.120.36.171 19970122190559 text/html 1705HTTP/1.0 200 OKMIME-Version: 1.0Server: WebSTAR/1.3.1 ID/6378Message-ID: Date: Wednesday, 22-Jan-97 19:06:40 GMTLast-Modified: Tuesday, 21-Jan-97 21:07:07 GMTContent-type: text/htmlContent-length: 1450 MIGRATION NEWS. Vol. 4, No. 1 January, 1997. Other. US and World Population The US population was 266 million on January 1, 1997, up about 2.3million or 0.9 percent from January 1, 1996. Net immigration of 809,000accounted for about one-third of the population increase. There were 3.8million births and 2.3 million deaths in 1996. The US Census Bureau projected in September 1996 that the world'spopulation will increase from 5.8 billion in 1996 to 6.1 billion in 2000 and7.6 billion in 2020. The world's population growth will slow despite adecreased rate of growth, from about 1.5 percent in 1996, or 87 million peryear, to one percent in 2020, or 76 million per year. About 80 percent of the world's population lives in developing nations, butthey account for about 95 percent of population growth. Half of the world's population lives in the six most populouscountries--China, India, US, Indonesia, Brazil and Russia. By 2020, Nigeriaand Pakistan are expected to replace Brazil and Russia among the five mostpopulous countries. About 46 percent of the world's residents live in urban areas and the urbanpercentage is expected to increase to 54 percent by 2020. US Bureau of the Census. World Population Profile: 1996. WP/96 _______________________________WT02-B12-190IA088-000636-B043-136http://migration.ucdavis.edu:80/archive/mn_97/jan_97-30.html 128.120.36.171 19970122190625 text/html 2567HTTP/1.0 200 OKMIME-Version: 1.0Server: WebSTAR/1.3.1 ID/6378Message-ID: Date: Wednesday, 22-Jan-97 19:07:11 GMTLast-Modified: Tuesday, 21-Jan-97 21:07:08 GMTContent-type: text/htmlContent-length: 2312 Immigration into Venezuela MIGRATION NEWS. Vol. 4, No. 1 January, 1997. Other. Immigration into Venezuela Colombia and Venezuela share 2,219 kilometers of border and manyColombians take advantage of better opportunities in Venezuela and move there.Venezuela's president Rafael Caldera spoke of "hundreds of thousands, possiblyeven millions of Colombian immigrants living in Venezuela" when he addressedthe Colombian Congress in September 1995. Venezuela is a country of 21 million with 1993 per capita GNP of $2,800 in1993. The minimum wage was raised to 45,000 Bolivars ($150) per month inFebruary 1996 and unemployment is 25 percent. Colombia is a country of 36million with a per capita GNP of $1,400. One estimate is that 70 percent of the immigrants living in thenorthwestern Venezuelan state of Tachira are Colombians. Colombians are 90percent of the agricultural labor force in Tachira and most earn less than $40a month. Venezuela in March 1995 deported 1,000 Colombians from the westernVenezuelan border area and announced plans to conduct a census to locate anddeport illegal immigrants. A February 1995 attack on a Venezuelan bordermilitary post that left eight Venezuelan soldiers dead strained relationsbetween the two countries. Venezuela seems to prefer European to Colombian immigrants. In Fall 1994,Venezuela asked the European Union (EU) for aid to help 5,000 to 10,000immigrants from East European nations move to Venezuela each year. Thousandsof Spaniards and Portuguese migrated to Venezuela in the late 1940s. A totalof 800,000 immigrants arrived in Venezuela between 1948 and 1961. Regional officials in Venezuela blamed a cholera outbreak in December 1996on uncontrolled immigration from Colombia and non-stop rain. Immigrationofficials do not keep count of the number of people going in and out ofVenezuela, making it harder for health authorities to control thedisease. "Venezuela blames cholera on immigrants," UPI, December 13, 1996. AlbertoGarnica, "Venezuela to crack down on illegals," United Press International,March 22, 1995. _______________________________WT02-B12-191IA088-000636-B043-157http://migration.ucdavis.edu:80/archive/mn_97/jan_97-31.html 128.120.36.171 19970122190650 text/html 3324HTTP/1.0 200 OKMIME-Version: 1.0Server: WebSTAR/1.3.1 ID/6378Message-ID: Date: Wednesday, 22-Jan-97 19:07:43 GMTLast-Modified: Tuesday, 21-Jan-97 21:07:08 GMTContent-type: text/htmlContent-length: 3069 Carliner, Geoffrey.  1996.  The Wages and Language Skills of US Immigrants. MIGRATION NEWS. Vol. 4, No. 1 January, 1997. Resources. Carliner, Geoffrey. 1996. The Wages and Language Skills of US Immigrants.NBER Working Paper 5763. September. http://nber.harvard.edu/ Foreign-born workers earned about $0.50 less than US-born workers in 1989,with the hourly wage gap largest for Mexican-born immigrants. The gap iswidest upon arrival and closes by 0.8 percent per year after arrival, so that,e.g. a 10 percent wage gap ($10 for US-born workers and $9 for foreign-bornworkers) would be closed within about 12 years. Huddle, Donald. 1996. The Net Costs of Immigration: The Facts, the Trendsand the Critics. Washington, DC. Carrying Capacity Network.800-466-4866. This study estimates that immigration cost the US a net $65 billion in1996, including $50 billion more in government expenditures on behalf ofimmigrants than the immigrants pay in taxes. In addition, Huddle estimatesthat immigrants cost $15 billion for indirect worker displacement costs such asunemployment benefits. Two thirds of the costs, or $41 billion, are attributed to legalimmigration. According to Huddle, immigration's net costs will rise over thenext decade. The Urban Institute, in a 1994 publication, Immigration and Immigrants:Setting the Record Straight, concluded that immigration results net balance ofgovernment revenues that are $25 billion to $30 billion more than thegovernment spends on immigrants. Simon, Julian. 1995. Immigration: The Demographic and Economic Facts. CatoInstitute: Washington, DC. This 51-page monograph argues that little has changed in immigration exceptthe "anti-immigrant" rhetoric. According to Simon, the 3.2 million illegalaliens estimated to be in the US in October 1992 is about unchanged since theearly 1980s, and immigrant families receive an average $1,400 in welfarepayments in their first five years in the US, versus $2,300 for natives(immigrants are not eligible for the same benefits as natives). Simon asserts that, on average, immigrant families contribute $2,500 morein taxes than they draw in publicly-funded benefits. UN Development Program. 1996. Human Development Report 1996. The UN'sseventh annual Human Development Report reported that there are 89 countries inwhich the average person is worse off than in the mid-1980s. In 19 countries,including Ghana, Haiti, Liberia, Nicaragua, Rwanda and Venezuela, per capitaincome is below the 1960 level. The UNDP ranks Canada first among 174 nations in human development, eventhough Canada was only one of three rich countries--the other two were Finlandand Ireland--considered worse off today than in 1980. The next countries inthe ranking, which combines life expectancy, education and purchasing power,are the US and Japan. _______________________________WT02-B12-192IA088-000636-B043-172http://migration.ucdavis.edu:80/mn/mntxtabt.htm 128.120.36.171 19970122190709 text/html 1952HTTP/1.0 200 OKMIME-Version: 1.0Server: WebSTAR/1.3.1 ID/6378Message-ID: Date: Wednesday, 22-Jan-97 19:08:01 GMTLast-Modified: Tuesday, 21-Jan-97 21:07:07 GMTContent-type: text/htmlContent-length: 1697 About Migration News Text Version About Migration News Migration News summarizes the most important immigration and integrationdevelopments of the preceding month. Topics are grouped by region: North America, Europe, Asia, and Other. There are two versions of Migration News. The paper edition is about 8,00words in length, and the email version about 15,000. The purpose of Migration News is to provide a monthly summary of recentimmigration developments that can be read in 60 minutes or less. Many issuesalso contain summaries and reviews of recent research publications. Distribution is by email. If you wish to subscribe, send your email addressto: Migration News Current and back issues may be accessed via Internent on the Migration NewsHome Page-- http://migration.ucdavis.edu There is no charge for an email subscription to Migration News. A paperedition is available by mail for $30 domestic and $50 foreign. Make checkspayable to UC Regents and send to: Philip Martin, Department of AgriculturalEconomics, University of California, Davis California 95616 USA. Migration News is produced with the support of the University ofCalifornia-Berkeley Center for German and European Studies, the German MarshallFund of the United States, and the Pew Charitable Trusts. Return to About Migration Dialogue WT02-B12-193IA088-000636-B043-190http://migration.ucdavis.edu:80/default.html 128.120.36.171 19970122190727 text/html 2439HTTP/1.0 200 OKMIME-Version: 1.0Server: WebSTAR/1.3.1 ID/6378Message-ID: Date: Wednesday, 22-Jan-97 19:08:26 GMTLast-Modified: Tuesday, 21-Jan-97 21:06:52 GMTContent-type: text/htmlContent-length: 2183 Migration Dialogue Migration Dialogue Migration Dialogue promotes an informed discussion of the issues associated withinternational migration by providing unbiased and timely information on immigration andintegration issues. Four Migration Dialogue activities are summarized below: thenewsletters Migration News and Rural Migration News, the work of University ofCalifornia researchers, and seminars for European and American opinion leaders. Migration News Rural Migration News Migration Dialogue Briefs, Seminars, Speakers University of California CIIP-CPS More About Migration Dialogue What's New January 7, 1997 - January issue of Migration News is avaiable. December 2, 1996 - December issue of Migration News is available. Try the Migration News search engine. November 5, 1996 - November issue of Migration News is available. October 17, 1996 - October issue of Rural Migration News is available. A total of people have accessed thispage since October 1, 1995. [ Feedback (migrant@primal.ucdavis.edu) ] WT02-B12-194IA088-000636-B043-206http://migration.ucdavis.edu:80/rmn/cfra.htm 128.120.36.171 19970122190735 text/html 897HTTP/1.0 200 OKMIME-Version: 1.0Server: WebSTAR/1.3.1 ID/6378Message-ID: Date: Wednesday, 22-Jan-97 19:08:34 GMTLast-Modified: Tuesday, 21-Jan-97 21:07:10 GMTContent-type: text/htmlContent-length: 642 Changing Face of Rural America Changing Face of Rural America Immigration and the Changing Face of Rural America Focus on the Midwestern States Immigration and the Changing Face of Rural California: Implications for Southern California Immigration and the Changing Face of Rural California, Asilomar Conference Center Rural Migration News HomeWT02-B12-195IA088-000636-B043-222http://migration.ucdavis.edu:80/carucom/carucom.html 128.120.36.171 19970122190909 text/html 13471HTTP/1.0 200 OKMIME-Version: 1.0Server: WebSTAR/1.3.1 ID/6378Message-ID: Date: Wednesday, 22-Jan-97 19:09:34 GMTLast-Modified: Friday, 09-Aug-96 01:35:42 GMTContent-type: text/htmlContent-length: 13215 California Rural Community (CARUCOM) Data Base CARUCOM click here to go to a California Map click here to go to a List of Communities The California Rural Community (CARUCOM) data base isa service of Rural Migration News.It was created for city planners, researchers, and students whowant access to census statistical profiles of rural Californiacommunities. The data base will be under construction for thenext few months. We will put new communities, census years, andvariables on line as they become available. The CARUCOM data were assembled from the Urban Institute'sUnder Class Data Base (UDB) for the 1980 and 1990 census years.This data base contains social, demographic, economic, and housingdata on census tracts across the United States. Tracts may beviewed as approximating large neighborhoods because they tendto contain groups of residents with similar social characteristics,economic status, and housing conditions. Typically, a census tractincludes between 2,500 and 8,000 persons. To illustrate the geographicdetail provided by census tracts, in 1990 there were 9 censustracts in both Watsonville and Parlier. We first extracted data on all census tracts in California's 12major agricultural regions. With the aid of census maps, we thenidentified all tracts contained entirely or partly in rural townswith populations of between 1,000 and 20,000 and with 8 percentor more of their workforces employed principally in agriculture.The data include information on 47 variables for each of 66 Californiarural towns scattered across the counties of Fresno, Imperial,Kern, Kings, Madera, Merced, Monterey, Napa, San Joaquin, Stanislaus,Tulare, and Ventura. Although there were some changes in censustracts between 1980 and 1990, the UDB utilizes a "comparabilityfile" produced by the Census Bureau to reconfigure data from1990 into tract boundaries used in the 1980 Census. This makesit possible to track changes in demographic and economic characteristicsof the communities we have "constructed" from thesecensus tracts over time. For each community included in the data base, a wide array of demographic and socioeconomic variablesand percentage changes in these variables between 1980 and 1990 is available. The available communites may be selected either from the list or from the clickable map below. The data are of course constructed from specific Census Bureau categories, in order to see how the data follow from Census definitions, consult this description file. To download the master file from which the individual tables were created click here. (The file is 68k and is saved in tab delimited text so should be readable by any spreadsheet program.) For the purpose of comparison here are some tables which rank the CARUCOM communties according to key variables of interest: Population Change Hispanic Population Foreign Born Population Hispanics Living in Poverty High School Dropout Rate List of Communities County Town Census Tract Number Fresno Carruthers 75 Coalinga 80 Del Rey 69 Easton 18 Firebaugh 84 Huron 78 Kerman 40 Laton 74 Mendota 83 Orange Cove 65 Parlier 68 San Joaquin 82 Sanger 60, 61, 62 Selma 70, 71 Imperial Brawley 103 Calexico 119, 120, 121, 122 Calipatria-Niland 101 Holtville 109 Imperial 110 Seeley 111 Westmorland 102 Kern Arvin 63 Buttonwillow 37 Lamont-Weedpatch 64 McFarland 47 Shafter City 41 Wasco 44 Kings Armona 5 Avenal 17 Corcoran 13, 14, 15 Kettleman City 16 Merced Delhi 2 Dos Palos 24 Livingston 3 Planada 19 Monterey Castroville 104 Gonzales 108 Greenfield 112 King City 113 Las Lomas 102 Soledad 111 Napa Calistoga 2020 St. Helena 2016 San Joaquin Lockeford 47 Hughson 29 Stanislaus Patterson 32 Tulare Cutler 6 Dinuba 5 Earlimart 44 East Porterville 39 Exeter 15 Farmersville 14, 15, 16 Ivanhoe 8 Lindsay 26, 28 London 3 Orosi 2 Pixley 42 Poplar-Cotton 34 Richgrove 43 Strathmore 33 Terra Bella 45 Tipton-Woodville 32 Woodlake 7 Ventura El Rio 50 Fillmore 3 Piru 2 California Clickable Map Click on one of the colored counties to see the communities available in that county. Then click on the communtiy within the specific county. Remember to click on the dot and not on the name of the town! Last Update: 8/1/96 This page created by Eric Van Dusen. Please sends comments or suggestions to: vandusen@gordy WT02-B12-196IA088-000636-B043-238http://migration.ucdavis.edu:80/hspn-census/census.htm 128.120.36.171 19970122190936 text/html 1867HTTP/1.0 200 OKMIME-Version: 1.0Server: WebSTAR/1.3.1 ID/6378Message-ID: Date: Wednesday, 22-Jan-97 19:10:23 GMTLast-Modified: Tuesday, 21-Jan-97 21:07:07 GMTContent-type: text/htmlContent-length: 1611  California's County and City Hispanic Census Analysis California's County and City Hispanic Census Analysis Download the Excel 5.0 files. raw_data.xls Master census raw data in Excel format. cntydata.xls Analyzed county data in Excel format. citydata.xls Analyzed city data in Excel format. Summary View the County Data; this is a look at the cntydata.xls file. County data sorted by percent Hispanic. County data sorted by percent change from 1980 to 1990. View the City Data; this is a look at the citydata.xls file. City data sorted by percent Hispanic. City data sorted by percent change from 1980 to 1990. Cities greater than 100,000 in population. Cities between 50,000 to 100,000 in population. Cities between 25,000 to 50,000 in population. Cities less than 25,000 in population. Source: California Dept. of Finance, State Census Data Center Last Updated: 7/2/96 UC Davis Research Assistant Patrick Ramsey Html Authoring: Wayne YoungWT02-B12-197IA088-000636-B043-278http://migration.ucdavis.edu:80/rmn/oct96/rc1.htm 128.120.36.171 19970122191004 text/html 6434HTTP/1.0 200 OKMIME-Version: 1.0Server: WebSTAR/1.3.1 ID/6378Message-ID: Date: Wednesday, 22-Jan-97 19:11:01 GMTLast-Modified: Thursday, 17-Oct-96 18:53:50 GMTContent-type: text/htmlContent-length: 6177 Untitled RURAL COMMUNITIES __________________________________ Immigrants in Midwestern Meatpacking The cover story of the September 23,1996 US News & World Report, "The New Jungle," focusedon the use of immigrant workers in Iowa's meatpacking industry.The story emphasized the role of meat packing companies in recruitingimmigrant workers to move to Iowa, and said that "perhapsno industry is so dependent on this low-wage labor as the nation'smeat and poultry companies." A July 1996 Changing Face of Rural Americaconference of social scientists, by contrast, emphasized that,in most midwestern meat packing plants, Latinos work alongsideUS-born Blacks and whites. Latinos are less than half of mostplants' work force, and many of them are US-born citizens. Many Latinos move to the Midwest because,in contrast to seasonal farm jobs in California, where workersaverage 1,000 hours per year at $5 to $6 per hour, in meat packingplants, workers average 2,000 hours at $6 to $8 per hour, enoughto support a family. The Changing Face report is available at:http://migration.ucdavis.edu The US News & World Report storyfocused on Storm Lake, Iowa, a town of 8,700 that has an IBP plantthat slaughters 13,000 hogs each day. Education costs and crimeare up. Almost half of the kindergarten class in 1996 is non-Caucasian.Many of the workers are from Santa Rita, Mexico, 100 miles southeastof Guadalajara; some allegedly buy false documents from IBP employeeswho sell them on the side. About $5,000 worth of money orders aremailed from Storm Lake to Mexico each week. IBP bought the Storm Lake packing plantfor $2.5 million in 1981, and it received $1.9 million in taxincentives and a $9.5 million revenue bond from the city. Turnoverin the plant is high; an average of 183 workers had to be hiredto keep every 100 jobs filled in 1990, according to one IBP manager. There are about 500,000 children in K-12schools in Iowa. The number of Limited English Proficiency childrenin K-12 Iowa schools has increased from 3,107 in 1989 to 6,931in 1996, including 21 percent of the Storm Lake students. Meat packing is a $95 billion per yearbusiness dominated by three companies, IBP, Cargill's Excel Corp.and Con-Agra's Monfort Inc. IBP had sales of $12 billion in 1995,and profits of $257 million. The INS district director for Iowa andNebraska estimated that 25 percent of the 50,000 workers who dis-assembleanimals in the 222 meat packing plants in the two states are unauthorizedaliens. INS inspections of the workers in 15 plants since 1992have led to 1,000 workers being detained, and the INS is openingan office in Cedar Rapids, Iowa in January 1997. On August 24, 30 INS inspectorssurrounded a Monfort-Swift plant in Marshalltown at the end ofa work shift, detaining 147 of the 900 employees as they left.Most were flown to Mexico within 48 hours. Another 24 workers wereapprehended at an IBP facility in Waterloo, Iowa. After an April1996 raid on All-State Quality Food, 47 apprehended workers pledguilty to working in the US illegally, making them subject tocriminal penalties if they are apprehended in the US again. Most of the meatpackingplants are constantly hiring new workers to replace workers whoquit, and many of the Hispanic workers employed in meatpackingplants use fraudulent documents to obtain their jobs. Meatpackerssay that they can only ask job applicants if they are "legallyentitled" to work in the US, and close scrutiny of workerdocuments can lead to charges of discrimination. The INS, however,estimates that 85 percent of the "documented illegals"are "knowingly hired" by employers. Meatpacking companies offerstarting wages of $5 to $7 per hour. According to OSHA, about36 percent of meatpacking workers are injured on the job eachyear. Newly-hired workers arenot eligible for health insurance benefits for off-the-job injuriesfor their first six months of employment, and then they sharethe cost of the premium on an 80-20 basis (workers pay 20 percent). Rural Oklahoma is alsoattracting Hispanic immigrants for meat and poultry processingjobs. Commerce, OK, a town of 2500, increased its Hispanic populationfrom 150 in 1990 to 800 in 1996. Jerry Fink, "RuralHispanic Population Booms," Tulsa World, October 13, 1996.Mark Siebert, "More kids needing English; Immigrants' childrenswelling Iowa schools," Des Moines Register, October 11,1996. Carl Quintanilla, "Meatpackers feel heat from INS probe,"Wall Street Journal, September 27, 1996. StephenHedges and Dana Hawkins, "The New Jungle," US News &World Report, September 23, 1996. http://www.usnews.com/usnews/WASH/IMmHIGH.htmlCurt Brown, "TheNew Americans: Next challenge for these Minnesota immigrants,"Star Tribune, September 15, 1996. WT02-B12-198IA088-000636-B043-299http://migration.ucdavis.edu:80/rmn/oct96/rc2.htm 128.120.36.171 19970122191013 text/html 4319HTTP/1.0 200 OKMIME-Version: 1.0Server: WebSTAR/1.3.1 ID/6378Message-ID: Date: Wednesday, 22-Jan-97 19:11:11 GMTLast-Modified: Thursday, 17-Oct-96 18:49:55 GMTContent-type: text/htmlContent-length: 4062 Untitled RURALCOMMUNITIES __________________________________ Latinos inSouthern Poultry The Hispanic population in the Southgrew from 4.3 million to 6.5 million between 1980 and 1990. Therising number of Hispanics is changing "minority relations"in the southeast, traditionally viewed in terms of Black and white. In the 1990 Census, the 66,000 Hispanicswere one percent of the state's 6.6 million residents. Today,there are an estimated 150,000 to 200,000 Hispanics in North Carolina,many attracted from Texas by wages of $6 to $7 instead of $4.25. In many cases, Hispanics are replacing Blacks in construction,services and manufacturing. Most studies trace the upsurge in Hispanicworkers to the recruitment of Latino tobacco workers. On August 8, 1996, some 450 Guatemalanand Mexican immigrant workers called an unfair labor practicestrike against Case Farms poultry processing plant in Morgantown,North Carolina. On July 12, 1995, Case Farms workers voted 238to 183 to be represented by the Laborers' International Unionof North America (LIUNA), a union with 750,000 members in construction,building maintenance, food service, health care and clerical occupations. According to the union, Case fired 38workers for union activity since the July 1995 election. TheNLRB ordered Case to begin to bargain with LIUNA on March 7, 1996. Case appealed. The INS detained 124 of the 1,200 workersat two plants of poultry processor Allen Family Foods in Cordovaand Hurlock, Maryland, in late August. Eight poultry processingfirms employ 14,000 workers in the Delmarva area, including 3200Hispanics. Most workers begin at $6 per hour, rising to a maximumof $7 per hour. Turnover is high; for every 100 jobs, 180 to200 workers are hired each year. Allen Family Foods paid a $43,000 INSfine in 1994 for knowingly hiring illegal aliens and for failingto have I-9 forms. The INS is investigating whether plant supervisorsparticipated in a smuggling ring based in Marydel, a trailer park. The Baltimore Sun, in a major reporton October 13, 1996, noted that the 1990 Census reported 7,000Hispanics on Maryland's Eastern Shore and Delaware's Kent andSussex counties, and 9000 in 1994. Some mid-1960s estimates arethat there are 20,000 Hispanics in southern Delaware and 7,000on the Maryland Shore. There are 3000 migrant farm workers inDelmarva, and 400 children enrolled in Migrant Education programeach summer. The Hispanic immigrants include a significantnumber of Guatemalans--$300,000 is reportedly sent each monthfrom Georgetown to Guatemala." James Bock and Dail Willis, "Latinos:Lured by abundant jobs and good wages, Hispanic immigrants havebecome a sizable community on the Delmarva Peninsula," BaltimoreSun, October 13, 1996. Ben Stocking, "Workplaces welcomeHispanics," News & Observer ,September 2, 1996. AnnaBorgman, "Poultry Firm Chief Says INS Is Probing Plant Supervisors,"Washington Post, August 30, 1996. Christina Nifong, "Hispanicsand Asians Change The Face of American South," ChristianScience Monitor, August 6, 1996. WT02-B12-199IA088-000636-B043-322http://migration.ucdavis.edu:80/rmn/oct96/rc3.htm 128.120.36.171 19970122191022 text/html 8475HTTP/1.0 200 OKMIME-Version: 1.0Server: WebSTAR/1.3.1 ID/6378Message-ID: Date: Wednesday, 22-Jan-97 19:11:19 GMTLast-Modified: Thursday, 17-Oct-96 18:53:06 GMTContent-type: text/htmlContent-length: 8218 Untitled RURALCOMMUNITIES __________________________________ Immigrantsin Rural California The San Diego Union-Tribune ran featurestories on September 22-23 that explored immigrant integrationin Mecca, California, a farm worker town of 5,000 near Coachellawith an average income of $5,000 per person per year. In nearbyPalm Springs, average annual incomes are $70,000. The complaint among the farm workerscamped in parking lots looking for work was: "too many peopleand too little work." Some employers say that they have100 people for every job. A Changing Face conference of immigrantintegration was held in Riverside in March, 1996; the conferencereport is available at: http://migration.ucdavis.edu Most Coachella Valley farmers offer farmworkers over $5 per hour for workers they hire directly; workershired through farm labor contractors typically receive less. Many of the farms are large; Peter Rabbit Farms, founded in 1950,is a 5,000 acre operation, including 2,000 acres of carrots, 600acres of grapes, and 600 acres of lemons, grapefruit, and oranges. Peter Rabbit has 120 year-round and 1,500 peak winter employees. Annual workers compensation premiums were over $1 million, whichwould imply an annual payroll of $8 to $10 million. Farm worker cities in rural Californiaare growing twice as fast as the state's population, as newly-legalizedfarm workers bring their families to the US. Many of these "overgrownlabor camps" are over 50 percent Latino, and some are over95 percent Hispanic. As farmers destroyed on-farm housing,workers moved into cities near major farming areas, and had topay for services that were previously free. In many cases, workerstoday spend 25 to 35 percent of their wages on housing and ridesto work. Housing is a serious problem for allpoor people, but especially for recently-arrived immigrants infarm worker towns. In most cases, friends and relatives doubleup, so that 10 to 20 people may share a one-bedroom apartment. Unlike in cities, the handful of public housing projects in farmworker towns are often oases that workers living in parking lotsdream of moving into. The Fresno Bee on August 18, 1996 rana lengthy article on the sharp drop in on-farm farm worker housingin the San Joaquin Valley, the eight county area centered on Fresnothat employs half of California's farm workers. Instead of providingworkers with on-farm housing subject to federal and state inspection,more and more farmers are razing their farm worker housing. Asa result, most farm workers crowd into urban dwellings, includingbackyard structures and garages. Much of the Fresno Bee story involvedGerawan Farming, the largest peach, plum and nectarine producerin the United States which bulldozed housing for 400 farm workersin 1995. This housing cost $1.6 million to construct and somewas only 18 months old. Gerawan employs 8,000 farm workers inpeak season. Many San Joaquin Valley towns have becomefarm worker service centers, with local residents, for a fee,providing everything from housing and meals to forged work documents,rides to the fields, and check cashing services. In one suchtown, Parlier, the mayor says that the population expands from9,500 to 13,000 each summer, as workers arrive from Mexico. Manywind up living in "The Jungle," a collection of ramshacklehouses and abandoned vehicles on Manning Avenue. Despite the influx of migrants lookingfor summer housing, there are practically no "for rent"signs in Parlier. Instead, migrants rely on friends, relativesor labor contractors to arrange housing. In many cases, 10 or20 men share a two- or three-bedroom apartment, each paying $30to $40 per week and generating for the landlord two to four timesnormal rents. One grower spent $300,000 over six yearsto house up to 96 men on an 800-acre grape and almond farm, butcomplained that maintenance on the 12-man dorms costs up to $1,500per month. Reliable data on farm worker housingis scarce. A Monterey County Health Department survey found thaton-farm housing for workers in the Salinas Valley fell 60 percentin the last 15 to 20 years. USDA's undersecretary for rural economicand community development toured San Diego county on January 24,1996. An estimated 16,000 people live in shacks and other makeshiftlabor camps. Many are unauthorized workers employed by area nurseriesand farms. At least five farm workers were killedin a van-car crash July 30 in Fresno county, the fourth fatalcrash in 1996 involving farm workers. The farm workers were headedfor melon fields 70 miles away, illustrating that the shortageof temporary housing for farm workers in rural areas encouragesmany to commute long distances from the housing that they find. If water were more expensive, would Californiafarmers shift from water-intensive crops such as alfalfa to labor-intensivecrops such as cantaloupes? A new report says not necessarily--cropchoice decisions depend on many factors, and crop changes inducedby more expensive water may not increase farm worker employment. The California Institute for Rural Studiesstudied Mendota in a report entitled "93640 At Risk." The report examined how area farmers adjusted to less irrigationwater between 1987 and 1992. The city of Mendota is in Fresnocounty, where crop sales jumped 16 percent despite less water,but production costs, according to the report, rose 30 percent. Of the 68 farming operations around Mendotain 1987, 28 went out of business, and 10 new operations began. Land values fell, as acreage of high value fruits and vegetablesdropped. There are 14,000 migrant children inthe Fresno Unified School District. One-third of the district's78,000 students speak little or no English. In response, the school district hasimplemented a program called linguistic targeting, which placeslimited English speaking students in a particular tract. Schooladministrators argue that this helps them consolidate each school'steaching resources so that teachers don't have to split theirtime with students speaking many languages. Some parents arenot happy that the district is segregating limited English proficientstudents because they fear that their children are not receivingthe same education as other students. Robert Rodriquez, "Clustering Putto test by Schools," Fresno Bee, October 5, 1996. DianeLindquist, "Unintended consequences: 10 years after enactmentof reform legislation, immigrant problems have mushroomed in ruralCalifornia," San Diego Union-Tribune, September 22-23, 1996. Jim Steinberg, "Fed up growers provide for fewer tenants;Conditions worse than ever for workers on Valley farms,"Fresno Bee, August 18, 1996. WT02-B12-200IA088-000636-B043-344http://migration.ucdavis.edu:80/rmn/oct96/rc4.htm 128.120.36.171 19970122191155 text/html 2768HTTP/1.0 200 OKMIME-Version: 1.0Server: WebSTAR/1.3.1 ID/6378Message-ID: Date: Wednesday, 22-Jan-97 19:12:23 GMTLast-Modified: Thursday, 17-Oct-96 18:54:34 GMTContent-type: text/htmlContent-length: 2511 Untitled RURALCOMMUNITIES __________________________________ Latinos inthe Northeast The New York Times on September 30 includeda lengthy story on immigrants to the US who bypass central citiesand settle in suburbs. Haverstraw, New York, 30 miles north ofManhattan, was 51 percent Hispanic in the 1990 Census, and upto 70 percent Hispanic according to some local estimates, largelybecause of chain migration from the Dominican Republic. Over 70 percent of the children in Haverstrawelementary schools are Latino. A study of immigrants in suburbs concludedthat new immigrants tend to move to suburbs that are a littlerundown, less affluent than average, and already have a smallerproportion of non-Hispanic whites than in the richer suburbs. In March 1996, the INS apprehended 14illegal immigrants at Poultry Products Inc. in Manchester, NewHampshire, including a woman who had been employed there for sevenyears. The INS estimated that there were about 1,075 illegalimmigrants in New Hampshire in October 1992--most are Mexicansand Canadians; others were from Guatemala, Honduras, Mexico andBrazil. Manchester and Nashua each have about10,000 Hispanic residents. Many Puerto Ricans migrated to ruralcommunities in the northeastern states to harvest crops, and somesettled: the five US cities with the most Puerto Ricans are NewYork City, Chicago, Philadelphia, Newark, New Jersey and Hartford,Connecticut. An estimated 300,000 Puerto Ricans --about 10 percent of the island's population -- migrated to theUS during the 1980s. Mirta Ojito, "Suburbs Grapple WithChange as New Immigrants Arrive," New York Times, September30, 1996. Nancy West, "INS Boosts Immigration Enforcement,"New Hampshire Sunday News April 7, 1996. WT02-B12-201IA088-000636-B043-365http://migration.ucdavis.edu:80/rmn/oct96/rc5.htm 128.120.36.171 19970122191212 text/html 3997HTTP/1.0 200 OKMIME-Version: 1.0Server: WebSTAR/1.3.1 ID/6378Message-ID: Date: Wednesday, 22-Jan-97 19:13:05 GMTLast-Modified: Thursday, 17-Oct-96 18:56:17 GMTContent-type: text/htmlContent-length: 3740 Untitled RURAL COMMUNITIES __________________________________ Rural Renaissance? About 75 percent of US rural countiesadded population between 1990 and 1995, versus 45 percent in the1980s. The US has about 3,100 counties, and 2,304 are consideredrural. Overall rural population growth in thefirst half of the 1990s was about 5.1 percent, versus 5.5 percentin metropolitan areas. If grouped by the dominant activity inthe county, rural counties that serve as retirement centers added14 percent to their populations in the first half of the 1990s,rural recreational counties added 10 percent to their populations,and commuting counties added seven percent more people. Rural counties gained an estimated 1.6million people via net migration in the first half of the 1990s,versus a loss of 1.4 million in the 1980s. Rural job growth has been faster thanurban job growth in the 1990s, especially in areas where certainindustries cluster, such as catfish processing in the MississippiDelta, and electronics in "silicon forest" near Portland.Between 1989 and 1994, rural counties added a net 167,000 manufacturingjobs, while urban counties lost 1.2 million manufacturing jobs.Many of the newly created jobs in rural America pay lower thanaverage wages, often at least $1 per hour less than urban wages. A September 16, 1996 Wall Street Journalprofile of Wheaton, Minnesota, noted that the town's populationpeaked at 2,100 in 1960, but was only 1,700 in the late 1980s.Then, the town aggressively wooed manufacturers, and today hasmore manufacturing jobs than workers. The US population in the 1990 Censuswas 249 million, including 22 million Hispanics and 13 millionMexican-origin residents. The Census of Population divides theUS into four regions: the Northeast, with 51 million residentsin 1990, four million Hispanics, and 175,000 Mexican-origin residents;the Midwest, with 60 million residents, two million Hispanics,and 1.1 million Mexican-origin residents; the South, with 85 millionresidents, seven million Hispanics, and 1.2 million Mexican-originresidents; and, the West, with 53 million residents, 10 millionHispanics, and eight million Mexican-origin residents. The Census distinguishes between farmand nonfarm residents. Many farm residents are not farmers, andmost farm workers are not farm residents. Farm residents are overwhelminglywhite. Minority farm residents are concentrated in two regions:Blacks are in the Southeast--99 percent in 1984--and Spanish-originfarm residents are mostly in the West--60 percent. Jerry Fink, "Rural Hispanic PopulationBooms," Tulsa World, October 13, 1996. Carl Quintanilla andRobert Rose, "Some tiny towns find a way to create jobs:attract manufacturers," Wall Street Journal, September 16,1996. Scott Kilman and Robert Rose, "Population of RuralAmerica Swelling," Wall Street Journal, June 21, 1996. "Returnto Main Street," Governing Magazine, May 1996. WT02-B12-202IA088-000636-B043-381http://migration.ucdavis.edu:80/rmn/oct96/rc6.htm 128.120.36.171 19970122191234 text/html 2131HTTP/1.0 200 OKMIME-Version: 1.0Server: WebSTAR/1.3.1 ID/6378Message-ID: Date: Wednesday, 22-Jan-97 19:13:23 GMTLast-Modified: Thursday, 17-Oct-96 18:57:11 GMTContent-type: text/htmlContent-length: 1874 RURAL COMMUNITIES RURALCOMMUNITIES __________________________________ Hispanic Housing Discrimination The US Justice Departmentsued Waukegan, Illinois over a housing ordinance the governmentalleges was enacted and enforced to limit the number of Hispanicfamilies who could live there. Waukegan, 35 miles north of Chicago,was charged with violating the Fair Housing Act by enacting anordinance on June 6, 1994 that permits only a husband and wife,their children and no more than two additional relatives to livein one home, regardless of its size. According to the JusticeDepartment, all those evicted under the ordinance have been Hispanic.The city of 69,000 had a population that was 24 percent Hispanicin the 1990 Census. The ordinance, according to the Justice Department,would permit overcrowding by people who are not related, but prohibitrelatives from living together. A dozen languages are spokenby the 2,500 residents who inhabit Sibley Manor housing developmentin St. Paul, Minnesota. Eighty percent of the residents are newAmericans. The housing complex is home to Russians, Hispanicsand southeast Asians. "Waukegan Ordinanceto Eliminate Overcrowding Allegedly Aims at Hispanic Families,"Washington Post, August 14 1996. WT02-B12-203IA088-000636-B043-405http://migration.ucdavis.edu:80/rmn/oct96/fw1.htm 128.120.36.171 19970122191244 text/html 10599HTTP/1.0 200 OKMIME-Version: 1.0Server: WebSTAR/1.3.1 ID/6378Message-ID: Date: Wednesday, 22-Jan-97 19:13:41 GMTLast-Modified: Thursday, 17-Oct-96 20:58:27 GMTContent-type: text/htmlContent-length: 10341 Untitled FARM WORKERS __________________________________ No UFW Electionsat Strawberry Farms in 1996 During the summer of 1996, UFWefforts to organize strawberry pickers around Watsonville featuredprominently in news stories. According to the AFL-CIO, the UFWstrawberry organizing effort is currently the largest union organizingeffort in the US, involving $2 million and 40 full-time organizersto organize 15,000 farm workers employed on 270 strawberry farms. However, the campaign did notlead to any UFW election victories. On August 6, 1996, the AFL-CIO'sExecutive Council pledged matching funds to the UFW's strawberryorganizing campaign in California, and to the Teamsters appleorganizing campaign in Washington. American unions need to recruitan estimated 700 new members each day, or 250,000 per year, tokeep the percentage of US workers in unions at its current 15percent level. In 1995, US unions added about 100,000 new members. Currently, none of the strawberryfarms in California, which produced $552 million worth of strawberriesin 1995, 80 percent of US strawberries, have union contracts. California produced 68 million 12-pint trays of strawberriesin 1994, 60 million trays in 1995, and a projected 69 milliontrays in 1996. Each 12-pint tray is worth $4 to $10 at the farmlevel. California strawberry yields average about 57,000 poundsper acre. The UFW is targeting large farms,those with 100 or more acres, and packer-marketers such as DriscollStrawberry Associates, WellPict, Gargiulo Farms (owned by Monsanto),and Naturipe that often make arrangements with ex-pickers to growthree or six acres of strawberries on a sharecropping basis. The UFW filed over 35 noticesto take access to workers on strawberries, and filed 25 noticesof intent to organize, meaning that the union obtained authorizationcards from at least 10 percent of the workers, but there wereno union petitions for elections, which require that the unionpresent authorization cards from 50 percent of the workers employedwhen employment is at least 50 percent of peak employment. During an August visit by ArturoRodriquez, UFW President, to a crew of some of 1,200 GargiuloFarms' workers, only one worker asked Rodriguez questions andseveral told a reporter that they do not want or need a union. Despite the UFW's "flexibility," most of the largerstrawberry growers hired labor consultants to oppose the union. According to the UFW, strawberrypickers' wages have not been raised for 10 years, and most donot have health insurance. In one UFW fund-raising letter, theUFW reportedly called strawberries La Fruta del Diablo (the fruitof the devil) because so many growers allegedly break laws governingwages and working conditions. The most-recently arrived strawberrypickers are Mixtec Indians from Oaxaca, many of whom are illegalaliens. On September 1, the SacramentoBee ran a long story on the strawberry campaign, emphasizing that,since Chavez died April 23, 1993, 47-year old Rodriguez has giventhe UFW a youthful face but boosted the UFW's membership onlyfrom 21,000 to 26,000. Housing and Urban DevelopmentSecretary Henry Cisneros and AFL-CIO President John J. Sweeneyaddressed the 2,000 farm workers attending the biennial UFW conventionSeptember 1 in Fresno. Cisneros urged legal immigrants to becomecitizens, asserting that 70 percent of the legal immigrants whowould lose benefits under the new welfare law were eligible tobecome US citizens. Sweeney praised the UFW for itsorganizing efforts, and announced that strawberries would be boycottedin 50 US cities. The New York Times (July 3) andCNN (July 7) ran stories on the UFW's efforts to organize strawberrypickers. According to CNN, strawberry pickers have average hourlyearnings of $6, although the grower interviewed employed pickerswho averaged $9 to $10 per hour and offered the workers additionalfringe benefits. Some strawberry pickers reportedly fear thatunion elections might persuade some growers not to grow strawberries. On August 9, 1996, thousands offarm workers reportedly marched through Watsonville to opposethe UFW's organizing attempts. The strawberry industry was hitby a health scare in June. On June 8, 1996, Texas health officialsannounced that they thought that California strawberries wereresponsible for an outbreak of cyclospora, an intestinal disease,and both strawberry shipments and prices fell, costing Californiagrowers an estimated $15 to $20 million in lost revenue. Theoutbreak was eventually traced to raspberries imported from Guatemala. Profiles of UFW leaders emphasizethat most work for little pay--UFW President Rodriguez received$6,362 in 1995, plus housing and reimbursement for expenses. Egg City, owned by Okura and Co.of Tokyo, and once the largest egg-producing facility in the world,with three million chickens, and 39 chicken houses each with 80,000to 90,000 laying hens, is closing. Egg City, located in Fillmore,about 50 miles northwest of Los Angeles, was the scene of oneof the UFW's bitterest defeats in the 1980s. The UFW was certifiedas bargaining agent for Egg City workers on July 7, 1978 and,after Egg City was sold to the Kroger grocery store chain in 1979,the UFW-Kroger agreement in 1979 became the UFW's first poultrycontract. Kroger sold Egg City to the CareauGroup in May 1985. The UFW contract with Egg City expired onSeptember 1, 1985. Instead of discussing higher wages with theUFW, Egg City's new owners argued that they were losing moneybecause they were paying about $2.50 hourly above the prevailingwage in the industry. There were nine months of negotiationsbetween September 1985 and May 1986, but there was no agreementwhen, in May 1986, Egg City filed a Chapter 11 bankruptcy petition. Egg City asked the bankruptcy court to cut wages for 240 UFW-representedworkers by $2 per hour, and the court approved the wage cut inJune 1986. On June 22, 1986, the UFW calleda strike at Egg City, and Egg City permanently replaced most ofthe strikers. The UFW mounted a consumer boycott against thebuyers of Egg City eggs, and in August 1986, McDonald's and grocerystore chains Ralph's and Von's stopped buying Egg City eggs. Egg City sought an injunctionto stop UFW boycott activities, and asked to have the NLRB reclassifyabout half of its workers as nonfarm workers. An ALRB-superviseddecertification election was held at Egg City on November 3, 1986,and in April 1988 the ALRB decertified the UFW as bargaining agentfor Egg City workers. During the summer of 1993, the UFW andEgg City privately settled a suit in which Egg City charged thatthe UFW's boycott activities had cost it $6.6 million. On September 4, 1996, a crop dustersprayed cotton and 22 grape pickers in an adjacent field werehospitalized for pesticide poisoning. Some 280 grape pickerswere employed on the grape ranch owned by Sun Pacific, a 3,000-acregrape operation near Shafter, California. Miguel Contreras, a former UFWorganizer, was elected secretary-treasurer of the Los AngelesCounty Federation of Labor in May 1996. Contreras worked forthe UFW from the mid-1960s through 1977, and then organized hoteland restaurant employees. Half of the 650,000 positions in manufacturingin Los Angeles county are filled by Hispanics. A book about the Western GrowersAssociation by Les Hubbard, WGA--A Step Ahead (1985), creditsunion issues (opposition to Prop. 14) with WGA's decision to opena legal department in 1976. WGA has a web site: http://www.wga.com Rick Geiger, "Egg City'sjust a fading memory," San Diego Union-Tribune, October 13,1996. "Protecting Farm Workers " New York Times, October4, 1996. Mark Potok, "The migrant reality: Interdependence,"USA Today, September 30, 1996. "L.A. Officials Back UnionEffort to Organize Strawberry Pickers," City News ServiceSeptember 16, 1996. Charles McCarthy, "National speakersstoke labor organizing fires," Fresno Bee, September 4, 1996. Edgar Sanchez, "Farm union picks big fight," SacramentoBee, September 1, 1996. Mark Arax, "AHarvest in Hell," Los Angeles Times, August 18, 1996. TimCornwell, "Union hopes bloom in America's strawberry fields,"The Independent, August 7, 1996. Carey Goldberg, "The Battleof the Strawberry Fields," New York Times, July 3, 1996. WT02-B12-204IA088-000636-B043-421http://migration.ucdavis.edu:80/rmn/oct96/fw2.htm 128.120.36.171 19970122191254 text/html 5350HTTP/1.0 200 OKMIME-Version: 1.0Server: WebSTAR/1.3.1 ID/6378Message-ID: Date: Wednesday, 22-Jan-97 19:13:50 GMTLast-Modified: Thursday, 17-Oct-96 19:12:16 GMTContent-type: text/htmlContent-length: 5093 Untitled FARM WORKERS __________________________________ Northeastern/MidwesternFarm Workers Maine is the nation's third-leadingproducer of broccoli, after California and Arizona, harvestingabout 5,000 acres each year and making broccoli third in importancein the state's produce industry, after potatoes and blueberries. Maine's two major broccoli producersimport 300 harvesters from Texas and California, and they offerthem housing at no cost. The workers share a group piecerate,and some crews reportedly average $400 to $500 per worker perweek. Broccoli production began in Aroostook County in 1981. One grower, Maine Packers, employs 200 workers (plus families)to harvest 3,200 acres of broccoli. Nationally, there were 11 millionhundredweight of broccoli produced from 104,000 acres in 1995,valued at $341 million, including $15 million worth in Maine. The US Department of Labor finedthe DeCoster Egg Farms $3.6 million on July 12, 1996 for allegedsafety and health violations at its Turner, Maine facility. DeCosteris the largest producer of brown eggs in the US, employing 800workers in three states, including 320 at the Maine farm. Poorworking conditions lead to the hiring of 750 to 800 workers eachyear to keep the Maine farm staffed. DeCoster has annual revenues ofmore than $40 million and produces about 23 million eggs eachweek. DOL charged that DeCoster operatedan unsanitary and dangerous workplace and provided "inhumaneliving quarters" consisting of filthy and cramped trailersto workers. The most serious violations included unguarded machineryand housing violations. The proposed penalties are the 15th highestlevied in the nation. DeCoster responded that it hascleared up "problems cited by the Immigration and NaturalizationService" on its farms, and that it would also clear up problemsidentified by DOL. DeCoster had been inspected 14 times since1976, and critics wondered why it took DOL so long to conducta full investigation of a firm with a reputation for violatinglabor laws, contesting fines and treating them as a cost of doingbusiness. After the DOL fine was announced,DeCoster lost two of its biggest customers-- Hannaford Brothersand Shop 'n Save, Maine's largest grocer. In 1995, a task force of the StateSenate and Assembly issued a report that recommended that flushtoilets be required at all farm labor camps immediately, ratherthan in 1999, and that all farm labor camps, rather than thosethat house five or more workers, be inspected. An estimated 3,000 migrant workerscome to Niagara and Orleans counties in Western New York eachyear. Most farmers provide housing at no cost to the workers. There are reportedly 4,000 farmworkers on the Eastern Shore of Maryland and Virginia. In the1990 Census, Hispanics were 2.5 percent of the populations ofMaryland and Virginia. In Ohio, the Farm Labor OrganizingCommittee in September 1996 sued the State Highway Patrol in U.S.District Court, charging that troopers selectively stop and searchvehicles driven by Hispanics in searches for illegal drugs. Asecond federal lawsuit charges that the Ohio Health Departmenthas failed to do its job in overseeing living conditions in migrantcamps. In April 1995, FLOC reached afive-year agreement with the Vlasic Pickle Growers Associationthat calls for workers to receive $4.70 per hour for thinningand hoeing in 1995, rising to $5.15 an hour in 1998, as well as50 percent of the value of the harvested cucumbers. Molly Kavanaugh, "MigrantWorkers' Advocate an Expert," Plain Dealer, September 26,1996. Debra Sund, "Maine's stealth crop," Bangor DailyNews, September 9, 1996. Nicole Peradotto, "Harvest of Hardship,"Buffalo News, August 4, 1996. Rick Valliere, "Reich announces$3.6 million proposed penalty against egg farm," Daily LaborReport, July 15, 1996. WT02-B12-205IA088-000636-B043-438http://migration.ucdavis.edu:80/rmn/oct96/fw3.htm 128.120.36.171 19970122191307 text/html 3882HTTP/1.0 200 OKMIME-Version: 1.0Server: WebSTAR/1.3.1 ID/6378Message-ID: Date: Wednesday, 22-Jan-97 19:14:05 GMTLast-Modified: Thursday, 17-Oct-96 19:16:49 GMTContent-type: text/htmlContent-length: 3625 Untitled FARM WORKERS __________________________________ Farm Workers in Idaho and Arizona Some 22,000 Hispanic farm workers areemployed from mid-March through late-October harvesting potatoes,sugar beets and grain in Idaho, and 15,000 have below-povertyline incomes, according to an August 25 newspaper analysis. Hispanicsare believed to be 75 percent of Idaho farm workers, and one-fourthof the state's farm workers are believed to be unauthorized. The percentage of farm workers who aremigrants--meaning that they stay away from their usual homes overnightto do farm work--is reportedly declining in Idaho as migrants"settle out." There are an estimated 22,000 Hispanicfarm workers in Idaho, and they do 73 percent of the work doneby hired workers. About 25 percent of Idaho's farm workersare believed to be illegal aliens. Most Idaho farm workers average 35 workweeks, making $7,000 or between $4 and $6 an hour. There is nostate minimum wage for farm workers, and only workers employedon farms that hire 500 or more man days of labor must provideUnemployment Insurance--in 1995, 2,646 of the estimated 30,000seasonal farm workers in Idaho filed for unemployment insurancethere (some Idaho farm workers may have filed for UI in Texasor California). The Latino population in Washington grewby 45 percent between 1990 and 1995 to more than 300,000. There are no union contracts on Arizonafarms. However, in 1984, there was hope that Lupe Sanchez, founderof the Arizona Farm Workers Union, would organize Arizona farmworkers as Cesar Chavez had organized California farm workers. Sanchez was featured on the cover ofthe Denver Post's weekly magazine in 1984 as the hero who helpedsome 300 illegal alien farm workers near Phoenix to negotiatean agreement with the successor of the citrus farm Goldmar in1979. Under the agreement, $0.20 for each hour worked went intoa Farmworker Economic Development Corporation fund that aimedto create jobs in Guanajuato, and other central Mexican states,where most of the migrants came from. The grower who negotiated with the AFWU,Art Martori, said that he had decided to use H-2 workers, whichrequired him to build housing for farm workers. Sanchez was praised for drawing a salaryof only $3,600 per year, plus expenses, and for attracting $100,000of Martori's money for investment in Mexico, plus another $1.5million from US foundations and churches. "Idaho trying to assist large Hispaniccommunity," Idaho Statesman, October 4, 1996. Jennifer Liberto,"Below the poverty line-Mexican immigrants are moving toEastern Idaho in record numbers, but most find poor-paying farmjobs," Idaho Falls Post Register, August 25, 1996. RichardJohnson, "A Harvest of Dignity," Denver Post, May 6,1984. WT02-B12-206IA088-000636-B043-451http://migration.ucdavis.edu:80/rmn/oct96/fw4.htm 128.120.36.171 19970122191316 text/html 5378HTTP/1.0 200 OKMIME-Version: 1.0Server: WebSTAR/1.3.1 ID/6378Message-ID: Date: Wednesday, 22-Jan-97 19:14:13 GMTLast-Modified: Thursday, 17-Oct-96 20:21:25 GMTContent-type: text/htmlContent-length: 5121 Untitled FARM WORKERS __________________________________ Florida FarmWorkers The UFW is attempting to put pressureon Sylvan Incorporated, a leading producer of mushroom spawn (seed)that owns Quincy Farms in Florida, where 85 of 600 mostly immigrantworkers were fired March 14, 1996. The UFW is mounting a boycottof Prime Mushrooms, the Quincy product. Quincy argued that theworkers quit voluntarily, but they succeeded in obtaining unemploymentcompensation, which is not paid to those who quit. Most of the Quincy workers earn$9,000 to $14,000 per year. Quincy in March 1996 obtaineda court order prohibiting workers from picketing at its mushroomfarm. On September 23, 1996, the 1st District Court of Appealoverturned the injunction, permitting picketing. The US Department of Labor investigated43 watermelon farms in May and June, 1996, and imposed fines of$39,475, an average $918 per investigation, usually for transportingworkers in unlicensed or uninsured vehicles. In 1995, 49 investigationsof watermelon farms resulted in fines of almost $100,000. Investigations of 33 citrus operationsin January 1996 found that 88 percent were violating labor laws,usually for housing workers in labor camps that do not meet federalstandards. The investigations resulted in fines of $89,500. On October 2, a suit was filedagainst the owner of two Lantana-based farms for failing to paythe minimum wage of $4.25 per hour and not keeping employmentrecords. The suit also claims that farm workers were transportedin an unsafe, uninsured vehicle. One of the complainants wasinjured in an accident in the vehicle. The federal government began toregulate farm worker transportation in 1963, after an accidentin Palm Beach county killed 27 farm workers. In the early 1990s,an average 17 farm workers were killed being transported to workeach year. The Fort Myers News-Press examinedthe driving records of the 342 persons in southwest Florida in1992 who were certified to transport farm workers. It found thatonly 29 had clean driving records, while 80 had had their drivinglicenses suspended, often several times. According to the paper,there are 40,000 to 50,000 farm workers employed in southwestFlorida between October and May. Federal and state rules requirethat drivers of farm worker transport have valid licenses, havetheir vehicles inspected and have insurance. However, many driversapparently buy insurance and then cancel after one month, so thatthe insurance papers show six-months coverage and only if thereis an accident is it discovered that there is no insurance. Laborinspectors are not notified when insurance lapses. A Wall Street Journal investigationof a Florida crew leader named Bonds in 1992 suggested that Bondsand his wife recruited alcoholics and homeless persons to workin southeastern fields, and then failed to pay them. Mr. Bondslost his FLC license in 1988, and his wife became FLC. She wasfined, and lost her license, but continued to recruit and supplyfarm workers to growers in the Carolinas and Georgia. The Wall Street Journal recountedhow hard it is to obtain criminal convictions in FLC cases. First,the Department of Labor must find and document the violations. Then, DOL's attorneys have to agree to prosecute and, if theFLC is to be charged with a criminal violation, DOL must turnthe case over to the local US Attorney. The founder of A. Duda and Sons,a 160,000-acre international fruit and vegetable operation, diedin September, 1996. Duda employs 3,000 seasonal farm workers. "Grower sued over labor laws,"Palm Beach Post, October 2, 1996. Lisa Shuchman, "Mushroomworkers can protest at firm," Palm Beach Post, September 24, 1996. "Labor Intensive Probe," Palm Beach Post,August 5, 1996. Michael Ybarra, "Homeless are drawn intomiserable life on farm 'wino' crews," Wall Street Journal,October 19, 1992. Andrea Pearl, "A Deadly Business,"Fort Myers News-Press, October 25, 1992. WT02-B12-207IA088-000636-B044-17http://migration.ucdavis.edu:80/rmn/oct96/fw5.htm 128.120.36.171 19970122191324 text/html 6615HTTP/1.0 200 OKMIME-Version: 1.0Server: WebSTAR/1.3.1 ID/6378Message-ID: Date: Wednesday, 22-Jan-97 19:14:22 GMTLast-Modified: Thursday, 17-Oct-96 20:21:56 GMTContent-type: text/htmlContent-length: 6358 Untitled FARMWORKERS __________________________________ Labor LawEnforcement US. President Clinton on July 29, 1996 vetoed the TEAM Act, whichwould have eased legal restrictions on "employee involvement"programs in nonunion settings. On July 10, the Senate, by a voteof 53-46, approved the employer-backed TEAM Act (S 295), whichwas strongly opposed by the AFL-CIO. An identical bill narrowlypassed the House in September, 1995 by a vote of 221-202. In December 1992, the NLRB ruledthat Electromation had violated the NLRA by establishing fivecommittees in which five or six employees and one or two managersdiscussed workplace issues. The Teamsters, who were trying toorganize Electromation, charged that the company had establishedan employer-sponsored labor organization to avoid unions. TheTEAM Act would have clarified when employers can establish worker-managementteams. California. The federal-state Targeted Industries Partnership Program (TIPP)was again active in California fields in 1996. TIPP was createdin 1992 to promote cooperation between state and federal agenciesthat enforce labor laws in the garment and agricultural industries. The goals of the TIPP programare to level the playing field for all employers, to protect vulnerableworkers, and to ensure that appropriate taxes are collected. In 1994, it was estimated that California's underground or untaxedeconomy involved $70 to $170 billion in annual transactions, andthat the US underground economy involved $500 to $800 billionper year. There are reported to be growingtensions between California and DOL TIPP teams. On August 30,1996, the US Department of Labor presented its first regionalAgricultural Employer of the Year award to tomato grower HarrySingh & Sons, in recognition of the farm's construction ofbarracks housing in 1990 for 325 farm workers. In 1991, the workerswere charged $16.50 a week for bunk beds in a communal sleepingroom -- and $44.80 a week for three hot meals a day. Singh &Sons farms employs 400 to 900 workers to farm 700 acres. In granting the award, DOL notedthat Singh has not been cited for even a minor violation since1978. However, the California Labor Commissioner in August 1996charged that Singh violated state labor law, and owed more than$1 million in overtime pay to workers--under California law, farmworkers must receive overtime pay after 10 hours daily or 60 hoursweekly. In 1996, DOL threatened to invokethe hot-goods rule of the Fair Labor Standards Act, Section 12a,to seize farm commodities produced in violation of federal wageand hour laws. The threat was made as the garlic, onion and strawberryindustries continue to employ large numbers of children. Under the hot-goods rule, DOLcan seize goods that were produced with oppressive child laboror on farms that repeatedly violate minimum wage laws. Cal/OSHA announced that it ismaking growers jointly liable with contractors for on-the-jobinjuries if the employer has any supervisory or control functionover the contractor's employees on his farm. The Los Angeles Times reportedthat there is growing tension between federal and state inspectorson TIPP teams assigned to the garment industry. TIPP has made2,000 inspections, and levied $15 million in fines, in an industrywith 6,000 registered sewing contractors and 158,000 employees. In the garment industry, California TIPP inspectors are beginningto do more inspections without their federal partners. An IRS agriculture enforcementteam has discovered cases in the Fresno area in which growerspaid farm labor contractors only workers' wages of $5 per hourand no commission to cover the cost of required social security,unemployment insurance and workers' compensation taxes. Thereare an estimated $200 million in unpaid agriculture employmenttaxes in the San Joaquin Valley, and IRS section 3505 permitsthe IRS to levy penalties against growers who knowingly pay farmlabor contractors too little for them to pay employment taxes. Since California began requiringthat FLCs seeking to renew their licenses include IRS Form 8821to assure that they have paid appropriate employment taxes, theIRS has determined that 117 of 279 FLCs renewing their licenses,or 42 percent, owed payroll taxes. A bill to make farmers liablefor violations committed by FLCs they use failed severaltimes in the California Legislature, in 1993 by a vote of 42 to25. Under California law, employeesearning less than twice the minimum wage must be provided withtools at no charge by their employers. Employees can use theirown tools at work only if they sign a statement saying that theyprefer their own to employer-provided tools. Don Lee, "Flap Arises OverU.S. Award to Oceanside Farm," LosAngeles Times, August 31, 1996. Rick Kushman, "State digging away at $100 billion undergroundeconomy," Sacramento Bee, May 1, 1994. WT02-B12-208IA088-000636-B044-37http://migration.ucdavis.edu:80/rmn/oct96/fw6.htm 128.120.36.171 19970122191455 text/html 22192HTTP/1.0 200 OKMIME-Version: 1.0Server: WebSTAR/1.3.1 ID/6378Message-ID: Date: Wednesday, 22-Jan-97 19:15:43 GMTLast-Modified: Thursday, 17-Oct-96 20:22:21 GMTContent-type: text/htmlContent-length: 21934 FARM WORKERS FARMWORKERS __________________________________ ALRB/NLRB/CourtDecisions ALRBAccess.The Agricultural LaborRelations Board on September 22, 1996 issued two decisions onthe access of union organizers to workers on farms. In Gargiulo,22 ALRB 9, the employer asserted that five UFW organizers violatedthe time and number rules that regulate access, disrupted harvestingactivities, and damaged crops, and asked that the ALRB ban theUFW from taking access for 60 days. The ALRB ordered hearings to beheld on the employer declarations, made under penalty of perjury,that allege the union significantly disrupted agricultural operations,intentionally harassed employers or employees, or intentionallydisregarded the access rules. In the meantime, UFW organizersretain the right to take access to Gargiulo workers. In Navarro Farms, 22 ALRB 10,the employer declared that UFW organizers took access to its CasserlyRanch July 25, 1996 but, instead of talking to workers, they inspectedtoilet and drinking water facilities and, Navarro declared, toldemployees that they were from Cal-OSHA. The ALRB ordered a hearingon whether the UFW organizers, acting on instructions from theUFW office in Watsonville, used access to conduct a safety inspectionrather than to communicate with employees. The Agricultural Labor RelationsAct, enacted in 1975, does not deal with the access of non-employeeunion organizers to workers employed on farms. Under the NLRA,the NLRB decides on a case-by-case basis whether union organizersshould have access to the work site where employees are working. This means that, in the nonfarm private sector, unions petitionthe NLRB for access to employees on a ship, or an isolated resorthotel or a logging camp. The ALRB reviewed the Californiafarm labor market and concluded that unions routinely asked foraccess to farm workers, and the ALRB would normally grant themaccess. The ALRB justified presumptive access on the groundsthat many farm workers live and work on employer property; thatworkers who enter and leave a farm come and go at different points,so that there is no single public place for organizers to waitto talk to them; and that worker characteristics, including littleeducation and lack of English, limit the ability of organizersto effectively communicate with workers through printed literature,radio, or other media. After much litigation, the ALRB accessrule was upheld by the California and U.S. Supreme Courts (SuperiorFarms-Pandol v. ALRB, 429 U.S. 802, 1976). The ALRB access rules limitnon-employee union organizers by number and time. After the unionfiles with the ALRB a Notice of Intent to Take Access (NA), upto two organizers can come and go on the farm for the first 30 workers,and then one organizer for each additional 15 workers. Unionorganizers enter a farm for a maximum three hours per day--onehour before work, during lunch, and after work, for up to four30-day periods per year. ALRB:Strikers and Jobs. On July 30, 1996, the ALRB issued Dole Farming Company, 22 ALRB8 (1996), upholding an Administrative Law Judge decision thatDole had unlawfully fired and refused to rehire 18 members ofa spraying crew who protested a new work schedule. Dole Farming Company is the Bakersfield-basedgrape, tree fruit, and citrus part of Dole Food Company. On May10, 1994, foreman Martinez told two spray crews that half of eachcrew would work the following day, and the other on May 12, andthat the full crews would return to work through the weekend. This changed established practices, in which Dole's spray crewsoften worked 14 to 16 hours per day for seven days each week fromMay through July. Farm workers in California areentitled to 1.5 times their usual pay for hours in excess of 10per day and 60 per week, and two times their pay for hours inexcess of eight hours per day on the seventh consecutive day ofwork. The spraying crew protested that,if they were not going to get the seventh day overtime, becauseof the day off, they wanted the day off to be Sunday, not in themiddle of the week. The crew demanded a meeting with ranch managerLopez, and he told them that they would have to abide by the workschedule that the company made or leave. The workers decided that eitherall or none would return to work, but that, before accepting thenew schedule, they would demand an increase in pay for clean-upwork and work equipment. However, before they got a chance todiscuss these issues with Lopez, the 10 names of workers who weresupposed to work May 10, 1994 were read out and all refused towork. Lopez testified that he hearda worker ask for checks, and that they should go home, and returnfor their checks in several hours. Lopez returned with the checksseveral hours later. Two days later, on May 12, 1994,one worker returned and requested his old job, and he returnedagain on May 13. On each occasion he was told not yet, and Dolenever contacted him about his job. Dole does not have a senioritylist, and never contacted any ex-members of the spray crew abouttheir jobs. The ALJ decided, and the ALRBaffirmed, that Dole committed an 1153(a) Unfair Labor Practiceby firing and refusing to rehire the spray crew members who hadengaged in protected concerted activity, i.e., refusing to workunder the new work schedule. Under the ALRA, employees whoengage in protected concerted activities can be disciplined, butnot fired. In many non-union settings, workers engage in spontaneousstrikes, meaning that they refuse to work in order to, e.g. protesta new work schedule. Such striking workers can be replaced, butthey cannot be fired for protesting. Replacement means that the employerannounces jobs are vacant and they are open to be filled by temporaryor permanent replacement workers. If the strikers return to work,they must be rehired without prejudice for engaging in a protestover wages and working conditions. Firing means that the employerleaves a job vacant rather than rehiring a returning striker. In S&S Ranch, 22 ALRB 7 (1996),the ALRB on July 18, 1996 overturned an ALJ decision that 27 employeeswho refused to work after S&S did not grant them a $0.25 raisewere economic strikers that the employer improperly failed torehire when they offered to return to work at the old wage. S&S Ranch is a Mendota-basedcotton ranch, and on July 20, 1994, 27 members of foreman Soto'sirrigation crew asked for a $0.25 raise, which Soto refused, asdid the ranch manager. The workers went to the EDD office inMendota, which told them it could not help them, but that S&Shad called to ask for replacement workers. Soto later visitedthe EDD office, but was unable to obtain replacement workers. The irrigation workers returnedto S&S, where personnel manager Blanco said that there werea few vacancies left, and that they should apply to Soto for jobs. After gathering more workers, they spoke with the ranch manager,with Blanco acting as interpreter, who also rejected their requestfor a $0.25 raise. The workers returned to EDD, andthen to the ranch. According to the workers, Blanco told themto go and talk to foreman Soto, who was responsible for hiringhis own crew. Soto told at least one worker that it was too lateto go to work on July 20, but to return the next day. A few workers returned to workon July 21, and most were back to work on July 22. The ALJ decidedthat the complaining workers were not rehired on July 20, whenthey offered to return to work, and thus were owed make-wholewages for the missed days of work. The ALRB overturned the ALJ'sdecision, reasoning that the workers were economic strikers, and that Blanco's July 20 mid-day instruction to go and talk toSoto about getting their jobs back was "an adequate offerof reinstatement." Economic strikers lose wages andpotentially their jobs, since the employer can permanently replaceeconomic strikers. Unfair labor practice strikers, by contrast,are entitled to back pay and their old jobs. The S&S workers initiallyclaimed that they were unlawfully fired for engaging in protectedconcerted activities, i.e., asking for a $0.25 raise. The ALJconcluded that they were economic strikers, and that they wereowed back wages for the day or two after they offered to returnto work and before they were reinstated. The ALRB overturnedthe ALJ's decision, and said that S&S offered to rehire thestrikers on the day that they protested and then returned to work. Peak Employment. In July 1994, 107 farm workers at the Gallo winery in Sonomacounty voted 4 to 1 to have the UFW represent them, and the ALRBcertified the UFW as bargaining representative for Gallo's Sonomafarm workers. In April 1996, a state superior court ruled thatthe election was not valid because Gallo expanded its operations,and thus employment was not 50 percent of the peak 250 that Galloestimated would be employed in 1994, as the ALRA requires. However, in 1994, Gallo hireda peak 175 workers, so that the winery was at peak employmentin July when the election was held. On August 27, 1996, the 5th DistrictCourt of Appeal in Fresno reinstated the UFW election victoryat the Gallo winery, ruling that California judges can set asideelections only when the ALRB makes a clear legal error, whichit did not do in this case. The Appeals Court rejected the firstjudge's ruling that the ALRB is required to base peak employmentlevels on statewide estimates of acreage and labor needs. US-IllegalAliens. Bya voice vote, the House of Representatives on July 11-12, 1996approved a rider to the $145 million appropriation for the NLRBthat bars the NLRB from expending funds "on behalf of anemployee not lawfully entitled to be present and employed in theUnited States." Those who supported the riderargued that the NLRB should not be able to order US employersto provide back pay to aliens who should not be in the US. NLRB Chairman William B. Gouldopposed the rider, and members of Congress who argued againstit noted that it may give US employers an incentive to hire unauthorizedalien workers, since they would not be entitled to back pay ifthe employer unlawfully acts against them. Several members ofCongress argued that, if the unauthorized worker cannot receiveback pay, at least the employer should be required to pay theUS Treasury the funds that cannot be received by the unauthorizedworker. If this provision survives theconference committee, the NLRB could not order employers to provideback pay for unauthorized workers for any period in which theywere not lawfully in the United States. The US Supreme Court,in a 1984 decision, Sure-Tan v. NLRB, 467 U.S. 883 (1984), heldthat the NLRB acted reasonably in interpreting the word "employee"in the National Labor Relations Act to include unauthorized aliens(116 LRRM 2857). The Court in Sure-Tan held thatthe exclusion of undocumented alien employees from participationin union activities and the protection against employer intimidationwould create a kind of subclass of workers which would erode theunity of all employees and impede effective collective bargaining. However, in the Sure-Tan case, the unauthorized workers leftthe US. The NLRB in December 1995 reaffirmedthe right of two unauthorized workers to receive back pay in APRAFuel Oil Buyers Group Inc, 320 NLRB No. 53 (December 21, 1995). In this case, APRA fired six union supporters, two of whom wereunauthorized aliens. The NLRB majority decision concludedthat "the most effective way for the Board to accommodate--andindeed to further--the immigration policies IRCA embodies is,to the extent possible, to provide the protections and remediesof the NLRA to undocumented workers in the same manner as to otheremployees...[to avoid giving] incentives for some unscrupulousemployers to play the provisions of the NLRA and IRCA againsteach other to defeat the fundamental objectives of each, whileprofiting from their own wrongdoing with relative impunity." The NLRB in APRA held that unauthorizedworkers were entitled to backpay and reinstatement if they couldproduce, within a reasonable time, documents enabling the employerto meet its obligation under IRCA [the Immigration Reform andControl Act of 1986] to verify their eligibility for employmentin the United States." Thus, the unauthorized workers unlawfullyfired by APRA are entitled to backpay from the date of dischargeto the earlier of (1) their reinstatement, including their compliancewith IRCA, or (2) the workers' failure, after a reasonable time,to produce documents establishing eligibility to work in the US. The US Supreme Court in February1996 refused to review this NLRB decision. In New York, a federal judge enforcedan arbitration award requiring the grocery chain A&P to reinstatean employee who had given a false name and other false informationon his job application to conceal the fact that he was an illegalalien (The Great Atlantic and Pacific Tea Co. v. Local No. 338,Retail, Wholesale & Department Store Union, DC SNY, No. 95Civ. 5255, May 28, 1996). The employee was an illegal alienwhen he applied for a job in 1986, became a legal resident in1989, and a naturalized US citizen in 1994. The union agreementallows A&P to discharge employees for dishonesty. The arbitratorheld that nine years of employment more than offset the dishonestyabout legal status in 1986. US-JointEmployment. A federal Appeals Court in July 1996 ruled that over 600 beanpickers in south Florida can collect as much as $2 per hour between1986 and 1989 from a grower who used a contractor to supply workers. On July 19, 1996, the US Courtof Appeals for the Eleventh Circuit modified its 1994 ruling thatset out the parameters for joint employment in labor contractor-growersituations. In Antenor v D & S Farms, 88 F.3d 925; 1996 U.S.App, Antenor and over 600 other mostly Haitian women who pickedbeans in south Florida sought back wages from both the labor contractor,Ag-Tech Services, and D&S Farms, and the court ruled thatD&S was a joint employer, and thus jointly liable for theback pay, because its supervisors were involved in managing theworkers. According to the winning attorney,this means that growers in most circumstances will be consideredjoint employers with contractors unless the contractor has true"absolute, sole, and unfettered control" over the workers,and has a substantial investment in equipment and facilities. Some speculate that this may be the biggest farm labor back paycase ever. In the mid-1980s, farmers growingsnap beans for the fresh market turned to Ag-Tech Services, alabor contractor, to get the beans picked for $3.90 per box, minus$0.11 per box for grower-paid workers compensation. Growers determinedwhen and where to pick, then contacted Ag-Tech Services, whichsent the crew to their field. However, picking did not beginuntil the grower or his supervisor gave approval. Pickers weresupervised by one Ag-Tech Services and one grower field boss. Growers issued two checks to Ag-TechServices: one for Social Security taxes, and one for the remainderof the $3.90 per box fee. Ag-Tech Services, in turn, paid itssupervisors, and the supervisors paid the pickers, in some casesdeducting for the cost of transportation to the fields. The bean pickers sued, charging,among other things, that D&S Farms and Ag-Tech Services didnot keep accurate records of hours worked and production, andthat, in some cases, workers received as little as $2 per hourfor their work. A federal district court ruledthat the farm workers could not sue D&S Farms, because D&SFarms was not a joint employer with Ag-Tech Services. DOL usesfive factors to determine whether there is a joint employmentrelationship: the nature and degree of control of the workers,the degree of supervision of the work, the power to determinethe pay rates or the methods of payment, the right to hire andfire and the payment of wages. In addition, the court held thatthree other factors are relevant--does the grower own the facilitieswhere the work occurs, is the workers' work integral to the productionprocess, and what is the grower's and labor contractor's relativeinvestment in equipment and facilities? In reviewing these eight factors,the Court found that D&S Farms told Ag Tech how many pickersto bring to the field and determined when picking was to begin,that D&S Farms supervisors talked directly to workers aboutthe quality of their work, and that D&S Farms at one pointtold Ag Tech to stop all picking until the pickers obtained identificationcards from the South Florida Vegetable Association. According to the court in Antenor,MSPA was intended to hold "agricultural employers' fullyaccountable as joint employers whenever the facts suggest thatliability is fairly imposed," which implies that, if in doubt,the courts will assume that there is a joint employment relationship. US-Bargaining. The US Supreme Court ruled, in an 8-1 decision announced on June20, that employers who bargain jointly with unions are shieldedfrom charges that they are violating antitrust laws when theyimpose new wages and benefits on workers after collective bargainingagreements expire. About 40 percent of all US collective bargainingagreements covering 1,000 or more workers involve so-called "multiemployerbargaining" in which participating employers appoint a committeeof negotiators to bargain for them with the union. The Court found that NationalFootball League team owners did not violate antitrust laws when,in 1989, the owners imposed a $1,000 per week salary cap on rookieswho played on taxi or practice squads. The players sued the ownersunder the Sherman Antitrust Act, and won a $30 million award thatwas overturned by the decision. "Court reinstates UFW winover Gallo," Associated Press, August 28, 1996. WT02-B12-209IA088-000636-B044-57http://migration.ucdavis.edu:80/rmn/oct96/i1.htm 128.120.36.171 19970122191514 text/html 9936HTTP/1.0 200 OKMIME-Version: 1.0Server: WebSTAR/1.3.1 ID/6378Message-ID: Date: Wednesday, 22-Jan-97 19:16:07 GMTLast-Modified: Thursday, 17-Oct-96 20:25:50 GMTContent-type: text/htmlContent-length: 9679 Untitled IMMIGRATION __________________________________ Immigrationand Welfare Changes In 1996, three major pieces of legislationwere signed into law that will affect immigrants: the Anti-Terrorismand Effective Death Penalty Act, signed into law on April 24,1996, the Personal Responsibility and Work Opportunity ReconciliationAct, signed into law on August 22, 1996, and the Immigration Controland Financial Responsibility Act, signed into law on September30, 1996. A fourth new law, the Small BusinessJob Protection Act of 1996, increased the minimum wage from $4.25to $4.75 hourly on October 1, 1996, and to $5.15 per hour on September1, 1997. Immigration Changes The immigration bill includes three majorsets of measures to reduce illegal immigration and reduce theaccess of legal immigrants to welfare. First, it provides for more border enforcement,adding 1,000 Border Patrol agents per year for five years, bringingthe total from 5,175 in 1996 to almost 10,000 by the year 2000.The new immigration law also requires INS to build a 14-mile triplefence on the US-Mexican border south of San Diego, and increasespenalties for smuggling aliens into the US and for using falsedocuments to obtain US jobs or welfare assistance. The new law also adds 1,200 INS investigators,the agents who inspect US work places for unauthorized workers,and apprehend and deport criminal aliens. Second, it introduces a pilot telephoneverification program to enable employers to verify the statusof newly-hired workers, and social service agencies to determinethe legal status of applicants for benefits. However, employerparticipation in the verification program is voluntary, and nonational worker eligibility verification system that mandatesemployer participation could be established without new legislation. The new law includes incentives for statesto develop counterfeit-resistant driver's licenses and birth certificates. The new legislation makes it easier foremployers to defend themselves against suits from job applicantswho believe that they were discriminated against by employerschecking their legal status. Job applicants who believe that employerschecking their legal status discriminated against them must nowprove that the employer intended to discriminate. Employers will not have to forfeit theirbusiness assets if they repeatedly hire illegal aliens. Third, the immigration bill expands andreinforces restrictions on the access of LEGAL immigrants to welfarebenefits. Non-US citizens were barred from Food Stamp assistanceand Supplemental Security Income by the welfare law enacted inAugust 1996, but that law left it to states to decide whetherto permit legal immigrants to participate in Medicaid, medicalassistance for the poor. President Clinton's last minute negotiationspreserved the right of states to offer Medicaid to non-US citizens,including for the treatment of AIDS. Persons with AIDS are notallowed to immigrate but, once in the US, Medicaid can pay fortheir treatment. Clinton also got a provision droppedthat would have subjected to deportation immigrants who receivedmeans-tested federal welfare assistance, including AFDC and Medicaid,for more than 12 months during their first seven years in theUS. To make it less likely that immigrantswill request welfare assistance after their arrival, US sponsorswill have to have higher incomes. Sponsors of immigrants now have to havean income at least equal to the poverty line, $15,569 for a familyof four in 1995. Under the new immigration law, US citizens whowant to bring spouses and minor children into the US will haveto have incomes that are 125 percent of the poverty line, $19,461,down from 140 percent in the House-approved bill. Sponsors areallowed to include the partial value of assets such as cars andhomes to reach this level. In 1994, about 36 percent of the sponsorsof immediate relatives had incomes that were less than 140 percentof the poverty line, and 44 percent of those who sponsored parentsand adult siblings had incomes less than 200 percent of the povertyline. One of the most contentious issues inthe immigration bill was the Gallegly amendment, which would haveallowed states to deny illegal alien children free K-12 education.A 5-4 US Supreme Court decision in 1982, Plyler v Doe, requiresstates to provide K-12 education to illegal alien children. The House approved the Gallegly amendmentby a vote of 254 to 175 on September 25, 1996. The Senate didnot consider the Gallegly amendment. Farm employers won a General AccountingOffice study of the H-2A program. In the next Congress, farm employersplan to push for a new guest worker program. Welfare Changes The new welfare law makes most legaland illegal immigrants ineligible for welfare assistance. To obtainmaximum federal payments, states have an incentive to implementthe new welfare law as quickly as possible. An estimated one million legal immigrants,including 400,000 in California, are expected to lose about $4billion per year in welfare benefits they are now receiving, anaverage $4,000 each. Under the new welfare law, foreignersare grouped into three major categories for the purpose of determiningtheir access to welfare assistance: -Legal immigrants who have worked inthe US for at least 40 quarters (10 years), are veterans or membersof the Armed Forces, or have been admitted as refugees, retainaccess to welfare as before. - "qualified aliens,"--mostlegal immigrants--are not eligible for specific means-tested federalbenefit programs for a five-year period after their entry intothe United States. -"non-qualified aliens" areunauthorized or illegal aliens and some categories of non-immigrantswho have INS permission to remain in the US, such as aliens withTemporary Protected Status (TPS) or Persons Residing under Colorof Law (PRUCOL). They are not eligible for most federal publicbenefits, or for many state and local public benefits. The assistance programs to which legalimmigrants continue to gain access are primarily those that deliverin-kind services, such as soup kitchens, or those that provideemergency help, such as violence and abuse prevention programs. Courts may slow the removal of immigrantsfrom welfare programs, since lawyers are preparing to sue statesas they remove immigrants from the welfare rolls. A major argumentwill be that the new welfare law unconstitutionally discriminatesagainst a class of people -- immigrants who have not become citizens-- when it cuts off their Supplemental Security Income and foodstamp benefits. Under the 14th Amendment to the US constitution,the equal protection under the law amendment, governments maynot discriminate on the basis of, inter alia, national origin. More immigrants receive assistance underFood Stamps than any other welfare program. In most states, immigrantsapplying for Food Stamps for the first time near the end of September1996 were rejected. Those receiving Food Stamps must havetheir need for them re-certified at least once each year. PresidentClinton directed USDA to permit all states to keep immigrantscurrently on Food Stamp rolls until August 22, 1997, one yearafter the welfare law was signed. California has 3.2 million Food Stamprecipients, including 436,000 legal immigrants. They currentlyreceive benefits worth an average of $182 per month. About 373,000immigrants will not be eligible for the program once the welfarelaw is implemented. Marc Lacey, "Toned Down Bill onImmigration Passes in House," Los Angles Times, September29, 1996. Gerald Seib, "Backlash over immigration has enteredmainstream this year," Wall Street Journal, September 27,1996. WT02-B12-210IA088-000636-B044-74http://migration.ucdavis.edu:80/rmn/oct96/i2.htm 128.120.36.171 19970122191529 text/html 3033HTTP/1.0 200 OKMIME-Version: 1.0Server: WebSTAR/1.3.1 ID/6378Message-ID: Date: Wednesday, 22-Jan-97 19:16:27 GMTLast-Modified: Thursday, 17-Oct-96 20:29:10 GMTContent-type: text/htmlContent-length: 2776 Untitled Immigration __________________________________ NaturalizationControversy As the number of newly-naturalizedUS citizens surpassed 1.1 million in FY96, Republicans steppedup their attacks on Citizenship USA, the INS-administered initiativelaunched by Vice President Gore in 1995 to eliminate the backlogof immigrants who applied for US citizenship. Republicans charged that expeditednaturalization was an attempt by the Clinton Administration toadd Democrats to the voter rolls in California and other key statesbefore the November 1996 elections. The INS officer in Fresno,for example, said in an April 1996 letter that the "INS hasbeen told to naturalize everyone who filed form N-400 prior toApril 1, 1996, in time for them to register to vote in the Novemberelection." A Gore staffer complained on March28, 1996 that INS headquarters was hindering efforts to produce"a million new voters by election day," and suggestedthat he should become INS Deputy Commissioner to speed up naturalization. The INS eventually granted its district managers in some citiesthe authority to waive some INS rules and regulations to speedup naturalizations. One memo prepared by Vice PresidentGore's office discusses way to "lower the standards for citizenship." A letter from Gore's National Performance Review to the INS recommendedwaiving INS some rules in order to streamline the naturalizationprocess. In California, immigrants eagerto naturalize are often bilked by notarios, non-lawyer paralegalswho sometimes operate from fancy leased offices, collect thousandsof dollars from immigrants, and then disappear. In some cases,the $2,000 to $4,000 represents several years of immigrant savings. Julio Laboy, "Immigrantshit by scams on citizenship," Wall Street Journal, October10, 1996. Marcus Stern, "White House pressured INS to addnew citizens," San Diego Union Tribune, October 9, 1996. Sara Fritz, "Gore Immigrant Program Role Draws Fire,"Los Angeles Times, October 6, 1996. WT02-B12-211IA088-000636-B044-91http://migration.ucdavis.edu:80/rmn/oct96/i3.htm 128.120.36.171 19970122191547 text/html 1917HTTP/1.0 200 OKMIME-Version: 1.0Server: WebSTAR/1.3.1 ID/6378Message-ID: Date: Wednesday, 22-Jan-97 19:16:38 GMTLast-Modified: Thursday, 17-Oct-96 20:29:34 GMTContent-type: text/htmlContent-length: 1660 IMMIGRATION Immigration __________________________________ Poverty in America In 1995, some 36 million US residents,14 percent of the population, lived in households with below-povertylevel incomes. The poverty line--three times what a family needsto spend to eat-- was $15,569 for a family of four and $12,158for a family of three in 1995. For the first time, the Census Bureaureleased poverty data on native- and foreign-born residents: 13percent of the US-born residents were poor, versus 28 percentof the foreign born who were not naturalized US citizens. Native-bornhouseholds had median incomes of $34,800, while households headedby foreign-born persons had median incomes of $28,400. Also for the first time, the percentageof Hispanics in poverty, 30.3 percent, exceeded the share of Blacksin poverty, 29.3 percent, in 1995. The immigrant welfare restrictionsare expected to increase Hispanic poverty. For more information, see http://www.census.gov/prod/www/titles.html Steven Holmes, "For Hispanics Poor,No Silver Lining," New York Times, October 13, 1996. WT02-B12-212IA088-000636-B044-113http://migration.ucdavis.edu:80/rmn/oct96/o1.htm 128.120.36.171 19970122191602 text/html 6778HTTP/1.0 200 OKMIME-Version: 1.0Server: WebSTAR/1.3.1 ID/6378Message-ID: Date: Wednesday, 22-Jan-97 19:16:59 GMTLast-Modified: Thursday, 17-Oct-96 20:36:01 GMTContent-type: text/htmlContent-length: 6521 Untitled OTHER __________________________________ How We Eat There were about 100 million "consumerunits" in the US, and they spent an average $30,700 in 1993,up from $29,800 in 1992. The five largest expenditure itemswere housing, $9,600; transportation, $5,500; food, $4,400 (14percent); personal taxes, $3,000; and personal insurance and pensions,$2,900. Food expenditures included $2,700for food eaten at home, or nine percent of total expenditures. The major items were meat and poultry, which averaged $735; fruitsand vegetables, $445; cereals and bread, $435; and, dairy products;$295. In addition, consumer units spent an average $225 on non-alcoholicbeverages and $270 on alcoholic beverages. Spending on fresh fruits and vegetablesrepresents about 10 percent of average consumer unit expenditureson food-- about $135 each for fresh fruits and for fresh vegetables,or a total $270 for the commodities most likely to use immigrantfarm labor. Farmers obtained an average 24percent of the retail price of food consumed at home in 1993--orabout $650. The farmer's share of the retail food dollar rangedfrom a low of about seven percent for grains used in cereal andbakery products, to 40 to 48 percent for poultry, eggs and beef. Farmers received about 19 percentof the average retail price for fresh fruits ($26), and 23 percentof the retail price of fresh vegetables ($31)--farmers get $57or 21 percent of the $270 spent on fresh fruits and vegetables. Farm labor, including supervisory labor, typically representsabout one-third of farmers' costs of production for fresh fruitsand vegetables. In other words, farm labor represents about $8.60of the $26 that the farmer gets from what the average US consumerunit spends on fresh fruit, and $10.20 of the $31 the farmer getsfrom US consumer unit spending on fresh vegetables. Suppose that immigration holdsfarm wages 50 percent below the level they would otherwise be,so that current wages of $5 to $6 per hour would be $7.50 to $9per hour. And suppose that the entire cost of higher farm wagesis passed through to consumers, so that the cost of farm laborto produce fresh fruit rises $4.40 to $13, and the cost of farmlabor to produce fresh vegetables rises $5 to $15. If these increasedfarm labor costs were passed through to consumers, spending onfresh fruits and vegetables eaten at home would rise by less thanfour percent (almost $10) from $270 to $280. In addition to food eaten at home,the average consumer unit spends $1,700 on food eaten away fromhome. It is difficult to calculate the food cost of food eatenaway from home--some of the total cost of restaurant meals reflectsservices and atmosphere. If 10 percent of away from home foodis for fresh fruits and vegetables, another $170 is spent on them,and the farm share of remains at 21 percent or $36, and farm laborrepresents 33 percent or $12, then a 50 percent increase in farmlabor costs would raise spending on fresh fruits and vegetableseaten away from home by $6, from $170 to $176. The total increase in consumerunit spending on food if farm wages were to rise by 50 percentas a result of immigration changes, assuming all of the increasedcosts were passed through to consumers, would be about $16 peryear. Per capita consumption.USDA estimates the "disappearance" of various typesof food. In 1994, per capita food disappearance was 1,782 poundsper person, excluding alcoholic drinks. Not all of this foodwas eaten; some was thrown away, but it is often said that theaverage American "eats" about 1,800 pounds of food peryear, or about five pounds per day. The per capita disappearance ofmajor food items includes: dairy products, 586 pounds, meat andpoultry, 194 pounds, flour and cereals, 199 pounds, and sugarand sweeteners, 148 pounds. Per capita disappearance of fruitsand vegetables totaled about 470 pounds, including 240 poundsof vegetables, 150 pounds of fruit, and 77 pounds of potatoes. Many fruits and vegetables are consumed after they are processed,such as canned or frozen--per capita fresh produce consumptionwas about 305 pounds per person, including 114 pounds of vegetables,48 pounds of potatoes and 127 pounds of fruit. The fresh vegetable consumptionincluded 27 pounds of lettuce--23 pounds of head lettuce and fourpounds of leaf lettuce. A head of lettuce weighs about two pounds. The next most important vegetables, by weight, were tomatoes,16 pounds per person in 1994, cabbage, 10 pounds, and carrotsand sweet corn, eight pounds each. In 1995, US residents spent $2.5billion on 2.7 million gallons of over 500 brands of bottled water. Americans ate an average 40 poundsof tortillas per person in 1995, compared with 410 pounds perperson in Mexico. Food service operations, includingrestaurants, spent about $185 billion on farm commodities in 1995. "Hitting a plateau,"The Packer, August 12, 1996. Putnam, Judith and Jane Allshouse. 1996. Food Consumption, Prices, and Expenditures, Annual Data,1970-94. 1996. Washington. USDA, Economic Research ServiceStatistical Bulletin 928, April. WT02-B12-213IA088-000636-B044-135http://migration.ucdavis.edu:80/rmn/oct96/o2.htm 128.120.36.171 19970122191634 text/html 10799HTTP/1.0 200 OKMIME-Version: 1.0Server: WebSTAR/1.3.1 ID/6378Message-ID: Date: Wednesday, 22-Jan-97 19:17:17 GMTLast-Modified: Thursday, 17-Oct-96 20:37:39 GMTContent-type: text/htmlContent-length: 10541 Untitled OTHER __________________________________ Mexican Tomatoes and Avocados The US farm value of fresh vegetablesand melons was $7.4 billion in 1995, and Florida's productionof six winter fresh vegetables--tomatoes, bell peppers, cucumbers,snap beans, eggplant, and squash--represented about 10 percentof the total. Florida produced 2.5 billion pounds ofthese six fresh vegetables in 1995, other states produced 3.8billion pounds, and 2.6 billion pounds were imported--about three-fourthsof these fresh vegetable imports were from Mexico. Mexico exportedabout $1.5 billion of fruits and vegetables in 1995, including$600 million of tomatoes. The US imported $3.1 billion worth ofhorticultural products from its NAFTA partners in 1995, including$400 million worth of Mexican tomatoes. About 80 percent of Mexicanhorticultural imports were fresh produce, versus 50 percent ofCanadian imports. Tomatoes In April 1996, Florida tomato producersfiled a petition alleging that Mexico "dumped" tomatoesin the US at less than their cost of production--they needed onlyshow that there was "some injury" from imported tomatoesto win this case. The US Department of Commerce investigated todetermine, e.g., whether Mexican tomatoes were sold at the sameprices in Canada, Mexico, and the US in 1995-96, and planned toissue its decision on October 7, 1996. However, the Commerce Department announcedit was suspending the anti-dumping case on October 11, 1996, becauseMexico agreed to a price floor for its tomato exports--Mexicangrowers would charge at least $0.21 per pound, or $5.17 for a25-pound box for their tomatoes shipped to the US--and Floridagrowers agreed to suspend their dumping case. Mexican growersmust ratify the agreement. Before the decision, Mexican growerspredicted that a 30 percent anti-dumping tariff would eliminate500,000 jobs in Mexico. Many observers expected Florida to winthe dumping case, largely because the Clinton administration,in a bid for Florida's 25 electoral votes, permitted the Floridagrowers to mix two marketing years in providing data on Floridaand Mexican costs of production and market shares. The FloridaDepartment of Agriculture spent $1.5 million to press the tomato-growers'complaints against Mexican tomatoes. If Florida had won the dumping case,the US could have imposed dumping sanctions on Mexican tomatoes,adding, for example, a 10 percent "dumping margin" tothe tomatoes imported in 1996-97. Mexico could have retaliated againstUS-produced goods, the $3 billion worth apparel and wood productsthat the US exported to Mexico in 1995 were suggested. On July 2, 1996, the International TradeCommission rejected by a 4-1 vote a petition from Florida growersthat alleged that the US winter tomato and pepper industries werebeing "substantially hurt" by normal tomato and pepperimports from Mexico, Canada, and the Netherlands. If the ITC hadagreed that US producers were being "substantially"hurt by imports, President Clinton could have imposed increasedtariffs or taken other steps to limit imports under Section 201of the Trade Act. The 16.5 pounds of fresh tomatoes thatthe average American eats each year, include about 4.6 poundsproduced in Florida, seven pounds produced in other states, especiallyCalifornia, and 4.6 imported pounds, usually from Mexico. During the first 10 months of 1995, Mexicanagricultural exports to the United States, excluding grains, roseby 42 percent to $ 2.9 billion, while US agricultural exportsto Mexico fell 44 percent to $ 724 million. Mexico supplies aboutthree-fourths of the imported vegetables consumed in the US, andMexican-born workers are about three-fourths of the US hand-harvestvegetable labor force. In the winter of 1996, prices for 25-poundboxes of tomatoes fell from the usual $10 to $12 to $3, belowthe $8 cost of production in Florida, and the $6 cost of productionin Mexico. Florida planted 47,000 acres of tomatoes in 1995, andharvested 14 billion pounds of tomatoes. In 1995, the US imported1.3 billion pounds of tomatoes from Mexico worth $400 million. Florida and Mexico compete for less thanhalf the year--for the five months between December and April--withthe most severe competition in February-March. Most observersattribute Florida's falling share of the winter vegetable marketto weather and to Mexico's "correct" technological choices. Until the early 1990s, both Florida andMexico produced mostly "mature green" tomatoes, whichmeans that green tomatoes were picked into buckets, sorted andpacked into cartons, and then gassed to turn them pink beforebeing shipped to retail stores. However, Mexico began in the 1990sto plant "vine-ripe" tomato varieties that can be pickedpink, and reportedly taste better than mature green tomatoes. On September 24, the House AgricultureCommittee's Risk Management and Specialty Crops Subcommittee helda hearing on the Florida growers trade complaints in Lantana,Florida. At the hearing, it was asserted that Florida tomato workershave average hourly earnings of $6.77 per hour, and that Mexicanpickers average $0.50 per hour. About one-third of tomato productioncosts are for labor. Avocados Mexico produces about 45 percent of theworld's avocados, some 800,000 tons per year from almost 220,000acres, but Mexican avocados have been banned from the US since1914. Some 100,000 workers are employed on 8,000 avocado farmsin Michocan, which produces about 85 percent of Mexican avocadosand is one the major states of origin for Mexican migrants headedto the US. California has about 6,000 avocado growersand 65,000 acres of avocados, up sharply from 20,000 acres in1960. San Diego county produces about half of all US avocados,which were worth $250 million in 1994. Mexico has both higheryields and lower costs--average Mexican yields are about one-thirdhigher than California yields, 7.6 tons per hectare, versus fivetons per hectare in the US. As a result of the ban on Mexican avocadosin the US, a box of US-grown avocados in the US sells for about$30, while a box of Mexican-grown avocados in Canada sells forabout $8. The US imports about one percent of itsannual avocado consumption, and Mexico exports about five percentof the avocados it produces. In 1994, the USDA proposed to lift theban on imported Mexican avocados. Mexican growers certified toship avocados to the US would have their trees inspected in Mexicoand USDA personnel would also check for pests in packing plants.Mexican growers would pay for these USDA inspections. Under the proposal, Mexican avocadoscould be imported only to 19 Midwest and Northeastern states duringthe months of November to February, when the cold weather shouldprevent any of the pests from surviving. If the import ban were lifted, one simulationprojected a four to eight percent decrease in US avocado acreageand a drop of 10 to 20 percent in US avocado prices. The ban on Mexican avocados was expectedto be lifted in November 1996, but California avocado growersspent $300,000 on newspaper ads to persuade USDA to continue tostudy the issue of pests slipping past inspectors, surviving theNew England winter and wreaking havoc in California. The delaywill likely mean that no Mexican avocados can be imported untilNovember 1997. USDA regulations on avocado imports requirethat there be an "absence of infestations of injurious insectsknown to attack fruits and vegetables" in the area of originof the fruit during the 12 months before importation. A box of Mexican avocados sells for about$8 in Canada, while a box of US avocados in the US sells for $30.Canadians pay $0.50 to $0.60 per Mexican avocado in retail stores,while US consumers often pay $1 each for California avocados.About five percent of Mexico's fresh avocados are exported. Mexicans consume about four times morefresh produce per capita than Americans, in part because fewerMexican have the freezers and microwaves associated with frozenvegetables. Costa Rica supplied 25 percent of the8.5 billion pounds of US banana imports in 1995. David Sanger, "President Wins TomatoDeal Protecting Growers in Florida," New York Times, October12, 1996. "Pact will keep tomatoes rollin' in from Mexico,"Chicago Tribune, October 12, 1996. Jerry Jackson, "TomatoImports Ruled OK," Orlando Sentinel, July 3, 1996. Joel Millman,"Mexican farmers are wary of sanctions," Wall StreetJournal, July 2, 1996. Brumfield, R.G. 1996. Proceedings of the13th International Symposium on Horticultural Economics. ActaHorticulurae. WT02-B12-214IA088-000636-B044-166http://migration.ucdavis.edu:80/rmn/oct96/o3.htm 128.120.36.171 19970122191728 text/html 2924HTTP/1.0 200 OKMIME-Version: 1.0Server: WebSTAR/1.3.1 ID/6378Message-ID: Date: Wednesday, 22-Jan-97 19:18:22 GMTLast-Modified: Thursday, 17-Oct-96 20:38:22 GMTContent-type: text/htmlContent-length: 2667 Untitled OTHER __________________________________ FVH Agriculture The farm value of fruits and nuts,vegetables and melons and horticultural specialties such as mushroomsand greenhouse/nursery crops totaled a record $34 billion in 1995,including $10.5 billion worth of fruits and nuts, $13.3 billionworth of vegetables, and $10.2 billion worth of specialties suchas flowers, garden plants and bulbs and Christmas trees. The US exported $9 billion worthof FVH commodities in 1995, and FVH exports are expected to hitalmost $10 billion in 1997. US farm exports, by contrast, areexpected to be $58 billion in 1997. About one-third of the value ofgreenhouse/nursery crops are floriculture--cut flowers and beddingand garden plants. The US ($2.4 billion in farm sales in 1994,and $3.3 billion in 1995) is second only to the Netherlands ($2.4billion in 1994) in global floriculture production. Italy, Germanyand other European countries also have significant floriculturesectors, but the growth in floriculture is fastest in Latin America(Colombia and Ecuador), Africa (Morocco and Kenya), Israel andAsia (Thailand and Malaysia). The US has about 10,000 floricultureoperations, and they have 843 million square feet under glass,and 27,000 acres of open air production. Geraniums worth $140million to growers were the most valuable of the potted plants,which had a grower value of $1.3 billion in 1995. Cut flowerswere worth $521 million to growers in 1995. Potted flowering plants such aspoinsettias were worth $679 million to growers in 1995 and foliageplants were worth $496 million. A growing segment of the greenhouseindustry involves the production of vegetables under glass; thevalue of vegetables grown in greenhouses more than doubled from$91 million in 1992 to $200 million in 1996. In the late 1980s,tomatoes accounted for about 40 percent of greenhouse vegetables,followed by cucumbers, 30 percent and lettuce, 13 percent. WT02-B12-215IA088-000636-B044-194http://migration.ucdavis.edu:80/rmn/oct96/o4.htm 128.120.36.171 19970122191752 text/html 2730HTTP/1.0 200 OKMIME-Version: 1.0Server: WebSTAR/1.3.1 ID/6378Message-ID: Date: Wednesday, 22-Jan-97 19:18:44 GMTLast-Modified: Thursday, 17-Oct-96 20:38:54 GMTContent-type: text/htmlContent-length: 2473 Untitled OTHER __________________________________ MarketingOrders Every year, growers are assessedabout $700 million to support research and promotion of commoditiesthat range from milk to grapes. Many farmers are beginning tochallenge these mandatory assessments and, in June 1996, the USSupreme Court agreed to review a 1995 decision of the 9th US CircuitCourt of Appeals in San Francisco that declared unconstitutionalmandatory grower assessments of about $0.20 per 20 pound cartonof fresh fruit to generate $10 to $20 million per year to supportgeneric advertising of peaches, plums and nectarines ("summerfruits"). The case began in April 1987,when several California packers petitioned USDA to stop collectingthe mandatory assessments, which total about $1 billion from allkinds of farmers and support research and promotion for commoditiesfrom California avocados to Vidalia onions. The 9th Circuit decision heldthat USDA can compel growers to pay mandatory assessments if thegovernment can prove that there is a government interest in increasingthe consumption of the commodity being promoted, that genericadvertising increases consumption, and that there is minimal infringementof grower rights. The court said that the burden of proof ison the commodity boards to prove that their advertising is usefulto growers. The California grower-packerswho brought the suit argued that they want to spend their promotionmoneys advertising their own brand, not peaches in general. In October 1996, Delano Farms,a major California table grape grower that shipped 1.7 millionboxes of grapes in 1996, sued the California Table Grape Commission,charging that mandatory assessments that raise $12.5 million eachyear to promote grapes are an unconstitutional infringement on promotions. WT02-B12-216IA088-000636-B044-223http://migration.ucdavis.edu:80/rmn/oct96/r.htm 128.120.36.171 19970122191810 text/html 9393HTTP/1.0 200 OKMIME-Version: 1.0Server: WebSTAR/1.3.1 ID/6378Message-ID: Date: Wednesday, 22-Jan-97 19:19:02 GMTLast-Modified: Thursday, 17-Oct-96 20:39:24 GMTContent-type: text/htmlContent-length: 9136 OTHER RESOURCES EDD Report 352. 1996. Wages,Benefits, Contributions, and Employment by Industry. August 23. This annual report presents administrativedata that employers provide to EDD when they pay their UnemploymentInsurance taxes. These data show that crop and agricultural serviceemployers pay only about half as much in UI taxes as unemployedworkers draw in benefits. In calendar year 1995, 934,000reporting units paid $309 billion in wages to an average 10.2million employees. Employers pay UI taxes on the first $7,000of annual wages for an employee, so taxable wages of $83 billionare only 27 percent of total wages paid in 1995. Unemployed workersreceived $3 billion in UI benefits in 1995. Some of the most interesting dataare those for individual industries. The 38,000 agriculturalreporting units paid $6.8 billion to an average 464,000 coveredemployees, or an average $14,700. Agricultural employers contributed$164 million in UI taxes, but unemployed workers received almosttwice as much in UI benefits, $304 million. The report provides data by two,three, and selected four-digit SIC codes. The 17,600 crop reportingunits paid $3 billion in total wages to an average 197,0000 coveredemployees, and unemployed crop workers drew $156 million, twicecrop employer contributions of $78 million. The 4,300 livestock reportingunits paid $468 million in total wages to an average an average25,000 covered employees, and unemployed livestock workers drew$5 million, less than livestock employer contributions of $7 million. The 15,000 agricultural servicereporting units paid $3.2 billion in total wages to an averagean average 238,0000 covered employees, and unemployed agriculturalservice workers drew $140 million, almost twice agricultural serviceemployer contributions of $78 million. The only three-digit informationpublished is for 1,426 farm labor contractors and farm managementservices, SIC 076. They paid $958 million in total wages to anaverage 112,000 covered employees; unemployed workers drew $73million, or twice employer contributions of $36 million. EDD publishes four-digit SIC informationfor 1,060 farm labor contractor reporting units in 1995. Theypaid $788 million in total wages to an average 102,000 coveredemployees, or an average $6,600 per covered job; unemployed workersdrew $66 million, or twice employer contributions of $32 million. Barger, W. K. and Ernesto M. Reza. 1994. The Farm Labor Movement in the Midwest. Austin: Universityof Texas Press. This seven chapter book is thestory of Baldemar Velasquez and the Farm Labor Organizing Committee,a union based in Toledo, Ohio that represented about 4,000 seasonalfarm workers employed on 100 Ohio and Michigan farms in 1991. The authors are ex-FLOC organizers who stress how FLOC developedits winning strategy: enlist churches, unions and other groupsto boycott food companies Campbells and Heinz. In 1994-95, FLOC reported thatit represented 90 percent of the workers in the pickling cucumberindustry in Ohio. However, they report that there are 60,000migrant workers in Ohio, Indiana, and Michigan, which would suggestthat FLOC represents fewer than 10 percent of area migrants. Campbells and Heinz bought tomatoesand cucumbers from farmers, and FLOC was able to persuade Campbellsin 1986-87, and Heinz in 1987, to sign three-way agreements betweenthemselves, the growers who actually employed FLOC farm workersand FLOC. A chronology of FLOC activities is provided on pages52-53 of the book. The strength of the book is itsinsider's account of how FLOC persevered in its struggle for recognitionby the nonfarm food companies that had the ability to pay thehigher wages that FLOC wanted. The book is much less clear aboutthe desirability and usefulness of the FLOC method of using guiltabout poor farm workers to pressure food companies to improvetheir wages. In the FLOC case, Ohio and Michigan production isa very small part of the total amount of cucumbers and tomatoeseach company buys; would the same strategy have worked in California,where most of these commodities are produced? FLOC endorsed a merger with theUFW in 1985, but in July 1994, became a local union directly affiliatedwith the AFL-CIO. The book does not deal with FLOC'sadaptation to the end of sharecropping in 1993. Until 1993, manyFLOC members were share croppers who received as payment for pickingcucumbers 50 percent of the revenues they fetched when the cucumberswere delivered to the processor. As share croppers, they couldlegally employ their children during the six to eight week harvest,enabling a family to sometimes earn $1,000 or more weekly. Valle, Isabel. 1994. Fieldsof Toil: A Migrant Family's Journey. Pullman, Washington: WashingtonState University. This book is a newspaper reporter'saccount of one year with a migrant worker family, 1991-92, basedin south Texas that every year follows the ripening crops to Washingtonand Oregon. The year-in-the-life project was sponsored by theWalla Walla Union-Bulletin--according to one estimate, there were7,500 migrant workers in Walla Walla county in the early 1990s. The first thing to note is thatthe Martinez family is very unusual. Due to a shortage of inexpensivehousing for short term migrants, there are few follow-the-cropmigrant workers, except in the northern states where workers areneeded for less than three months. Patriarch Raul was also unusualbecause he was 61 in 1991-92, far older than the typical migrantworker--the book repeats the canard on page 57 that the averagelife expectancy of a migrant farm worker is 48. Finally, few extended familiesmake the migrant trek in the 1990s; the typical migrant farm workeris a 25- to 35- year old man who shuttles into the US from Mexico,and then works in a crew of 20 to 30 men which has jobs, and oftenhousing and transportation, arranged for them by an intermediarysuch as a farm labor contractor. The Martinez family had 13 children. The family is also unusual in its ability to tap virtually everyprogram sponsored by the state and federal governments to assistmigrant and seasonal farm workers. From Migrant Education toMigration Health to Migrant Head Start to the job training programthat provides a summer job to the 15-year old son as a recreationalaide, the family seems to be familiar with many of the 15 federalprograms that assist farm workers at an annual cost of over $600million. Summaries of these programs arepresented in various chapters, but there is no sense of evaluation. For example, many of the children in the lower Rio Grande Valleyare enrolled in Migrant Education programs, but Fields of Toilgives little sense of whether these supplemental federal fundsare being spent wisely. The strength of Fields of Toilis its portrayal of manual labor for a country in which most peopleprovide services from office settings. Most of the 18 chaptersare short, as befits the newspaper columns as they originallyappeared. The family goes from crises to crisis, looking forwork where there are already too many workers, dealing with goodand bad employers, and always worrying that something may pushthem further into poverty. The Julian Samora Research Instituteis developing a directory of experts rural Latinos. To be listed,contact Emily Marroquin, JSRI, , 112 Paolucci Building, East Lansing,MI 48824-1110. marroqui@pilot.msu.edu; phone: (517) 432-1317;fax: (517)432-2221 WT02-B12-217IA088-000636-B044-256http://migration.ucdavis.edu:80/rmn/rmntxtab.htm 128.120.36.171 19970122191830 text/html 2167HTTP/1.0 200 OKMIME-Version: 1.0Server: WebSTAR/1.3.1 ID/6378Message-ID: Date: Wednesday, 22-Jan-97 19:19:28 GMTLast-Modified: Tuesday, 21-Jan-97 21:07:07 GMTContent-type: text/htmlContent-length: 1911 About Rural Migration News Text Version About Rural Migration News Rural Migration News summarizes the most importantimmigration and integration developments affecting residents of cities and townsin the agricultural areas of California and rural areas throughout the UnitedStates. It is published quarterly, in mid-October, January, April, and July. Topics are grouped by category: Rural Communities, Farm Workers, Immigration,Other, and Resources. There are two versions of Rural Migration News. The paper edition has about8,000 words, and the email version about 15,000 words. The purpose of Rural Migration News is to provide summaries of recentdevelopments that can be read in 60 minutes or less. Most issues also includespecial reports, abstracts of selected papers, and news of conferences andupcoming events. Distribution is by email. If you wish to subscribe, send your email addressto: Rural Migration News Current and back issues can be accessed via Internet on the Migration News HomePage-- http://migration.ucdavis.edu There is no charge for an email subscription to Rural Migration News. A paperedition is available by mail for $12 domestic and $20 foreign. Make checkspayable to UC Regents and send to: Philip Martin, Department of AgriculturalEconomics, University of California, Davis California 95616 USA. Rural Migration News is produces with the support of the Gianinni, Kellogg,Mellon, and Rosenberg Foundations. We also wish to acknowledge the support ofUC-Mexus. Return to About Migration Dialogue WT02-B12-218IA088-000636-B044-285http://migration.ucdavis.edu:80/mda/mb.htm 128.120.36.171 19970122191843 text/html 18635HTTP/1.0 200 OKMIME-Version: 1.0Server: WebSTAR/1.3.1 ID/6378Message-ID: Date: Wednesday, 22-Jan-97 19:19:39 GMTLast-Modified: Tuesday, 21-Jan-97 21:07:10 GMTContent-type: text/htmlContent-length: 18378 For top of MD page-- International Migration: A Global Challenge Philip Martin and Jonas Widgren April 1996 Published by the Population Reference Bureau. Table of Contents The Migration Challenge Why People Migrate 8 Table 1. Determinants of Migration 8 International Migration for Employment 10 Demand Pull 10 Reducing Demand Pull 11 Supply Push 13 Networks 15 North America 17 Box 1. Immigrants, Refugees, Nonimmigrants, and Unauthorized Aliens 18 Figure 2. Immigration to the US 20 Figure 3. Immigration to Canada 22 Western Europe 23 Table 2. Foreigners and Foreign Workers in Western Europe: 1993 24 Box 2.Postwar European Migration 26 Figure 4. Asylum Applications in Europe and Germany, 1983-1994 29 Asia 31 Table 3. Asian Labor Importers and Exporters 33 Table 4. Immigrant Workers in Malaysia by Sector: 1993 35 Box 3. Labor Smuggling in Asia 36 Box 4. Migration in China 37 Other Regions 38 Africa 38 Middle East 40 Latin America 41 Refugees, Guest Workers, and Illegal Immigrants 43 Refugees and Asylum-Seekers 43 Numbers 43 Figure 5. Refugees: 1970-1994 44 Changing Realities and Policies 44 Box 5. European Costs of Asylum Seekers 46 Box 6. US Policy Toward Cubans and Haitians 4 8Guest Workers 49 Figure 5. Foreign Worker Programs 50 Why Foreign Workers? 50 The Effects of Foreign Workers 53 Illegal Immigration 54 Box 7. Regulating the German Labor Market 56 Box 8. IRCA and Agriculture--A Case of Good Intentions Gone Awry 58 Reducing Migration pressures 58 Box 9. Emigration Pressure 59 Trade 59 Investment 61 Box 10. The Case of Mexico 62 Aid 63 Intervention 64 Managing Migration 65 Toward International Cooperation? 67 Two Grand Bargains 68 Further Reading 69 Table 5. Countries with the Highest Percentage of Foreigners 71 Table 6. The UN Data Base on Foreigners by Country 72 This monograph explains who moves, why people cross national borders,and how migration flows are likely to evolve in the decades ahead. We then look at international migration through two prisms: first by region, examining, in turn, migration issues in NorthAmerica, Europe, and Asia, and then by type of migrant--refugeesand asylum seekers, guest workers, and illegal aliens. Instead of building ever-higher walls to keep migrants out, manyrich countries would like to stop immigration by acceleratingeconomic growth and reducing wars and human rights violationsso that people would not want to cross national borders. We explorethe migration-reducing potential of trade, aid and interventionpolicies, and ask whether industrial nations can and should coordinatetheir immigration and assistance policies. TheMigration Challenge Migration is the movement of people from one place to another. Migration is as old as humankind wandering in search of food,but international migration is a relatively recent development--itwas only in the 20th century that the system of nation-states,passports, and visas developed to regulate the flow of peopleacross borders. Today, there are 185 members of the United Nations, and each hasa system of passports to distinguish citizens and foreigners,border controls, and policies toward the immigration and integrationof foreigners. Most migration policies discourage immigration--mostcountries do not anticipate the arrival of foreigners who wishto settle and become naturalized citizens. Many nations alsodiscourage emigration--the Communist nations until 1989 did theirbest to prevent citizens from leaving the former USSR, East Germany,and Romania. Migration is a result of differences --differences in resourcesand jobs, in demographic growth, and in security and human rights. These differences are widening, thus increasing potential migration. For example, according to World Bank calculations, the gap betweenaverage incomes in the richest and poorest countries was about11 to 1 in 1870, 38 to 1 in 1960, and 52 to 1 in 1985 (World Bank,1995, 9), but today there is no country that will accept practicallyall migrants who arrive, as North and South America did a centuryago. Given these large and growing differences, how many people migrateacross borders? The best estimates are that there are about 125million persons living outside their country of citizenship, meaningthat about two percent of the world's population are legal orillegal immigrants, refugees and asylum seekers, or migrant workers. This nation of migrants was estimated to be about 100 millionstrong in the late 1980s. It rose by 25 percent in the 1990sboth because people moved across borders--migration--and becauseborders moved across people, as occurred when the Soviet Unionbroke up, and Russians found themselves in a "foreign country,"even though they did not move. It is important to remember thatsome individuals become "foreigners" even though theydo not move. There are several ways to think about this "nation of migrants." First, the nation of migrants is equivalent in size to the world'seighth most populous nation, Japan, and is growing faster thanworld population growth.. In several Middle Eastern nations,foreigners are over half of the population or labor force, andmany nations formed from the ex-USSR have more than 25 percentnon-nationals. Some countries, including Canada, Switzerland,and Australia, have 15 to 25 percent foreign-born persons in theirpopulations. Second, many of the world's migrants are moving from relativelyfast-growing and therefore "young" developing nationsto aging societies that may resist the changes that accompanyimmigration. A society's "demographic need" for immigrantsmay be the opposite of its willingness to accept them. Third, there is no "natural" end in sight to the currentwave of migrants. Uneven population growth, economic disparities,and war and persecution are likely to continue to produce migrantsand refugees for the foreseeable future, and most observers believethat the number of opportunity- and refugee-seeking migrants willincrease rather than decrease in the 21st century. Paul Kennedy,the Yale historian, flatly predicts that "enhanced effortsto control immigration... are unlikely to succeed...(Kennedy,1993, 45). On the other hand, those who emphasize that migration is a manageablechallenge for the industrial democracies begin with the observationthat the world's "nation of migrants" involves two percent,not 20 percent, of the world's population, despite demographic,economic, and other differences that might be expected to producea world on the move. In other words, most people stay in theircountry of birth, despite more borders to cross, and more incentivesto cross them. For example, the world's major country of emigration, Mexico,has about 100 million people currently alive born within its borders,and over 90 percent of them still live in their country of birthdespite massive legal and illegal Mexican migration to the UnitedStates. The world's second leading country of emigration, thePhilippines, includes over 90 percent of the 70 million personsborn within its borders. Furthermore, countries can implement policies that control immigration. Germany's 1993 asylum reforms were apparently able to reduceby two-thirds the number of asylum applicants in that countrywithout offsetting increases in illegal immigration. But there is uncertainty and skepticism about the long-term effectivenessof such control measures as the differences that motivate migrationwiden. The US, for example, thought in the late 1980s that illegalimmigration was under control, and that the economic boom thatwas creating millions of jobs would persist, so the US increasedthe number of immigration slots both to unify families and tofill vacant jobs. These assumptions have proven false, promptinganother round of immigration reforms in 1995 aimed at reducinglegal and illegal immigration. The migration challenge in the worlds immigration nationshas two faces, one external and one internal. The external challengeis how to deal with the millions of people who would like to immigrateto take advantage of the opportunities offered for economic bettermentand political freedom. The internal or integration challengeis how to help immigrants and their children who are living inimmigration countries to be accepted as fellow citizens and futureleaders. Immigration to the United States: Journey to an UncertainDestination Philip Martin and Elizabeth Midgley September 1994 Published by the Population Reference Bureau. Introduction 1 1. Immigration Today 3 Table. 1. Alien Entrants to the U.S, FY 92 5 Box 1. Immigrants, Refugees, Nonimmigrants, and Unauthorized Aliens In the United States 7 Table 2. U.S. Population--1990-2050 9 Figure 1. U.S. Population, by Race and Hispanic Origin--1990-2050 10 Figure 2. Immigration by Decade and Major Source Country.. 11 Conflicting Prescriptions 11 Legislative Responses 15 2. Why Migration? 18 Demand-Pull, Supply-Push, and Networks 19 Figure 3. The Decision to Migrate 20 Recruitment and Continuing Migration 23 Box 2. The Bracero Program1942-1964 24 Figure 3--Mexican Braceros, Apprehensions, and Immigrants1942-65 27 Mexican Braceros, Apprehensions, and Immigrants1942-65 28 NAFTA 29 Figure 4 --Mexican and Total Legal Immigration1981-92 30 Box 3. Mexico-U.S. Migration with and without NAFTA 33 Networks 33 Box 4. Family Fairness and Other In-between Legal Statuses 36 3. Four Waves of Immigration 37 Figure 5--Immigration to the United States--by year or Decade 38 4. U.S. Immigration Policies 41 Laissez-Faire  1780-1875 41 Qualitative Restrictions  1875-1920 43 Immigration Reforms1980-1990 48 Refugees 48 Illegal Immigration 50 Figure 6 Legal Immigration and Apprehensions--1965-92 51 Box 5. IRCA and Agriculture--A Case of Good Intentions Gone Awry 54 Legal Immigration Reform 54 Table 2. Major Categories of Immigrants 56 Box 6. Can Immigrants Stave off Labor Shortages? 57 5. The Economic Effects of Immigration on the U.S. 59 Labor Market Effects 61 How Much Immigration Is Economically Beneficial to the United States? 66 Fiscal Effects 68 Box 6 CaliforniaWave of the Future? 70 6. The Socio-political Effects of Immigration 72 Immigration and Politics 72 Figure 7. Immigrants Admitted, 1970-79 and Naturalizations of Those ImmigrantsFiscal Years 1970-91 75 Immigrants in American Society 77 Language and Education 82 Table 3. English Language Ability 84 7. A Worldwide Perspective 85 Population and Labor Force Growth 85 Map 1. Map of Immigration and Migration Patterns 88 European Guestworkers 88 Box 7. GermanyReluctant Land of Immigration 89 Nonimmigrant Asia? 90 Box 8. JapanA Pacific Destiny for Immigrants? 92 A Global Labor Market? 93 8. Conclusions 94 Suggested Readings 98 INTRODUCTION The United States is engaged in a historic experiment: more foreignersare arriving to settle than ever beforeabout 3,000 per day--andthe world's major country of immigration is unsure about how torespond. There are two extreme positions. Organizations suchas Federation for American Immigration Reform (FAIR) argue thattoo many people are coming in, and they call for a moratoriumon immigration to allow recent arrivals and Americans to adjustto each other. At the other extreme, the Wall Street Journaladvocates a constitutional amendment that would state that "thereshall be open borders." Immigration promises to be a majordemographic, economic, and political issue in the United Statesat the end of the 20th century, as it was at its beginning. This is not the first time that the world's "huddled masses"have arrived on American shores, nor is it the first time thatthere has been a controversy about whether to pull up the gangplankor to open the immigration door wider. Americans have alwaysbeen of two minds about immigration. On the one hand, the UnitedStates is proud to be a "nation of immigrants", celebratingthe theme of national renewal and rebirth embodied in the storyof newcomers starting over in the land of opportunity. On theother hand, Americans have worried since the days of the foundingfathers about the economic, political, and cultural effects ofnewcomers. These concerns have been reflected in legislationthat limits the annual entry of immigrants, and by a preferencefor those who have relatives here or possess needed skills. The debate between restrictionistswho want to reduce immigrationandadmissionistswho want to maintain or increase current immigrationflowspromises to heat up in the 1990s for three reasons. First, the number of immigrants is rising. Immigration has onceagain become a major contributor to population growth: about40 percent of U.S. population growth is now due to the immigrationof about a million newcomers per year; they represent the equivalentof adding a Dallas or Detroit annually. Second, today's immigrants are differ from the American citizenryin their ethnic origins and in their education and skills. Whileearlier waves of immigrants were mostly Europeans, todaysimmigrants are primarily from Latin American and Asian countries. Most people of the United States (and most other industrial countries)are in the middle class, resulting in a diamond-shaped patternof skills and incomes. Today's immigrants, by contrast, tendto be bunched near the extremes of the education and income spectrum:whether professionals or unskilled workers, they tendto reinforce other factors promoting economic inequality. Third, there is no consensus among politicians, researchers, orAmericans on whether the immigrants arriving today will be socialand economic assets or liabilities tomorrow. The tendency ofimmigrants who arrived in the 1950s and 1960s to earn more thansimilar Americans within two decades, and the remarkable successof some immigrants in business and education, can be read to suggestthat the nation will reap a windfall from today's immigration,while other income, employment, and public assistance data canbe interpreted to suggest that through immigration the UnitedStates may be adding directly and indirectly to its underclass. Economic issues are not the only area in which the effects ofimmigrants are disputed. Should immigrants be allowed to votebefore they become U.S. citizens? Does immigration result ina melting pot amalgam of American and immigrant values, or isAmerica a salad bowl in which ethnic identity is be maintained? Many immigrants do not speak English. Are they learning thecommon language fast enough? Immigration raises three fundamental questions: how many, fromwhere, and in what status should newcomers be admitted to theUnited States? Until after World War I, the United States tookin almost all the immigrants who could get to American shores. It remains the nation most open to immigrants--accepting abouthalf of the worlds immigrants--but immigration is now restrictedthrough a complex system that favors foreigners who have relativeshere or special skills. This monograph explains U.S. immigration patterns and policies. After summarizing trends in the 1980s, we turn to explanationsfor why people migrate, and outline what can be done to reducemigratory pressures. The four waves of immigrants that compriseU.S. immigration history are reviewed, as are U.S. legislativeresponses to immigrant numbers and characteristics. Immigrationraises both economic and socio-political issues, and some of themajor ones debated today are examined. We then turn to othercountries: why are immigrants streaming into Western Europe? Will Japan and other Asian nations also become destinations forimmigrants? Immigration promises to be one of the most important issues forthe United Sates as the 21st Century approaches. Newcomers raisedifficult questions. Who are we? What kind of a society havewe built, and whom shall we welcome to it? What should we doto integrate newcomers and how should we deal with those who arriveuninvited? Orders-- To order, call 1-800-877-9881or fax Migration Dialogueat 916-758-4928, or write MD at 1004 Eagle Place, Davis, CA 95616WT02-B12-219IA088-000636-B044-308http://migration.ucdavis.edu:80/mda/chi.htm 128.120.36.171 19970122191856 text/html 44581HTTP/1.0 200 OKMIME-Version: 1.0Server: WebSTAR/1.3.1 ID/6378Message-ID: Date: Wednesday, 22-Jan-97 19:19:50 GMTLast-Modified: Tuesday, 21-Jan-97 21:07:10 GMTContent-type: text/htmlContent-length: 44324  Migration Dialogue Integration Issues and Immigration Policy: Focus on United States April 25-28, 1996 Omni Ambassador East 1301 North State Parkway Chicago, IL 60610 Phone: (312) 787-7200 Fax: (312) 787-9757 Sponsored by: Migration Dialogue, with the support of the German Marshall Fund of the United States, Pew Global Stewardship Initiative and the US Commission on Immigration Reform April 22, 1996 The purpose of Migration Dialogue is to promote among opinionleaders an off-the-record discussion of the major immigrationand integration issues likely to face the industrial democracies.Three-day seminars are held in places that allow participantsduring field trips to discuss with immigrants, service providers,and others the day-to-day issues involved in dealing with immigrationand integration. ______________________ Thursday, April 25, 1996 Arrival Day. 7:00-9:30 PM Welcome Reception and Dinner at Byfield's,Omni Ambassador East Hotel (next to front desk) ______________________ Friday, April 26, 1996 7:00-8:30 AM Breakfast at the hotel. 8:30-9:00 AM Welcome and Introductions 9:00-9:45 AM Immigration and Integration: An Overview Moderator: Philip Martin, University of California-Davis Speaker: Susan Martin, Commission on Immigration Reformand Roger Bhning, International Labor Office, Geneva Discussion questions: When two distinct groups share ageographic area, two extremes delineate their possible interaction--integrationor assimilation (eliminating boundaries between groups, encouragingconvergence in language, values, earnings etc.) and pluralismor multiculturalism (encouraging maintenance of cultural diversity,tolerating or welcoming enclaves). These are sometimes referredto as the "melting pot" versus the "salad bowl"approaches to accommodating immigrants. 1. What relationships can be identified between the patterns ofimmigration and the integration experiences of immigrants? Forexample, how do the numbers and origins of immigrants affect theirintegration experiences? Does it matter for integration if immigrationflows from the same countries are continuous vs. fluctuating? 2. In countries of immigration such as the United States, andin cities such as Chicago, what were the major factors that contributedto the successful integration of large numbers of immigrants:economic growth; policies favoring integration; and/or institutionssuch as public schools, churches, unions, political parties, andthe military? What was the Americanization movement, what impactsdid it have on integration, and why is it criticized by some today? 3. How do the integration policies of European countries, andof Canada and Australia, differ from those of the United States? 4. Are there trade-offs between immigration and integration policy?For example, if a high proportion of immigrants enter under nuclearor extended-family unification criteria, does this contributeto or limit successful integration? Does it matter for integrationif immigrants are co-ethnics relocating to the "mother country";intending temporary vs. permanent immigrants; culturally/linguistically/racially/religiouslydistinct from the receiving country's population? Is it easierto successfully integrate a large immigrant population from thesame national/ethnic origin, or do diverse origins accelerateintegration? 5. For purposes of integration, how important are underlying conditionssuch as the labor market; the housing market; residential segregationvs. dispersion; effectiveness of public education systems; etc.? 9:45-10AM Break 10AM-11AM Hispanic Immigrants in the U.S. and Chicago Moderator: Elizabeth Midgley, Working English Speakers: Marta Tienda, University of Chicago Barry Chiswick, University of Illinois Thomas Faist, University of Bremen Discussion questions: The focus in this session is on nativereactions to immigrants. How do the perceptions of natives aboutthe ability of their societies to integrate the newcomers affecttheir support for their society's immigration policies? An underlyingquestion is whether anti-immigrant reactions are cyclical reflectionsof economic or political insecurity, or whether they are structuralreflections of demographic and other trends. 1. What is the history of Hispanic immigration to Chicago? Whatare recent Hispanic immigration trends? What has been the recenthistory of their economic and social integration and upward mobility? 2. How do current residents determine what constitutes the successfulintegration of immigrants? What kind of integration indicatorsdo they look to: economic? language? crime? political activities?immigrant children? intermarriage? What tend to be the flashpointsthat set off anti-immigrant native reactions? language? religion?race? ethnic militancy? 3. How does the geographic concentration and linguistic segregationof immigrants affect integration? What roles are played by thenature of political and party systems? 4. What is the tenor of relations between recent Hispanic immigrantsand other ethnic groups in Chicago? How do Mexican immigrantsrelate to Puerto Ricans? 11-11:20 AM Break 11:20-11:40AM Immigrant Integration in Chicago: Focus on Latinos Robert Paral, Latino Institute, Chicago 11:45AM Bus departs for Field Trip 12:10PM Arrive RTC Industries, 3101 S. Kedzie Ave. , 708-640-2400 Lunch with workers in cafeteria 1:45PM Depart RTC for visit to Whitney Elementary School, 2815S Komensky 2:45PM Depart for Farley Candy Co, 2945 W. 31st St., 847-673-7200 4PM Bus tour of Latino/Black areas 5PM Arrival at Mi Tierra Restaurant, 2528 South Kedzie, 254-7722. Drinks and Local Community Leaders Introductions: Robert Paral, Latino Institute, Chicago 8PM Bus Departs for hotel; arrives 8:30 PM ________________ Saturday, April 27, 1996 7:00-8:30 AM Breakfast at the hotel 8:30-10:15 AM Integrating Immigrants: What works? Moderator: Michael Teitelbaum, Sloan Foundation Speakers: Michael Fix, Urban Institute; Roberto Suro, WashingtonPost; Zair Kedadouche, Ministere de lIntegration,Paris Discussion questions: This session focuses on the immigrants,and discusses how well immigrants are integrating as measuredby various integration indicators. An underlying question is howthe success or failure to accommodate immigrants in turn affectsimmigration policy. 1. How effective, both during the first half of the century andmore recently, have the public schools been as integrating institutions?Similarly, what have been the historical and contemporary rolesof institutions such as churches, settlement houses, ethnic associations,development banks, local political leaderships, etc.? 2. What is the current tone of relations among the diverse ethnicgroups of Chicago? Cordial and cooperative? Competitive but proper?Hostile and suspicious? 3. To what extent do ethnic and racial issues drive local politicsin Chicago? What is the role of citizenship and naturalizationrules in integration? Would adoption of jus soli and easing naturalizationrules promote integration? What are the effects on integrationof recent changes in citizenship laws in France and Germany? Shouldan in-between legal status be developed, such as "denizen,"for settled immigrants who choose not to naturalize? 4. What effective efforts have been undertaken to minimize discrimination?To minimize residential segregation of ethnic groups? To manageconflicts that may arise? What types of organizations have beenmost effective in such conflict management? 10: 15-10:30AM Break 10:30-11:15 Slide Presentation: Integrating Immigrants in Chicago Dominic Pacyga, Columbia College 11:15-11:30 Break 11:30 AM Bus departs hotel 12PM Arrive at the Orbit Restaurant, 2948-54 N. Milwaukee Ave.,276-1355. Presentations by community leaders; introductions byDominic Pacyga. 1:45 PM Waking tour of Polish neighborhood surrounding restaurant 2:15PM Board bus at Orbit Restaurant for bus tour of ethnicChicago 4PM Free time, optional tour of ethnic South Chicago--Bus willdrop off at hotel, and then continue down Michigan Ave, makingstops at Water Tower Place (many shops close at 6 pm, and at theArt Institute closes at 5 pm). 4:30PM Bus arrives in South Chicago; tour of Little Italy,Poland and African-American neighborhoods 6PM Bus returns from South Chicago 7:30 PM Meet in hotel lobby to walk (200 meters from hotel)to dinner at Palette's, 1030 N. State Street, 440-5200. Amap is enclosed in your packet. _____________________ Sunday, April 28, 1996 7:00-9:00 AM Breakfast 9:00-10:30 AM Race and Immigration Moderator: Michael Teitelbaum, Sloan Foundation Speaker: Gerald Jaynes, Yale University Discussion Questions: 1. What impacts, if any, has recent immigrationhad upon residential segregation patterns in metropolitan Chicago?To what extent does residential segregation facilitate or inhibitinteractions between African American Chicagoans and recent immigrants? 2. What relationships are there between native-borngroups and African American groups from e.g. the West Indies? 3. How is recent immigration viewed withinthe African American communities of Chicago? Is there a differenceof opinion between African American political/economic elitesand African American publics? Are recent immigrants seen as competitorsfor employment opportunities, housing, educational resources,public employment, affirmative action preferences, political influence,etc? What opinions do African American Chicagoans hold concerningbilingual education and multicultural education policies? Are recent immigrants viewed as potentialallies in pursuit of joint agendas, as in the Chicago-based RainbowCoalition headed by Rev. Jesse Jackson? How do leaders of Chicago'sAfrican American churches feel about immigration? 4. What have been the activities and impactsof institutions in Chicago attempting to build bridges betweenAfrican American and immigrant groups? What role has been playedby Chicago's well-known community development banks such as SouthShore Bank? 10:30AM Hotel Checkout 10:45 AM Bus to Progressive Community Church, 56 E. 48th St,Rev B. Herbert Martin, Sr 1PM Lunch and discussion of African American-immigrant interactionsat church 3 PM Bus departs for O'Hare; Arrival at terminal 3:45PM Report of the seminar on Integration Issues and Immigration Policy: Focus on Chicago Philip Martin Michael Teitelbaum May 2, 1996 Introduction 1 The Questions 2 Immigration and Integration Policies 2 Data 3 Integration: Definitions and Experience 4 US Integration Policy 5 US Integration Instruments 5 European Integration Policies 6 Unauthorized Migrants 7 Focus on Illinois and Chicago 8 Illinois 8 Chicago 8 Little Village 9 Polish Immigrants 10 African Americans 10 Chicago--Similarities and Differences 12 INTRODUCTION The fourth Migration Dialogue was held April 25-28, 1996 in Chicago.Migration Dialogue seminars provide an opportunity for some 40opinion leaders from France, Germany, and the US to discuss intensively,in an off-the-record setting, the major immigration and integrationissues facing the industrial democracies. Each seminar includesfield trips, so that participants can learn about these issuesdirectly from immigrants and from immigration and integrationauthorities. This report was prepared after the seminar, and is being distributedto participants in the Chicago seminar and to other interestedparties. Since it has not been seen or approved by participants,it should not be construed as a consensus document discussed anddebated by participants. An agenda and list of participants areattached. The Questions Four types of questions framed the Chicago discussions. First,how did diverse immigrants come to be integrated in the US inthe past, and what are the lessons of history for integratingthe current wave of immigrants? In Europe, how can countries begrouped in terms of their policies to integrate immigrants, andwhy does there seem to be a sense that individual country experiencesshow that there are "many ways to fail" when it comesto integrating immigrants? Second, why, by most criteria, do Hispanic immigrants seem tofare worse than Asian immigrants arriving in the US today, butbetter than US-citizen African Americans and Puerto Ricans? Arethere similar country-of-origin and ethnic differences in theeconomic integration patterns of newcomers in Europe? Third, what mechanisms brought about the integration of third-waveEuropean immigrants to the United States early in the 20th century?Why do the integrating institutions--schools, unions, military,churches etc.--seem to be less successful in integrating newcomerstoday? Should they be revived and reformed, or do new immigrantsand new circumstances call for different integrating institutionsand policies? Given shrinking central government revenues, wherecan the funds for efforts to integrate 21st century immigrantsbe found? Fourth, about one in eight Americans is African American, includingabout 40 percent of Chicago's 2.7 million residents. African-Americans,especially those in the central cities, have high rates of joblessnessand poverty. Some argue that African-Americans have been the USresidents most negatively affected by immigration, while othersbelieve that there is little relationship between the socio-economicproblems of African-Americans and recent immigration patterns. Immigration and Integration Policies Immigration policies refer to questions such as--how manyimmigrants should be admitted? From where? In what categoriesor through which doors should immigrants enter--what is the properbalance between immigrants admitted for family, economic, andhumanitarian reasons? In most countries, immigration policiesare exclusively the authority of the central government. Integration or immigrant policies refer to public effortsto deal with immigrants after their arrival, and they are setby a mix of federal, state, and local policies. In the US, mostimmigrants are "sponsored" by their US relatives orUS employers, and families and employers are expected to accommodatethem without public intervention or assistance. Sponsorship is so powerful an integrating mechanism that the Commissionon Immigration Reform recommended that the US maintain the sponsorshipsystem rather than switching to a point system for admitting immigrants. Federal immigrant policies (1) are targeted on certain limitedgroups, especially refugees, (2) regulate the access of newcomersto general services provided by federal and state governments,and (3) are determined in part by courts interpreting the rightsof immigrants based on their physical presence in the US. TheUS has a relatively limited welfare state, and provides few targetedservices for immigrants who are not refugees. Most recent reformefforts would further restrict the access of immigrants to governmentservices. European countries offer more government services, and often providespecial services for immigrants, including, in some cases, publicsupport for maintaining the languages and cultures of newcomers.However, it appears that, regardless of the policy mix adoptedin Europe, foreigners have unemployment rates about twice nativerates--similar to the 2 to 1 ratio of Black to white unemploymentin the US--and there have been clashes in many European countriesin which natives have attacked foreigners. Data Several speakers emphasized that immigration to the US is increasingin number--roughly one million arrivals per year, 70 percent arelegally admitted. The immigrants are bimodal in origin and characteristics.On the one hand, about 40 percent of US immigrants are from LatinAmerica, speak primarily Spanish, and have for the most part,less education than the average US-born adult. On the other hand,an equal proportion are from Asian countries, speak Chinese andother Asian languages, and many have more education than US-bornadults. Immigrants in the US are concentrated in certain neighborhoodsof six cities in six states. This concentration magnifies theeffects of immigration in those locations, with the consequencethat scholarly and popular attention is directed there. Abouteight percent of the US population is foreign-born, but 95 percentof all US residents live in places that have less than eight percentforeign-born residents --Dade County, Florida has the highestpercentage of foreign-born residents--45 percent in 1990. Studies of the economic effects of immigrants on US workers wereoptimistic in the 1980s, in the sense that they found few negativeeffects of immigrants on the wages or unemployment rates of similarUS workers, including African Americans. Studies in the 1990sreach the opposite conclusion--immigration has a significant negativeeffect on unskilled US workers, depressing their wages, and causingUS workers who compete with immigrants to leave areas with concentrationsof immigrants, or to seek jobs where there is little immigrantcompetition, as in the public sector. Until the 1980s, immigrants roughly replicated the US-born populationin the single-best predictor of earnings--years of education.Immigrants arriving since the 1980s, however, have a differentdistribution of years of schooling. When arrayed by years of education,they are concentrated at the extremes of the distribution, sothat immigration joins globalization and technological changeas a factor that is squeezing people out of the middle class--pushingthem up or down the job ladder--and increasing competition atthe bottom of the labor market. Integration: Definitions and Experience When two or more distinct groups share a geographic area, twoextremes delineate their possible interaction--integrationor assimilation means blurring or diminishing boundaries betweengroups, encouraging convergence in language, values, earningsetc. Pluralism or multiculturalism, on the other hand,means encouraging the maintenance of cultural diversity, and toleratingor welcoming ethnic enclaves. These are sometimes referred toas the melting pot versus the salad bowl approaches to integratingimmigrants. Since definitions of social issues usually contain at least theseeds of proposed solutions, the definition of integration iscrucial for understanding the degree of integration of particularimmigrant groups. It was noted that Germany tends to define integrationin terms of lineage--persons descended from ethnic Germans inthe ex-USSR are more "integrated" in the sense thatthey are automatically made citizens while Turks are by definitionless "integrated," since they must acquire qualificationsin order to attain citizenship. France, on the other hand, measures integration chiefly as anability to speak French. Foreigners who speak French will haveovercome a major hurdle to be considered French nationals. The criterion of full integration in the US is citizenship, andthe US has the easiest path to citizenship of the major countriesof immigration--birth in the country, or five years of legal residenceand rudimentary knowledge of the English language and Americanhistory and government. One of the major questions in integration policy is whether thereis a trade-off between the number and the characteristics of immigrantsand the ease of integrating them. Thus, do countries tend to takemore immigrants if the immigrants are mostly professionals whotend to earn high incomes and contribute tax dollars immediately?Do efforts that make integration more difficult--such as Proposition187's bar to services for unauthorized immigrants--help to controlthe influx of such immigrants? US Integration Policy The United States has been shaped by immigration, and Americanculture is the result of an amalgamation of many cultures. Fromthe starts, residents of the US have worried about whether everygroup of newcomers to arrive could be successfully integratedinto American society. Benjamin Franklin lamented that the Germansarriving in Pennsylvania in the 1750s would not become Englishand would impose their language on the English. The German settlersdid, however, become Americans, and English remained the dominantlanguage. Because America has been in constant flux throughout its history,it was suggested that the kaleidoscope, the metaphor first usedby the historian John Higham to describe the reconfiguration ofAmerican society as it added new elements, was more descriptivethan the more static metaphors of the melting pot or the saladbowl. Americans tend to think of the immigrants of long ago as good,and the immigrants of the present day as bad, leading to the aphorismthat one can tell that newcomers are integrated into the US whenthey want to stop immigration. Immigrants have long been associatedwith good things--new blood and entrepreneurial dynamism, revitalizationof neighborhoods, and scientific breakthroughs--as well as withdisagreeable developments such as crime and disease, unemploymentand welfare usage, and fears of disloyalty and cultural change. American history suggests that the crucial variables affectingimmigrant integration are the number of immigrants, their characteristics--includingwhether they concentrate in particular cities/areas--and socio-economic"receptivity"--the state of the economy and the degreeof political confidence felt by residents. Government policiesaimed particularly at immigrants have had little to do with it.In the history of the United States, integration, it was noted,has been the result of unique constellations of historical circumstancethat cannot be made to repeat themselves. The past does not offermodels that can be adopted for use at a later time. US Integration Instruments The US has a relatively limited welfare state that allocates benefitsto the "deserving needy," such as the elderly, coupledwith an extensive set of court-determined individual rights. Theallocation of public benefits to groups which made their casein Congress, and then using courts to expand access to benefits,was born in the civil rights era of the 1960s, and came to beexpanded to include immigrants, who are mostly "minorities"in US parlance. Affirmative action for blacks started as redressfor past wrongs. Benefits for newly arrived people from abroadare justified as remedies for present-day discrimination. US integration policy has been described as a system in whichindividuals are assigned to groups, representatives of each groupnegotiate with government for rights and privileges, and the resultingsocial change facilitates the integration of diverse groups. Many Migration Dialogue participants were of the view that thereis a contradiction between the US policy of admitting increasednumbers of poor and minority immigrants and the simultaneous attemptto balance the budget by scaling back the welfare state and reducingthe access of immigrants to social services. This libertarianthrust of US immigration policy would permit numbers to remainhigh, and make naturalization the gateway to the reduced levelof benefits available. The contrast with Germany is striking. Legal immigrants in Germanyhave relatively full access to the more generous German welfarestate, and Germans discuss whether additional targeted programsshould be available to foreigners. Governments on both sides of the Atlantic, however, are scalingback public benefits, and deregulating their economies. Increasingly,therefore, immigrants will have to fend for themselves in restructuringeconomies and societies. Early this century, immigrants finding their way in industrializingAmerica achieved substantial social and economic upward mobility.Some achieved positions of power in unions and in politics thatthey used to combat unemployment and monopoly business power.Integration or Americanization was promoted by social workers,settlement houses, and schools. For the largest immigrant group,Germans, the pace of integration was forced by two world wars,and the public use of the German language was stopped as a tokenof loyalty to America. European Integration Policies Europeans tend to define immigrant integration differently thando Americans--they perceive German or French language and cultureas more fixed than Americans view theirs --and to look to differentindicators of integration--unemployment rates, or the rate ofphysical attacks on foreigners, for example. Most European countriesoccupy the assimilation end of the integration spectrum--Francedefines integration to include learning proper French and "actingFrench" in public--with well-defined exceptions for historicminorities. None of the European countries has multicultural immigrant integrationpolicies designed specifically for "different" immigrants,as in Australia and Canada. American data tends to compare the progress of groups with referenceto indicators of integration. The groups are defined by race andethnicity. Europeans tend to look to compare foreigners and citizens. In the US, the major gaps are between races, including the 2 to1 ratio of African Americans to white unemployment rates. In Europe,there is about a 2 to 1 ratio of foreigner to citizen unemploymentrate, and it does not vary significantly from country to country. The US has often associated high rates of crime with immigrants.In California, about 40,000 of the 140,000 persons in prison wereborn abroad, including 20,000 who were believed to be illegalaliens when they committed felonies. In Europe, by contrast, successfulintegration was defined in terms of the absence, or infrequency,of attacks by nationals on foreigners. Germany has a famed school-to-work transition program that providestwo-thirds of the non-college bound high school graduates witha certificated skill. This apprenticeship certificate normallyleads to a good job that can last a lifetime. However, foreignyouth, including those born in Germany, often do not participatein the apprenticeship system, consigning themselves to lower wagesand more uncertainty. Unauthorized Migrants Integration policy normally refers to legal immigrants and refugees.But many of the migrants in industrial democracies are in a "grayarea" in which they are either tolerated or continue in anunauthorized status. How does the proportion of migrants who arelegally-invited immigrants and refugees affect integration policies? Germany and the Scandinavian countries believe that they can preventillegal immigration, so they make sharp distinctions between legaland illegal migrants, with the result that some public employeesother than those directly concerned with immigration are involvedin immigration regulations. France and the US, on the other hand,are more likely to accept their inability to eliminate illegalimmigration, leading to incomplete amnesties and the developmentof schemes through which some rights are granted to illegal aliens Focus on Illinois and Chicago Illinois Illinois is the sixth most populous state, with almost 12 millionresidents in 1996--75 percent white, and 8 percent foreign born.Illinois is often described as two states--the Chicago area, withabout six million residents, including 80 percent of the state'simmigrants, and "downstate," another six million residentswho are 90 percent US-born whites. The state's population has been in the 11 to 12 million rangesince 1970, a period during which the US population rose by 60million, and the population of California increased by 12 million. Illinois has been losing US-born residents, and receiving about45,000 legal immigrants each year, plus an estimated 15,000 unauthorizedimmigrants. There are about one million foreign-born persons in the state.Eighty percent are in the Chicago area, making immigrants aboutnine percent of Illinois' 12 million residents-- almost 20 percentof Chicago's 2.7 million residents were born abroad. Of the almost one million foreign-born persons in Illinois enumeratedin the 1990 Census, about 40 percent were from Mexico and LatinAmerica. One-third of the immigrants in Illinois were from Europe;the largest single group was from Poland. One-fourth of the foreign-bornwere from Asia, with the largest single group from Philippines. Seven of the top 15 immigrant countries of origin are European,and 40 percent of Illinois's immigrants arrived since 1980. About107,000 of Illinois's K-12 students are in some type of bilingualprogram. About two-thirds of the "old" European immigrants havebecome naturalized US citizens, almost half of the Asian immigrantsare US citizens, and less than one-third of the Hispanic immigrantsare US citizens. Chicago Chicago, a city of 2.7 million on the southern shores of LakeMichigan is about 40 percent African American, about 35 percentwhite, about 20 percent Hispanic, and five percent Asian. Aboutone-third of the Hispanics were born abroad. Chicago was for many years the second largest city in the US,after New York City. Its growth was due to its role as the transportationhub for the US, and a meat packing and manufacturing center--itsstockyards slaughtered one billion head of cattle and hogs, andits factories included a Western Electric plant with 48,000 employees. Immigrants from Germany and Ireland, as well as southern and EasternEurope, who found manual jobs in factories and railyards, gaveChicago a reputation as a city with "broad shoulders"that "worked"--often under very hard conditions at lowwages. Each of these immigrant groups founded its own neighborhoodchurch, giving Chicago separate Catholic churches and schoolsfor e.g., Irish, Italian, German, Bohemian, and Croatian groups. Like other midwestern cities such as Cleveland and Detroit, Chicagoattracted African Americans--southern Blacks saw Chicago and othermidwestern cities as "the promised land," and 50,000migrated to Chicago between 1915 and 1920, and another 100,000in the 1920s. Hundreds of thousands of small farmers and sharecroppersmigrated into Chicago, especially after 1945. African Americans initially remained in the southern parts ofChicago, near the terminus of the railroad that brought them toChicago. During the 1960s, there were numerous clashes betweenBlacks and ethnic white immigrants as Blacks attempted to desegregatehousing by moving into ethnic Polish or Italian neighborhoods--repeatingwhat has been termed "the chasing across the prairie"of various racial and ethnic groups. Automobiles and freeways changed Chicago after World War II, asthe better off groups moved to the suburbs. The 1970s and 1980swere marked by the economic decline of Chicago, white flight tothe suburbs, the entrance of Blacks into local city politics,and the loss of factory jobs that paid high wages and could befilled easily by newcomer immigrants. Little Village The Little Village section of Chicago is one of two areas of heavyMexican immigrant settlement. This previously Czech immigrantsettlement is ringed by one-story factories that turn out a varietyof non-durable goods with relatively low-wage immigrant workers. Many of the settled Mexicans have begun small businesses to servethe immigrants who continue to arrive--the 26th street shoppingdistrict reportedly was second only to Michigan Avenue in shoppingdollars. However, there was some uncertainty about whether thesecond generation schooled in the US would commit themselves totaking over family businesses that often require very long hoursof work. The factories employing mostly Mexican immigrants tend to recruitworkers by asking their current workers to refer family and friendsto fill vacant jobs. One factory processed the workers referredby such family networks through a temporary employment agency,so that all new workers were in effect probationary hires forseveral weeks to several months. Once they were selected as permanentemployees, the employer offered them with pay at their regularhourly rate for the time spent completing a GED high-school education. Another factory employed over 2,000 workers in a sprawling facility.A condition of employment was that they work five or six 12-hourdays. At entry level, the first eight hours were compensated atthe minimum wage, with time and a half for the remaining fourhours. The long hours of work seemed to serve as an effectivescreening device that favored newly-arrived Mexicans--many Americansexpect a 40-hour work week. The schools in the 22nd ward of Chicago where Little Village islocated tend to be older two story structures jammed with studentsborn in Mexico. Many of the teachers do not live in the neighborhood.Chicago has elected school boards, and school board elections,in which unauthorized residents can run for office and vote, hashelped to launch several political careers. Polish Immigrants There are one million residents of Polish ancestry among the sixmillion persons in the Chicago metro area--two-thirds of themlive in the suburbs. An estimated 125,000 of them speak primarilyPolish, and 60,000 are believed to have arrived since 1990. There were about 17,600 Polish applications for legalization in1987-88, including 5,300 Polish SAW applications. Some 8,000 Poleswere legalized in the Chicago area in 1986-87. About 160,000 orfive percent of the three million applications for legalizationin 1987-88 were filed in Illinois. There are several Polish language newspapers and radio stations,reflecting both rising immigration and the fact that many immigrantsin the 1980s were dissident intellectuals. African Americans About 12 percent or 26 million Americans are African-American,self-designated, since persons select their racial and ethnicidentity in the US for the census and other government agencies.Blacks are about half of all US minority residents, and they aregenerally those least likely to have achieved the American dream--thesuccess that is thought to be possible for anyone who works hard,no matter how humble his/her station at birth. Sentiments of African Americans are divided on immigration. Somesee minority immigrants as potential allies in the struggle toobtain more benefits for minorities in the US; others see immigrantsas competitors for low-wage jobs that who retard African Americanprogress. Some whites argue that, if Asians and Caribbean Blackimmigrants can fulfill the American dream, this demonstrates lingeringpoverty is the fault of the individual, and not the US economicsystem. It was explained that comparisons of various immigrant groupswith US born Blacks are often misleading, because the Blacks inthe data include all American Blacks, whereas the immigrants areoften selected, or self-selected, from their home population becausethey are likely to succeed in the US. Korean or Caribbean Blackimmigrants, for example, are often drawn from the middle and upperends of the education and motivation spectrums of their societies,and can be expected to do better in the US than the average Black. Similarly, most US-born Blacks were educated in urban areas ofthe US and are thus familiar with the history of discriminationagainst generations of US African Americans. They are far moreskeptical about the value of hard work for low wages than recentimmigrants from rural Mexico. The indicators of integration for US-born Blacks put them nearthe bottom of the US job ladder. But the same is also true formany immigrant groups are also near the bottom, including Hmongrefugees and Dominican immigrants. If these groups fail to succeedin the next generation or two, then the notion that the Americandream still works may be called into question by middle-classHispanics and Asians. As immigration has increased in the 1980s and 1990s, evidencehas mounted that, as economic theory and common sense would suggest,immigrants depress the wages and increase Black joblessness. In1980 in Chicago, for example, there were two Blacks for everyHispanic employed in construction. By 1990, Hispanics outnumberedBlacks in the Chicago construction industry. There are tensions between minority immigrants in Chicago. Forexample, the public housing system is primarily Black--Hispanicsare about 20 percent of Chicago's population, but they are onlytwo percent of the tenants in the city's public housing units.Even Lawndale Gardens, public housing in the heart of Little Village,has only five percent Hispanic tenants. Despite severe problems in the public housing system, there isa long waiting list of persons wanting to get into public housing,and the Chicago Housing Authority stopped taking applicationsin 1985--persons moving in to subsidized units in 1996 appliedin 1981. Residents in public housing pay 30 percent of their incomefor rent, and the government makes up the difference. Hispanics sued the CHA in 1994, arguing that many Hispanics weredropped off the waiting list because they did not respond to requestsfor updated information that was available only in English. Chicago--Similarities and Differences Immigration into Chicago is in some respects similar to immigrationelsewhere. First, immigration is accelerating ethnic shifts, makingminorities taken together sum to a majority, first in the centralcity, and later in the region as a whole. Second, the integration of European immigrants in Chicago servedas the basis for the three-generation language-shift integrationtheory--the first generation did not learn English, the secondwas bilingual, and the third was monolingual English. The Universityof Chicago was the base of the leading theorists of immigrantintegration for much of the 20th century. Third, as in other areas, immigration in Chicago brings promisesand problems. One the one hand, immigrants are credited with fillingvacant jobs, starting small businesses, and revitalizing neighborhoods.On the other hand, the roughly 45,000 immigrants arriving in thestate each year, plus another 15,000 unauthorized immigrants,are blamed for overburdening especially overcrowded school systems,contributing to crime, and adding directly and indirectly to welfarecosts. Chicago and Illinois are also different from other places in theirimmigration and integration patterns. First, Chicago has a historyof successfully integrating diverse immigrants, and unlike othercities, Chicago still has a relatively large number of manufacturingjobs open to unskilled and semi-skilled immigrants. The politicalclimate in Chicago and Illinois seems to deter extremist reactionsto immigrants. Second, Chicagos immigrants are more diverse than is commonelsewhere. The three leading countries of origin for immigrantsin Chicago are Mexico, Poland, and the Philippines, making Chicagothe only major US city in which the three leading countries oforigin are on three different continents. There are also relativelyfew refugees in Chicago, so that few newcomers go directly intothe welfare system. Third, Chicago has long been associated with distinct immigrantneighborhoods, the Irish in one neighborhood, the Polish in another,and the Germans in a third, Lithuanians in a fourth, etc. Today'simmigrants are also concentrated in particular neighborhoods,and they can utilize Chicago's peculiar brand of politics to achievesome degree of political integration. Since the city has over50 aldermen for just over 2.5 million residents, each local politicianrepresents just 50,000 residents, and residents turn to theiralder person to participate in social events such as weddings,and to deal with city hall. Home WT02-B12-220IA088-000636-B045-9http://migration.ucdavis.edu:80/mda/par.htm 128.120.36.171 19970122191941 text/html 58122HTTP/1.0 200 OKMIME-Version: 1.0Server: WebSTAR/1.3.1 ID/6378Message-ID: Date: Wednesday, 22-Jan-97 19:20:07 GMTLast-Modified: Tuesday, 21-Jan-97 21:07:08 GMTContent-type: text/htmlContent-length: 57865 The third Migration Dialogue Seminar on Integration Issues and Immigration Policy: Migration Dialogue Integration Issues and Immigration Policy: Focus on France September 15-18, 1995 Hotel: Sevres Vaneau Hotel 86, rue Vaneau 75007 Paris, France (Tel) 331-4548-7311 (Fax) 331-4549-2774 Conference Site: Conseil Regional 33, rue Barbet de Jouy 40 43 88 77 Sponsored by: Migration Dialogue, with the support of the German Marshall Fund of the United States and the Conseil Regional d' lle-de-France The purpose of Migration Dialogue is to promote among youngishopinion leaders in an off-the-record setting a discussion of themajor immigration and integration issues likely to face the industrialdemocracies over the coming decade. Three-day seminars are heldin places that allow participants during field trips to discusswith immigrants, service providers, and others the day-to-dayissues involved in immigration and integration. ______________________ Friday, September 15, 1995 Arrival Day. 2:45-6:00 PM Meet in the hotel lobby for one of two fieldtrips--early arrivals will choose one. 1. Tour the Mosque of Paris at the end of services, anddiscuss religious issues affecting the 3 to 4 million Muslimsin France. (Women may be asked to wear scarves over their heads,if you didn't bring, the mosque should be able to provide one.) 3:45 Leave hotel 4:00 Welcome by Mr. Boubaker (rector) and Mr. Dramchini Tour of Mosque and Tea and Discussion with officials in library 5:30 Return to Hotel 2. Tour the garment-making Sentier area of Paris, and discussunauthorized worker employment with French immigration officials 2:45 Leave Hotel 3:00 Arrival at Paris Police Headquarters for discussion of enforcementissues 4:00 Departure to Le Sentier 5:00 Return to Hotel 7:15 PM Meet in hotel lobby to walk to reception atthe Conseil de Paris (2.5 blocks) 7:30-9:30 PM Welcome Dinner at the Conseil ______________________ Saturday, September 16, 1995 7:30-8:45 AM Breakfast at the hotel. Depart hotel lobby at8:45 to walk to Conseil. 9:00-10:45 AM Immigration Policies and Integration Patterns Moderator: Philip Martin, University of California-Davis Speakers: Michael Teitelbaum, Sloan Foundation and ViceChair, U.S. Commission on Immigration Reform, and Jonas Widgren,Director of the International Centre for MigrationPolicy Development Discussion questions: When two groups share a geographic area,two extremes delineate their possible interaction--integrationor assimilation (eliminating boundaries between groups, encouragingconvergence in language, values, earnings etc.) and pluralismor multiculturalism (encouraging maintenance of cultural diversity,tolerating or welcoming enclaves). These are sometimes referredto as the melting pot versus the salad bowl approaches to accommodatingimmigrants. 1. What were the traditional modes of interaction in classic immigrationcountries such as the US? What were the major factors that helpedimmigrants to integrate successfully in the past--economic growth;political leadership; integrating institutions such as churches,schools, political parties, unions, and the military; the numberof immigrants; immigrant characteristics? How many of these successfulintegration policies were planned as integration instruments,and which ones were the result of general social policies andgoals? Why are the Americanization policies that successfullyintegrated immigrants in the past decried by some today? How dothe integration policies of Canada and Australia differ from thoseof the United States? 2. What factors guided integration policies in European countries?How were integration policies and the perceptions of immigrantintegration affected by the reasons for the arrival of migrants?For example, were there differences in integration policies andexperiences between "immigrants" from former colonies,guestworkers, and ethnic minorities relocating to the "mothercountry?" How have integration policies and attitudes changedas migration flows become more diverse? 3. How do immigration policy instruments such as family unification,efforts to prevent illegal immigration, and other policies designedto manage the influx of newcomers affect integration patternstoday? Which seems most important in affecting prospects for successfulintegration--the number of immigrants to be integrated, or their"differentness" from the native population? 4. What are the trade-offs in integration policy? Is the majortrade-off that between numbers and integration success? Or isit between "differentness" and integration success,meaning that it is easier to integrate large numbers of similarimmigrants than small numbers of persons who are very differentin language, religion, or culture. To what extent are per country "quotas" or "ceilings"useful in preserving multi-national and multi-ethnic flows ofimmigrants that minimize separatism? Does continuous immigrationfrom the same country affect the integration patterns of thosealready present? 10:45-11:00 AM Coffee Break 11:00-12:00 PM Small Group Discussions Each group will have a discussion leader and rapporteur. 12:00-1:00 PM Lunch at Conseil Regional 1:00-3:00 PM Integration and Immigration--How do native perceptionsof integration affect immigration and immigrant policy? Moderator: Mary Fleming, The German Marshall Fund of theUnited States Speakers: Patrick Weil, CNRS,Paris; Rosi Wolf-Almanasreh, Commissionerfor Alien Affairs, Frankfurt; and Susan Forbes-Martin,Executive Director, Commission on Immigration Reform, Washington The focus in this session is on native reactions to immigrants.This session is designed to explore how the perceptions of nativesabout the ability of their societies to integrate the newcomersaffects their support for their society's immigration policies.An underlying question is whether anti-immigrant reactions arecyclical reflections of economic or political insecurity, or whetherthey are structural reflections of demographic and other trends. 1. How do current residents determine what constitutes the successfulintegration of immigrants? What kind of integration indicatorsdo they look to: economic? language? crime? political activities?immigrant children? intermarriage? 2. What tend to be the flashpoints that set off anti-immigrantnative reactions? language? religion? race? How relevant are lowfertility rates of natives in the immigration society, so thata disproportionate share of babies are born to immigrants? Howdoes the geographic concentration of immigrants affect integration?What roles are played by the nature of political and party systems? 3. Does ethnic militancy generate a native backlash that inhibitsintegration. For example, if Muslims insist that girls wear headscarvesto school, does the French reaction to Muslim religious stricturesinhibit their integration? Similarly, how does bilingual educationthat encourages immigrant children to maintain their native languageaffect native reactions and integration prospects? 4. How did worries over integration affect immigration policyin the past? What are the effects of anti-immigrant politicalmovements on native reactions to the perception and reality ofimmigrant integration? 3:30 PM Depart hotel in bus for Field Trip to immigrant suburbof Montfermeil by bus to observe market activities, livingconditions, in the suburbs where many immigrants live. 5:00 PM Arrival and welcome by mayor. 6:00 PM Tour of city. 6:30 PM Discussion of integration issues with local residents. 7:30 PM Dinner with Eric Raoult, Minister for Integration 9:45 PM Sound and light show. 11:30 PM Bus leaves for hotel. ________________ Sunday, September 17, 1995 7:00-9:00 AM Breakfast at the hotel 9:00-10:45 AM The Instruments of Integration Policy Moderator: Michael Teitelbaum, Sloan Foundation Speakers: Pierre Lellouche, Deputy Mayor of Paris; CorneliaSchmalz-Jacobsen, Foreigners Commissioner, Bonn; and Roberto Suro,Washington Post Discussion questions: This session focuses on the immigrants,and is designed to provide case studies of how well immigrantsare integrating as measured by various integration indicators.An underlying question is how the success or failure to accommodateimmigrants affects immigration policy. 1. What do France, Germany, and the US do to integrate immigrants?Do these policies vary by type of immigrant, immigrant needs (howevaluated?), or economic and other conditions at the time in theimmigration or emigration country? 2. What are the most important indicators of immigrant integration--theirplace in the labor market, earnings, education, prison and welfareuse, intermarriage, naturalization, etc.--and how do they varyby type of immigrant (family, humanitarian, economic), countryof origin, and other immigrant characteristics? Is there sucha thing as "segmented assimilation?" 3. Has the creation of publicly-funded immigrant assistance programsand organizations helped to steer immigrant integration in certaindirections--e.g. Cubans have tended to seek private sector opportunitiesmore than Southeast Asian refugees, whose leaders in many casesprovide government-funded social services to their communities? 4. To what extent does and should our ability to predict who ismost likely to integrate successfully be used to make immigrationpolicy? 5. What is the role of citizenship and naturalization rules inintegration? Would adoption of jus soli and easing naturalizationrules promote integration? What are the effects on integrationof recent changes in citizenship laws in France and Germany? Shouldan in-between legal status be developed, such as "denizen,"for settled immigrants who choose not to naturalize? 10:45-11:00 PM Coffee Break 11:00-12:15 PM Small Group Discussions 12:15-1:15 PM Lunch at Le Royal Babylone, 62 rue de Babylone,tel 4551-4773. 1:15-5:00 PM Break 5:00-7:00 PM Immigration, the Media, and Root Causes Film (19 minute version): The March (BBC, 1993) Moderator, Roberto Suro, Washington Post Speakers: Philip Martin, University of California, Davis,Roger Bohning, ILO, Elmar Hnekopp, Institute for EmploymentResearch Discussion questions: 1. Can fears of mass migration be used to encourage "ordinarypeople" to support aid, trade, and other policies that promote"stay-at-home" development? 2. In light of demographic, political, and economic considerations,what could France, Germany, and the US do to reduce emigrationpressures in North Africa, Eastern Europe, and Latin America? 8:00 Dinner: Aux Chapentiers, 10, rueMabillion (Tel 1 43 26 30). A group of those wishing to walk willdepart the hotel at 7:40 PM. Taxi/metro group will leave at 7:55pm. _____________________ Monday, September 18, 1995 8:30 AM Breakfast 9:30-11:00 AM Discussion of integration in French schools Alain Seksig, School Prinicipal 11:00-11:15 Break 11:15-12:30 Presentations by rapporteurs of small discusssiongroups. 12:30 PM Lunch at Le Royal Babylone, 62 rue de Babylone 1:30-3:00 PM Free Time 3:00-6:30 PM Panel discussion: Immigration, Integration, andDevelopment Moderator: Michael Teitelbaum, Sloan Foundation Speakers: Patrick Weil, CNRS; Ursula Mehrlander, FreiderichEbert Stiftung; and Roger Bhning, International Labour Office 6:30 PM Adjourn for Farewell Cocktails at Conseil 8 PM Dinner for those who stay in Paris Monday night near Conseilat Le Fonnelier de Breteuil, 4 rue dEstrees, 4551-2943 ______________________ Tuesday, September 19, 1995 Departures Report of the seminar on Integration Issues and Immigration Policy: Focus on France September 15-18, 1995 Conseil Regional Paris, France Philip Martin Michael Teitelbaum October 2, 1995 Immigration Policies and Integration Patterns 2 Will Immigration Continue? 2 World Population and Migration 3 Definitions and Questions 4 Integrating Quasi Immigrants 5 Native Perceptions 7 The Instruments of Integration Policy--What works? 8 France 8 Germany 9 United States 10 Attacking the Root Causes 11 Trade 11 Cautions 12 Aid 13 Focus on France 13 Past and Present 14 Residence and Work 14 Schools and Integration 15 This is the report of the third Migration Dialogue seminar, whichwas held on September 15-18, 1995 in Paris. Migration Dialogueseminars provide an opportunity for 35 to 40 opinion leaders todiscuss in an intensive and off-the-record setting the major immigrationand integration issues facing the industrial democracies. Eachseminar includes field trips, so that participants can learn aboutthese issues directly from immigrants and immigration and integrationauthorities. This report was prepared after the seminar, and is being distributedto participants in the Paris seminar, as well as previous MigrationDialogue seminars, and to other interested parties. It has notbeen read or approved by participants, and should not be construedas a consensus document discussed and debated by participants.An agenda and list of participants are attached. The major question discussed in Paris was sharply focused: dofears that newcomers cannot integrate successfully prompt effortsto reduce or stop immigration flows? One participant argued forcefullythat the answer is yes--the first step to deal with the integrationof foreigners and their children is, in this opinion, to stopimmigration. Only then could governments tackle the problems associatedwith integration, which range from the isolation of immigrantsin housing and schools to federal-local tax and power issues. Other participants did not agree that it was necessary to stopimmigration in order to integrate newcomers. They emphasized thatmany of the problems identified with integrating immigrants wouldnot necessarily be on the way to resolution if immigration simplystopped. On the field trips, participants discussed the process for issuingresidence permits to foreigners with immigration police, and accompaniedthem on walks through Sentier and Barbes, two garment districtsfilled with immigrant workers in Paris. Participants visited thelargest mosque in France, and heard from officialMuslim leaders that fundamentalists were only a small fractionof the three to four million Muslims in France. Participants visited Montfermeil, a sububan city outside Pariswith a population of 26,000 that is composed of about one-thirdimmigrants and their children. Immigrants there are concentratedin a handful of 1960s-era six-story apartment blocks, and theirchildren attend schools that serve mostly immigrant children.To promote integration, the French government has hired additionalsocial workers and added teachers, but has no plans to mix native-bornand immigrant children through active public housing or transportationpolicies. Because of security concerns arising from the recent bombingsin Paris, schools were deemed off limits to visitors. In placeof visiting a school with immigrant children, French teacherscame to the meeting to discuss issues involved in educating immigrantchildren. Immigration Policies and IntegrationPatterns Will Immigration Continue? Will large scale immigration, and thus the need to integrate newcomersin industrial democracies, continue in the 21st century? Migrationis a result of differences--especially differences in economicopportunity and security--and these differences are widening,increasing potential migration. The number of people who would like to migrate is probably manytimes the number who actually do, so that increased potentialmigration does not necessarily result in a comparable increasein migrants. But widening differences, and wars and other crises,promise continued immigration despite recent efforts to reduceimmigration into France, Germany, and the US. Dealing with unwantedimmigration, it was emphasized, is likely to be a major challengein the 21st century. Continuing unwanted immigration highlights the growing gap betweenimmigration policy goals and outcomes in industrial democracies.In few other areas of public policy is the credibility of governmentsso low. For example, French governments since 1974 have impliedthat immigration has stopped, reducing the credibility of thegovernment when blue-collar workers observed immigrants movinginto their neighborhoods. This is one reason why, in several Europeancountries, political parties whose primary or major aim is toreassert control over immigration have obtained 10 to 20 percentof all votes. World Population and Migration The world's population of about 5.7 billion in mid-1995 was distributedamong 185-odd countries. Each country has its own definition ofcitizen and foreigner, which makes determining the number of migrantsdifficult, but the best estimates are that there are about 125million persons living outside their country of citizenship. Abouttwo percent of the world's population are legal or illegal immigrants,refugees and asylum seekers, or migrant workers. There are two ways to look at this "nation of migrants."First, the nation of migrants is equivalent in size to the world'seighth most populous nation, Japan, and is growing faster thanthe world's population. Immigration is also contributing significantlyto population growth in industrial democracies--it accounts forhalf or more of the population growth in countries such as theUS and Canada, and immigration prevents population declines inlow fertility nations such as Germany. Second, many of the world's migrants are moving from relativelyfast-growing and therefore "young" developing nationsand toward aging societies. Aging and demographically stable societiesmay resist the social changes that accompany immigration. Thismeans that a society's "demographic need" for immigrantsmay be the opposite of its willingness to accept them. Third, there is no "natural" end in sight to the currentwave of migrants. Population growth, economic disparities, andwar and persecution are likely to continue to produce migrantsand refugees for the foreseeable future, and most observers believethat the number of opportunity- and refugee-seeking migrants willincrease rather than decrease in the 21st century. On the other hand, those who believe that migration is a manageablechallenge for the industrial democracies begin with the observationthat the world's "nation of migrants" involves two percent,not 20 percent, of the world's population, despite demographic,economic, and other factors that might be expected to producea world on the move. In other words, most people stay in theircountry of birth, despite more borders to cross, and more incentivesto cross them. For example, one of the world's major countries of emigration,Mexico, has 100 million people currently alive born within itsborders, and over 90 percent of them still live in their countryof birth. Over 90 percent of the 70 million persons born in thePhilippines live there. Furthermore, countries can control immigration. Germany's 1993asylum reforms, some argue, were able to reduce by two-thirdsthe number of asylum applicants in that country without offsettingincreases in illegal immigration. But there is uncertainty and skepticism about the long-term effectivenessof immigration control measures. The US, for example, thoughtin the late 1980s that illegal immigration was under control,and that the economic boom would persist, so that the US increasedthe number of immigration slots both to unify families and tofill vacant jobs. These assumptions have proven false, promptinganother round of immigration reforms aimed at reducing legal andillegal immigration. Definitions and Questions Before turning to integration issues in more detail, a few definitionsare in order. When two or more distinct groups share a geographicarea, two extremes delineate their possible interaction--integrationor assimilation means eliminating boundaries between groups,encouraging convergence in language, values, earnings etc. Pluralismor multiculturalism, on the other hand, means encouragingthe maintenance of cultural diversity, and tolerating or welcomingethnic enclaves. These are sometimes referred to as the meltingpot versus the salad bowl approaches to accommodating immigrants. The discussion found several points of agreement. First, settledimmigrants should be naturalized citizens, but there is a sharpcontrast between the US goal of encouraging naturalization, andFrance and Germany offering a naturalization option, but not encouragingnaturalization. Many participants argued that Germany discouragesnaturalization. Second, integration is easiest to achieve with young childrenin families that want to settle, which makes language and schoolskey instruments to ensure that newcomers are integrated by thesecond generation. Third, there is a relationship between immigrationand integration, in the sense that a continued influx of foreignersmay make immigrants less interested in integrating, and nativesless willing to make the adaptations required for integrationand may make the integration process in general more difficult. However, what was striking were the apparent differences in theconcept of integration. Blood (i.e. genetics) largely defineswho is German, the ability to speak French largely defines whois French, and being born in the US, or learning some Englishand civics, defines Americans. The discussion centered on several issues. First, exactly whatare the trade-offs, if any, between continuing immigration andintegration? What are the appropriate parameters--the number ofimmigrants, or how similar the newcomers are to current residentsin language and religion? By how much is integration eased byan economic "need" for newcomers, or guilt over theplight of refugees or ethnic members abroad? Second, is integration eased by governments that are forthrightand clear in spelling out country priorities as to the annualnumber of immigrants, their characteristics, and their distributionby country of origin? Third, to what extent is there a universal relationship betweennumbers of immigrants and ease of integration? Are there "waves"of immigrants precisely because large numbers of immigrants setin motion forces that eventually reduce immigration? Integrating Quasi Immigrants Disagreement on exactly how to curb immigration as newcomers continueto arrive has led to a proliferation of in-between immigrationstatuses, such as Temporary Protected Status. These statuses permitforeigners to remain legally in the country, and sometimes towork, but they do not grant the secure status of residents whoare expected to settle that is assumed in most theories of howsocieties integrated newcomers. In the 1990s, for example, the US acquired its largest-ever numberof "unwanted immigrants." Today, about two percent ofthe US population--some four to five million persons--are unauthorizedor quasi-authorized aliens. In other words, despite high levels of legal immigration,as many as 50 percent more unwanted foreignersare arriving in the US, and there are fears that the control systemsin place cannot prevent their entry, or enforce their departure. Europe faces a similar situation. Even thoughmost European countries do not consider themselves countries ofimmigration, in 1992 some three million foreignersarrived in Western European nations. About half of Europe's newcomers arrived outside normal immigrationchannels. Most European nations permit family unification forcitizens and resident aliens without quotas and waiting listsbut, in addition, some 700,000 foreigners applied for asylum in1992; another 400,000 persons fleeing the Yugoslav war arrivedand were handled outside the asylum system; and an estimated 400,000unauthorized aliens arrived. Indeed, since European nations in the early 1990s launched individualand collective efforts to reassert control over immigration, thenumber of newcomers arriving each year has remained in the twoto three million range, but an ever larger share of all newcomersare in illegal or quasi legal statuses. Immigrants are arriving on both sides of the Atlantic throughfront, side, and back doors. Front-door immigration includes familyunification, immigrants who arrive with permission to fill vacantjobs, and refugee admissions--in most cases, these immigrantsare expected to settle and to become fellow citizens. Side-doorimmigrants are foreigners in the country for a specific time andpurpose, such as tourists, students, or "temporary"workers. As such, they are expected to leave the country, notto integrate. Back-door immigrants are those who became residentsunlawfully and are to be deported rather than integrated. There are many issues involved in integrating foreigners intotheir new host societies, but three stand out. First, the numberof planned-for legal immigrants is at historic highs, and theseimmigrants are often quite different from resident populationsin language, religion, and the ability to quickly earn as muchas the native born. The fact that many newcomers have low incomes raises issues asto how much governments should intervene and assist newcomers.Canada and Australia have programs that provide assistance tonewcomers, the US provides such assistance mostly to refugees,and Germany confines special language and welfare assistance mostlyto ethnic Germans who return to Germany and are immediately eligibleto become German citizens. Second, immigration societies today differ from the classic immigrationcountries at the turn of the century. There is less politicalconsensus that assimilation into the host society's language andculture should occur as rapidly as possible, or even at all. Integratinginstitutions such as churches, the military, labor unions, andschools are smaller or less sure of their role in integratingnewcomers today than they were in the past. As one participant noted, a society must have confidence in itspolicies for integrating domestic minorities and poor personsif it is to develop an integration policy for foreigners. Policiesthat may be controversial in their own right, such as affirmativeaction or busing, may be doubly controversial when available toimmigrants. Third, integration is difficult when so many of the newcomersare in unauthorized or quasi-authorized legal statuses. At theturn of the century, immigrants to the US were presumed to wantto settle, and Americanization tried to speed up their integration. Today, countries do not have such simple either/or integrationpolicies. They may want to integrate some immigrants rapidly,but encourage others, such as students and temporary workers,to adhere to their plans to leave when their education or employmentis complete. But since all types of aliens may be in proximityto each other--sometimes in the same family--it is very hard toavoid contradictions between immigration control and integrationpolicies. Native Perceptions Most people in industrial democracies think that immigration shouldbe reduced. But most industrial democracies link immigration andintegration in Grand Bargains that, e.g., couple new controlson illegal immigration with an amnesty or an easier path to naturalization.In France, for example, late 1970s and early 1980s efforts todeport Algerians, and then to pay workers with residence and employmentrights to depart, were followed by programs in 1984 that promotedintegration. However, France also provides a case study of how governmentslose credibility on immigration by tolerating growing gaps betweenimmigration policies and realities. France announced in 1974 thatforeign workers from outside the EU could no longer enter Franceas probationary immigrants. French politicians assured anxious publics that immigration hadbeen stopped. However, family unification and illegal immigrationcontinued. Local residents often failed to appreciate the categoriesthrough which newcomers entered; they only knew that foreignerswere still arriving in their neighborhoods. As a result, governmentalcredibility declined to the point that, in some polls, the mostcredible spokesperson on immigration issues in France today isthe National Front leader Jean-Marie Le Pen. Continuing immigration has complicated the process of integratingespecially the four to five million Muslims immigrants in France.At the beginning of the 20th century, France successfully integratedItalian and other Catholic immigrants by persuading them fairlyquickly to learn French; familiarity with French and French culturealso expedited the integration of immigrants from French colonies. France is today debating how best to integrate Muslim and BlackAfrican immigrants who may have less appreciation for French andFrench culture. In some neighborhoods, as many as 30 differentlanguages are spoken. The Instruments of Integration Policy--Whatworks? Integrating resident foreigners is described as a top priorityin France, Germany, and the US, but there is remarkably littleagreement on the best public policy instruments to integrate foreigners.However, most participants agreed that learning the native languagewas important for economic success and to minimize native fearsof foreigners, and that the schools were the key to integratingthe second generation. France Some French politicians argue that policies that successfullyintegrated immigrants in the past no longer work, and that whatis needed is an immigration stop, coupled with a renewed effortto restructure housing and welfare policies and reverse the trendtoward family breakup. In language that echoes California GovernorPete Wilson, it was asserted that the minimum welfare assistanceof roughly 2800FF ($550) per month offered to immigrants in Francekeeps them from seeking employment. The list of problems attributed to or aggravated by immigrantsin France is long, and this leads to the calls for an immigrationstop. What is less clear is how to seek solutions, and where tostart. For example, some argue that the starting point for integratingimmigrants in France is to start with their housing--demolishthe high-rise apartment blocks that concentrate them far fromjobs, and segregate immigrant children in schools. Another key to integration, some believe, is to change the structureof the French government. France gives considerable power to mayors--manymembers of the National Assembly are also mayors--and the needto be re-elected allegedly prevents mayors from assembling andcoordinating the regional resources necessary to help immigrantsget access to housing, transportation, and jobs. A return to centralpower, it was argued, is necessary to get the French economy movingagain, as well as to integrate foreigners by imposing sometimesunpopular housing and schooling policies at the local level. Others would put more money into educating immigrants. There aretwo problems with this approach. First, hiring teachers for immigrantschools, or social workers for their parents, may not integrateimmigrants already isolated from French children and jobs. Second, France has little latitude for additional public expenditures.France already collects more of what the economy produces in taxesthan any other major industrial country--44 percent of GDP wascollected in taxes in 1993, versus 40 percent in Germany, and30 percent in the US. The new government in 1995 raised the minimum wage as well asthe standard VAT or sales tax to 20 percent and, despite promisesof deregulation to stimulate private sector job creation to reducethe 12 percent unemployment rate, the tradition of a strong centralgovernment in France makes it tempting to try to spend any additionalintegration resources in a top-down fashion, but with deferenceto local politicians. Neither France nor Germany encourages immigrants to naturalize,but France makes naturalization easy for most children born inFrance. Germany The German naturalization dilemma is that there is no consensuson the ultimate aim of integration. According to some Germans,naturalization should be the goal of integration, so that Germanystops re-producing foreigners within its borders. However, Germany is reluctant to admit that it is a country ofimmigration, and thus it is hard to agree on a package of measuresthat immigration countries would consider natural, including explicitguidelines on who can immigrate and naturalize. Under German policiesadopted in 1981, foreigners age 16 to 23, with 8 years residenceand six years of German schooling, can be naturalized practicallyautomatically. Germans noted the significant differences between integrationprograms for ethnic Germans and other foreigners. Upon their arrival,descendants of Germans who emigrated to the former USSR--sometimeshundreds of years ago--are entitled to German citizenship as wellas six months of language training, and welfare payments and jobsearch assistance. Other newcomers, by contrast, do not have accessto special integration services, although there are a varietyof job training programs available to foreign-resident youth. Muslim immigrants are a special concern in Germany, even thoughthey are less than half of the immigrant population. There arewidespread fears that fundamentalist teachers will turn disaffectedyouth into a potential anti-native underclass, but most effortsto head off such a result seem to be local and spontaneous ratherthan national efforts that most observers believe will work. There was a lengthy discussion of why European governments whohave acknowledged integration issues are so slow to act. SomeFrench participants emphasized that there remain significant differencesamong EU countries in policies that range from naturalizationto controlling drugs, so that immigration and integration issuesare as likely to lead to confrontation among EU states ratherthan cooperation. Examples of naturalization dumping--Turksmoving to France so that their children can more easily be naturalized--areundoubtedly rare, but are invoked to argue that Schengen bordercontrols cannot be lifted right away. Most economic and social indicators of integration indicate thatforeigners are poorer and less educated than the native born.As with the US Black-white unemployment rate, the unemploymentrate for foreign workers in Germany is twice the rate for thenative born. More detailed analyses indicate that there are alsosignificant differences in economic indicators by ethnic group,with the most different groups--Turks in Germany, or Blacks andMuslims in France--at the bottom of labor market and earningspyramids. United States The US has few immigrant integration programs, aside from refugeeresettlement and bilingual education programs. Instead, the UStypically assigns individuals to groups, allowsrepresentatives to negotiate for the group, and manages to integrategroups in the resulting social change. The current wave of immigrants to the US is becoming Americanizedbut, since most newcomers move into central cities filled witha US underclass, many immigrants are integrating by adapting tocentral city values, including illegitimate births, welfare, andcrime. The group integration of the US allows the characteristicsof a subgroup to represent the entire group. Even though lessthan one-fourth of the roughly 15 million foreign-born Hispanicsin the US are illegal immigrants, Latino immigrants are oftentagged with the illegal label. According to some Americans, the major mechanism for integratingminority groups, including immigrants, are the tools developedin the Civil Rights movement of the 1960s. It is for this reason,it is argued, that Latino immigrants have adopted the positionof a minority needing government assistance to be integrated inthe US. Latinos, in this view, had the bad luck to arrive in the US ata time when the Civil Rights instruments of integration have beendiscredited, but before other integration instruments were developed. Opinion on immigration in the US has been volatile and has changedquickly over the past year. In the early 1990s, there was discussionof new federal expenditures to expedite the integration of immigrants.In 1995, there is widespread agreement that legal and illegalimmigration should be reduced, and the social service system scaledback. The US must deal with three areas that affect the integrationof immigrants as well as other fundamental aspects of US society.First, what services will the government provide, and on whatterms? Second, what happens to the US assumption of upward mobilityin a static economy? Third, what policies will the US developto broker ethnic differences? Governments on both sides of the Atlantic are scaling back thewelfare state, and deregulating their economies. As a result,immigrants will have to fend more for themselves in restructuringeconomies and societies. Early this century, immigrants fending for themselves in industrializingAmerica achieved substantial social and economic upward mobility,and in many cases helped to produce the modern welfare state asa reaction against some attributes of market economies. It isnot clear what immigrants fending for themselves in post-industrialand slow growing societies will produce. Attacking the Root Causes International migration is a big business. There are some 60 millionforeigners in the world's 24 richest nations, and the half ofthem in the labor force send at least $40 to $50 billion eachyear to their countries of origin. In countries from Algeria toex-Yugoslavia, remittances are a major source of foreign exchange. Could the industrial democracies that are trying to reduce unwantedimmigration provide emigration countries with trade, investment,and aid in a manner that reduces unwanted immigration? And, iftrade concessions are opposed by some sectors of immigration countries,such as farmers and steel workers, can the fear of unwanted migrationbe used to nonetheless adopt free-trade policies? In 1990, the "One-World Group" of European public televisionnetworks produced a film, "The March" designed to showviewers that it would be better to provide more aid to Africathan to deal with the arrival of desperate African migrants. Thereis no evidence that such efforts to convince taxpayers to stepup development assistance have succeeded; aid budgets have notincreased significantly. Trade There is no disagreement that immigrants tend to flow from poorerto richer countries, but, in a world in which per capita incomedifferences are on the order of 25 to 1 between rich and poorcountries, the surprise may be how little, not how much, internationalmigration for employment occurs. In spite of demand-pull, supply-push, and network factors thatcould be expected to increase migration across borders, only abouttwo percent of the worlds population lives outside theircountry of citizenship, and less than 10 percent of the populationof most industrial countries were born abroad. The most significant economic policy change in the 1990s is theworldwide shift toward free markets. In industrial countries,market opening is evidenced by free trade pacts, including theEU-92 program in Europe, and by the deregulation of labor andother markets. But the adoption of free market programs has been most noticeablein several of the major developing countries from which many migrantscome. Mexico, Turkey, and the Philippines, for example, have announcedambitious plans to privatize state-run industries, open themselvesto free trade and investment, and deregulate their labor and productmarkets. These free market policies should, over time, speed up economic,job, and wage growth, and thus reduce economically-motivated migration.But the transition from a closed to an open economy is neithereasy nor assured of success. Indeed, most economists believe developing nations that embracefree market policies first experience increased pressuresfavoring outmigration. This makes it very hard for an industrialcountry such as the US to embrace freer trade with an emigrationcountry such as Mexico. US opponents of such free trade policiescan complain that jobs will flee south, while workers will fleenorth, and this job loss-migration hump may persist for a generationor more. Furthermore, free trade policies may not succeed. There is noassurance that simply adopting such policies will automaticallyproduce faster growth. Free market policies tend to have highfailure rates, for reasons that include corruption, the replacementof public monopoly with private monopoly, and policy mistakes. In light of the migration hump and uncertainty of success, whyembrace free trade and investment? The answer is simple--thereis no alternative strategy that has proven its ability to accelerateeconomic growth and thereby reduce emigration pressure. Free trade enables emigration countries to grow their way outof emigration pressure--both countries ride up the escalator towardmore jobs and higher wages, but the emigration country rises faster,much as Europe "caught up" with the US in the 1960s.There is an alternative--wage gaps can also be lessened by themigration of workers from low to higher wage countries, reducingthe growth of wages in industrial democracies. But a migration-induced narrowing of wage differences has differentsocio-economic consequences. Emigration areas that live off remittancescan turn into bedroom communities for foreign labor markets, sothat migration depresses wages in the immigration country, anddoes not generate stay-at-home development. The result can bedependence on a foreign labor market, and tensions over immigration. Cautions There are several problems associated with implementing policiesto free up trade and investment and thereby reduce emigrationpressures. First, the process through which economic transformationsgenerate faster growth are neither smooth nor sure. Many emigrationcountries depend on tariffs for 30 to 40 percent of governmentrevenues, so changing economic policies means that the governmenthas fewer resources when the need for assistance is greatest. Second, industrial countries often urge emigration nations toadopt free trade policies, but then they restrict imports of preciselythose goods that emigration nations are most capable of exporting,such as agricultural and labor-intensive commodities. Third, there is no assurance that free trade policies will work.Success depends on many factors, including confidence, and policymistakes can quickly turn a country such as Turkey or Mexico fromsuccess to pariah. In many cases, it makes little sense for agovernment to adopt the free trade and investment policies ifthe fundamentals are not in place. There is probablylittle current investor interest in, for example, Algeria, evenif the government rolled out the red carpet for foreign investors,and this situation is likely to persist until the conflict isresolved. Aid One difference between European and American attitudes towardpolicies to reduce emigration pressures is captured in the adage:Americans believe in trade, not aid, while Europeans want aid,not trade. The US gives very little aid to Mexico, but signedNAFTA, while Europe keeps out many North African agriculturalcommodities but provides significant aid. In 1994, the OECD countries provided $58 billion in aid to developingnations. However, much of this aid flows from one government toanother, and little of it is concentrated in emigration areasto deter emigration. Focus on France France is a country of 58 million with an average per capita incomeof about $22,000. The 1995 election was fought largely over howto deal with the country's persistent 11 to 12 percent unemploymentrate, or how to avoid the reinforcement of a two-tiered societywith an underclass of French and foreign residents. France is Europes traditional country of immigration.France was practically unique in having an early fertility declinebeginning as early as the late 18th century, and fear of populationdecline that would make the country more vulnerable to rival Germanyprompted both pro-natalist and expansionary immigration policies.France was among the worlds first countries to developan immigration system, and France has what is for Europe an easypath to naturalization. The second unique aspect about French immigration is the so-called"Republican model" of integration, which asserts theneed for a commonality of French language and culture--both Frenchrural-urban migrants as well as immigrants were expected to learnFrench and behave as the French do in public. Any language, religious,or cultural differences should be celebrated only in private. This system worked reasonably well to integrate European immigrants,and immigrants from former French colonies familiar with the Frenchlanguage and culture. Today, almost one in three French residentsis believed to have at least one foreign-born grandparent. Past and Present Past immigrants were integrated into French society by a combinationof a relatively easy path to citizenship--virtually all childrenborn in France can become French citizens at age 18; secular schoolsthat inculcated French and French values; by the assembly-lineorganization of the military and heavy industries that integratedboth immigrants and rural to urban French migrants; and by theCatholic church. These integrating institutions assured that children born or educatedin France considered themselves French as adults. The French,in turn, were confident that they could use their language andculture to integrate foreigners--foreigners from any of the 27countries that use French as an official language, such as Belgiumand Lebanon, can naturalize as soon as they receive residencepermits in France, instead of waiting for at least two years. Today, there is less certainty in France and elsewhere that pastintegrating instruments will work for today's immigrants. Onething that makes France unique is that, unlike other immigrationcountries that are experimenting with bilingual education andreligious diversity in public places, many French policy makersresist changing policies that have "worked." Otherssay that it is high time that France wake up to the new immigration,the new Europe, and the new world of migration. Residence and Work Foreigners in France for more than three months need residencepermits--one-year residence permits are usually obtained for 200FF($40) after 20 minute interviews with the French immigration police.After three years of continuous lawful residence and employment,or 10 years lawful residence, a foreigner can obtain a ten-yearresidence permit for 250FF. Several areas of Paris, such as Sentier near the Gare du Nord,are known to harbor significant numbers of illegal alien workers.France until 1991 attempted to curb illegal alien employment byremoving illegal alien workers from workplaces, and perhaps fromFrance. Since 1991, immigration police and labor inspectors putmuch more emphasis on sanctioning employers and labor smugglers-middlemen. In 1991, the French developed a fax system that enables employersto check on the legal status of newly hired workers--employersfax copies of residence and work permits to the police and labordepartments and, if there is no response from the authorities,the worker is legal. The percentage of newly-hired workers believedby these departments to be unauthorized in targeted industriessuch as garments has fallen from one-third to 10 percent. Immigration and labor inspectors receive tips from other employers,and from each other, about places in which illegal aliens areemployed. Since 1993, they have another source of tips--employersmust report newly-hired workers at least eight days before hiringthem to social security, not within eight days of putting themto work. In this way, inspectors can be alerted by the socialsecurity system before illegal workers go to work. The Sentier area is a garment manufacturing district that hiressignificant numbers of illegal aliens in sewing lofts above displayshops. There is a general level of tolerance for illegal behaviorin the area, from traffic violations to prostitution. However,tightened labor law enforcement has apparently pushed much ofthe sewing involving illegal workers to the suburbs. The French government has recently taken several highly visiblesteps against illegal immigration, including the chartering ofairplanes to return illegal aliens to their countries of origin.For historical reasons, the government is careful with both thelanguage and the form of transportation--aliens are returned,not deported, and planes rather than trains are used to take aliensto borders, partly because of fears that opponents of such policieswill associate them with Nazi deportations by train during WorldWar II. Most experts believe that the charter airplanes are symbolic actions.They point to a host of problems. It is expensive to charter planes,and so the authorities wait until they have a plane load of aliens.But French law permits detention of aliens awaiting return foronly 10 days, so that, if a full plane load of aliens is not available,the government must set aliens free or take off with a partialload. Many countries refuse to accept back persons who do nothave papers proving that they are e.g., Algerians. Schools and Integration Many French teachers are convinced that the key to integrationis learning French--in the words of one, "own language instructionis the road to failure." Indeed, in France, own languageinstruction was advocated by those in the 1970s who hoped thatit would encourage return migration. The result was a contradictory "policy" toward integrationthat satisfied no one. Indeed, French teachers asserted that withrespect especially to young foreign children from homes in whichthe parents wanted their children to learn French, it is feasibleand desirable to take non-French speakers into regular Frenchclasses and, within several months, have the foreign childrenspeaking and working in French. This immersion approach, theynoted, also helped to integrate the foreigners socially. In Germany, foreign children have had the right to attend K-12schools since 1964. Germany is sensitive about the problems involvedin integrating older foreign children--especially those olderthan 10 when they arrive in Germany. Germany has a decentralized school system--each Land or stateis responsible for developing a curriculum, including how to teachforeign children. German regulations have changed to prohibitfamily unification of children over age 15, under the theory thatolder children will be unable to learn enough in German schoolsto succeed on the German labor market. The German experience can be seen as a half empty or half fullglass. Optimists note that the number of foreign children completingthe vocational training for which Germany is famous has been rising,as has the number of foreign children who go to university-preparatoryschools (Gymnasium). However, pessimists note that more than 40 percent of foreignyouth fail to finish the equivalent of high school and, of thosewho obtain vocational training, many of the foreign children selectsunset occupations such as mechanic or hairdresser. German handicraftemployers such as bakers are willing to take on foreign apprentices,but some fear that these declining industries might be using foreignersas cheap workers. In France, recent immigrants often find themselvesstranded in housing developments in Paris suburbs such as Monfermeilabout one-third of whose 26,000 residents are foreign. The areahas no direct transportation into Paris, and offers little industryand few jobs. The few who are employed must travel more than anhour to low-paying jobs in Paris. Los Bosquets, which occupiesthree percent of the town, has 20 percent of its 20,000 population--mostof whom are first- or second-generation immigrants. Unemploymentis 25 percent. Home WT02-B12-221IA088-000636-B045-36http://migration.ucdavis.edu:80/mda/san.htm 128.120.36.171 19970122192005 text/html 32113HTTP/1.0 200 OKMIME-Version: 1.0Server: WebSTAR/1.3.1 ID/6378Message-ID: Date: Wednesday, 22-Jan-97 19:20:56 GMTLast-Modified: Tuesday, 21-Jan-97 21:07:10 GMTContent-type: text/htmlContent-length: 31856  Migration Dialogue Immigration and Integration Issues inthe 1990s: Focus on the United States November 19-21, 1994 Catamaran Resort Hotel 3999 Mission Boulevard San Diego, CA 92109 Tel (619) 488-1081 Reservations Desk Only:(800) 288-0770 Fax (619) 488-0901 Sponsored by: Migration Dialogue, with the support of the German Marshall Fund of the United States and the Friedrich Ebert Stiftung Friday, November 18, 1994 Arrival Day. 7:00 PM Walk to informal dinner at the Rusty Pelican (4325Ocean Blvd., phone 274-3474), a local oceanfront restaurant. Therestaurant is four blocks or 300 meters from the hotel. We willmeet in the lobby at 7 pm by the Migration Dialogue sign; youwill also receive a map to the restaurant when you check in--pleasejoin the group late if you wish. ______________________ Saturday, November 19 7-9AM Continental Breakfast served in the hotel's second floorfoyer next to the Boardroom, where our sessions will be held. 9-10:45 AM Immigration Patterns and Policies in IndustrialCountries Speakers: Michael Teitelbaum, Sloan Foundation and Vice Chair,U.S. Commission on Immigration Reform and Jonas Widgren, Director,International Center for Migration Policy. Moderator: Philip Martin,Professor, University of California, Davis. Discussion Questions  Immigration policy involves three fundamental questions:how many immigrants should be admitted, from where should theycome (or who should have priority to enter), and in what statusshould immigrants enter. How are industrial countries answeringthese questions? Whose interests tend to be most important inmaking and enforcing entry rules? What time dimensionsenter into immigration debates?  What are current immigration flows into industrial countries?How can we compare or rank countries in their openness to immigrants?Is a society's openness to immigrants in any manner analogousto its openness to foreign goods?  Is there an upper limit on the annual influx of foreignersor on the foreign share of the population (Canada adds almostone percent to its population annually via immigration; the U.S.about 0.4 of one percent; in Switzerland, foreigners are 18 percentof the population; in Germany, nine percent; in the U.S., eightpercent). Are such comparisons of immigration flows and stocksmisleading because each country has a different understandingof the term "immigrant." In the US, for example, mostof the foreigners have a right to become citizens, while mostforeigners living in Switzerland are not expected to become citizens.How are foreigners/immigrants integrated into a new society?  What influences the "absorptive capacity" ofa nation? Gross numbers? History? Demography and Economics? Geography?Regional concentration/dispersal of immigrants?  What determines the range of views on how easy it willbe to integrate particular groups of immigrants? Is "absorptivecapacity" affected by the number and type of immigrants arriving,socio-economic conditions when they arrive, or the speed withwhich their arrival changes the ethnic/racial/religious compositionof the population?  Should the annual inflow of immigrants be set by an annualceiling or "quota?" Should the intake of immigrantsvary with domestic socioeconomic conditions, such as the unemploymentrate, or with international events, such as the number of refugeesand asylees seeking entry? How can annual limits be enforced?  How large is the contribution of immigration to populationand labor force growth? In a country with a declining native population,such as Germany, should immigration be used as a policy to preventthe population from shrinking? 10:45-11AM Coffee Break 11AM-12:30 PM Small Group Discussions Each group will have a discussion leader and rapporteur. 12:30-1:30PM Lunch 1:30-3:00 PM Why and How Do Industrial Democracies RegulateUnskilled Immigration? Speakers: Philip Martin, Professor, University of California,Davis and Thomas Straubhaar, Professor, Universitt der BundeswehrHamburg. Moderator: Elizabeth Midgley, President, Working English. Discussion Questions  The focus on this session is whether, why, and howthe influx of unskilled workers into industrial societies shouldbe regulated. Illegal workers can be converted into legal workersor immigrants via temporary worker programs and amnesties, sowe want to discuss--from economic, political, and social pointsof view--whether, why, and how an industrial country shouldattempt to control entries.  Presentations will make reference to three points. First,to what extent are the benefits of unskilled migrant workers inan industrial society such as the U.S. immediate and concretein the form of higher profits for some employers, and concentratedin the hands of a relatively few people? To what extent are anycosts associated with unskilled immigration delayed, diffusedacross society, and difficult to measure, since they include integrationissues?  Second, why is there so much controversy over the economiceffects of migrant workers in industrial democracies? Theory wouldsuggest that the presence of migrant workers should raise profitsand depress wages, increase total employment and unemployment,and slow the search for labor-saving change. Why do researchershave such a hard time finding any significant such effects? Therewill be a discussion of examples of the effects of immigrantsin particular sectors, such as nursing, construction, agriculture,hotels and restaurants, and garments.  Third, what would happen to these sectors and to the economyas a whole without immigrant labor? How should non-specialiststhink about the trade-offs involved in front-door legal immigration,side-door guestworker migration, and back door illegal immigration? 3:00-3:15 PM Coffee Break 3:15-5 PM Small Group Discussions 7:00 PM Reception 7:30-9 PM Welcome Dinner: Frank Loy, President, GermanMarshall Fund of the United States 9 or 10PM Cruise After dinner, there is an optional cruise around Mission Bay onthe Bahia Bell. The tickets, which will be in your welcome packet,may be used on either Friday or Saturday night. There is a loungeand music on the boat. The boat leaves hourly in the evening fromthe dock behind the Catamaran. The boat stops at the Bahia Hoteland the Princess Resort Hotel where you can get off and reboardlater, if you wish. _____________________ Sunday, November 20 7-9AM Continental Breakfast served in second floor foyer nextto the Boardroom. 9 -10:45 AM Can Trade be a Substitute for Migration?The Case of NAFTA Speakers: Sidney Weintraub, University of Texas-Austin; GeorgeTapinos, Institut detudes politiques, Paris; and SharonRussell, MIT and the World Bank. Moderator: Jorge Bustamante,El Colegio de la Frontera Norte.  The U.S. is the world's major country of immigration, Mexicois the world's major country of emigration, and most Mexican immigrantshistorically arrived as illegal or irregular aliens who were laterlegalized. How have demand-pull, supply-push, and network factorsevolved between Mexico and the U.S.? Which factors are most importantin explaining current migration flows? What is the prospect thatthe North American Free Trade Agreement will break these links,and over what time periods are NAFTA's effects expected to bevisible?  We will be traveling to Mexico to visit some of the "maquiladoras"--foreign-ownedassembly plants--that employ about 1 in 5 Mexican manufacturingworkers. To what extent does trade in the labor-intensive goodsassembled in these plants substitute for migration? If these factoriesemploy mostly young women, do they also draw young men to theborder area who later cross the border illegally? How are patternsof Mexican migration to the United States changing after NAFTA. 10:45-11:00PM Coffee Break 11:00-12:15 PM Small Group Discussions 12:15-2:30 PM Sunday Brunch and Free Time. You will receivetickets for the brunch during the morning session. 2:30PM Leave for Border. Sunday night is usually the busiest night on the border,as Monday through Friday workers return, although November isa light month for apprehensions. We will drive to the border inseveral vans, and spend two to three hours with the Border Patrolobserving illegal entry, processing, return, and re-apprehension. 7:00 PM Dinner with Border Patrol Representatives atEl Torrito Restaurant. 8:30PM Return to hotel or nighttime viewing of border area. Participants have the option of returning to the border to watchapprehensions through new nightscopes or returning to the hotel. _____________________ Monday, November 21 6:30-7:45AM Continental Breakfast served in second floor foyernext to the Boardroom. 7:45 AM Field Trip to Border and Mexico (American citizensneed an ID; non-US citizens need their passport and I-94 form) We will drive to the border to observe activities therein daylight, and then proceed to visit several to the 2,000 foreign-investorowned maquiladoras that employ 500,000 mostly young Mexican women.You will have an opportunity to observe working conditions, andto ask about the effects of encouraging Mexicans to move northon "stepping stone" migration to the United States.We will return through the Otay Mesa checkpoint, and receive abriefing from the INS on the use of false documents to enter theUnited States. 3:00 PM Return to hotel. 4-5 PM Panel discussion: What are Realistic Immigration ControlOptions? Panel: Patrick Weil, Institut d'Etudes Politiques de Paris; WayneCornelius, Director, Center for US-Mexican Studies; and DavidMartin, Professor of Law, University of Virginia. Moderator: MichaelTeitelbaum. 6:30 PM Dinner 7:30 PM Continued panel discussion 9:30 PM Farewells ______________________ Tuesday, November 22 Departures Report on the San Diego Seminar, November 19-21, 1994 November 30, 1994 Immigration Patterns and Policies 1 Why Regulate Unskilled Immigration ? 2 Can Trade be a Substitute for Migration? 4 Practical Options for Managing Illegal Immigration 5 Prop 187 6 The purpose of the seminar was to explore four major questions: what is the gap between immigration policy goals and outcomesin the US and Western Europe? why should industrial countries try to regulate unskilledimmigration? can trade and investment arrangements such as NAFTA reduceemigration pressures?  what are practical options to deal with unskilled immigrationpressures? These questions were framed by Europeans and Americans,discussed in a general session, and then in small groups. In addition,these issues were discussed during the field trips. Immigration Patterns and Policies The opening session noted that there have been enormous and unanticipatedchanges in the US and around the world over the past three decades.These changes have given the US far more immigrants, especiallyfrom Asia, and neither the increased number of immigrants, northe rise in Asian immigration, was anticipated. The US made four major changes in its immigration policies duringthe past three decades: in 1965, 1980, 1986, and in 1990. In eachcase, the unanticipated consequences have been as significantas the expected effects of these immigration reforms. Many Americans do not believe governmental promises that effortsto control illegal immigration will soon succeed. This nationalfailure to manage illegal immigration has produced an anti-immigrantreaction, especially in California. Managing migration has becomethe number one issue in the nation's largest state. European nations are getting immigrants, but they have not yetaccepted the responsibility to deal with immigration prospectivelyand realistically. For example, Europeans still avoid discussingthe three fundamental immigration questions of how many, fromwhere, and in what status immigrants should arrive. The number of immigrants arriving in Europe has been rachetingupward despite tough talk, new laws, and even departure bonuses.Europe's major political parties have primarily been reactive,trying to do enough to blunt the appeal of anti-immigrant partiesso that immigration does not dislodge the parties that have runEurope for the past five decades. Most experts believe that European governments must become forward-looking,taking steps to prevent unwanted migration, and developing a GATT-analogGeneral Agreement on Migration Policies (GAMP) to promote thecoordination of efforts to manage migration. It was generally agreed that pressures to cross nationalborders will rise rather than fall in the years ahead, but itwas emphasized that rising migration pressure or potential doesnot necessarily mean rising migration. In other words,there was not a consensus that the only choice open to the receivingcountries is whether to accept migrants through front, side, orback doors--indeed, most participants believed that migrationmanagement was both possible and should be given higher priorityby governments. It was also agreed that the fear of the stranger is real and caneasily be exploited. The recent civil rights/individual rightsrevolution resulted in an elite consensus not to play the "immigrationcard" for political purposes, but California's Proposition187 may be a harbinger of change. It is also clear that ideas that would have been scoffed at evenfive years ago get a respectable hearing today. These includeusing military intervention to prevent disruptive migration, asin Haiti, taking at least symbolically tough steps to reduce unwantedmigration, as exemplified by Proposition 187 in California , policechecks in France, and the German law that requires public employeesto report suspected illegal aliens. There was a general concern that the growing gap between immigrationpolicy goals and outcomes could lead to larger problems. For example,it was noted that Germany and the Scandinavian countries believethat they can prevent illegal immigration, so they hew to legaland illegal categories, with the result that some public employeesfeel forced to become immigration agents. France and the US, onthe other hand, are more likely to accept their inability to eliminateillegal immigration, leading to incomplete amnesties and the developmentof schemes through which some rights are granted to illegal aliens. Second, it was emphasized that voters at the bottom of the labormarket could express their frustration at the gap between immigrationgoals and outcomes by voting for anti-immigrant parties or takingdirect action against foreigners. Third, it was emphasized that,in a global economy linked by freer trade and capital flows, relationsbetween nations can be disrupted by immigration disputes. Why Regulate Unskilled Immigration ? Most of the immigrants arriving in industrial nations are unskilled,meaning that they have less than the median level of educationof native-born adults. Since immigration pressures are rising,and immigration control is getting more difficult, this sessionasked a simple question--why bother with control, or how muchresources and energy should be devoted to controlling unskilled/illegalimmigration? It was emphasized that this question has been avoided regularlyby immigration commissions in the US. Their normal justificationfor doing more to curb illegal immigration is that, in a nationof laws, illegal immigration is wrong and, if it persists, antipathytoward illegal immigrants might lead to a less open front doorto legal immigrants. Immigrants in industrial countries are a small part of the worldwidelabor force and a marginal part of industrial country workforces,so that any effects they have will be marginal for both developingand industrial nations. It was also noted that economic theoryfinds that it is not optimal to completely stop unwanted activitiessuch as pollution and illegal immigration because the costs ofachieving a zero level outweigh the benefits. But perhaps the most interesting observation was that, in Europe,it seems to be easier for blue-collar workers to push societytoward a "too restrictive" immigration policy, whilein the US employers and ethnic groups have been able to organizethemselves to get a "too open" policy toward unskilled/illegalimmigration. Immigration is neither good nor bad; it produces economic andother tradeoffs. Three economic tradeoffs seem especially importantin evaluating unskilled immigration. First, unskilled immigrantson balance hurt unskilled native workers through wage depression,displacement, and changing patterns of hiring and training. However,these changes affect less than 20 percent of all native workers,and many occur in a fashion that is not visible to in statisticalstudies of immigrant impacts. The fact that these impacts arenot easy to measure does not mean that they do not exist. Second, the availability of immigrant workers affects the evolutionor trajectory of those sectors of the economy where immigrantsare concentrated. In the US economy, there are only three occupationswith 1 million or more workers in which immigrants are a majorityof the workforce--farmworkers (2.5 million), janitors (2 million),and household help (1 million). These sectors are also not wellstudied in comparison to other economic sectors, so it is notalways easy to see what would happen without immigrants. However,in the case of agriculture, the termination of the bracero programin 1964 spurred a cost-reducing series of innovations that madethe US a world leader in processed tomato products. Third, the immigrants arriving in the US today, if arrayed bythe best single predictor of earnings, years of education, havean hourglass or barbell shape. This means that current immigrationpatterns are increasing economic inequality. The discussion emphasized that immigrants have many economic effects,sometimes improving the position of some native workers, as whenunskilled immigrants in the fields create or preserve jobs fortruck drivers. It was also noted that the trajectory of an industryis not shaped just by immigration. In US transportation industries,for example, the major changes in the labor market are traceableto de-regulation. The discussion also emphasized that foreigners willing to workfor low wages can affect domestic workers directly via immigration,or indirectly through trade and investment flows. The discussion concluded with a consensus that, if unskilled/illegalimmigration is to be controlled in the 1990s, countries need haveflexible policies that adapt to changing patterns of movement.Economic differences between industrial and developing countriesare widening, increasing incentives to enter industrial countriesenough so that e.g., Chinese nationals pay $30,000 to be smuggledinto the US to fill unskilled jobs. Can Trade be a Substitute for Migration? This question was answered simply: yes, and free trade and investmentare the only instruments guaranteed to eventually reduce migrationpressures. But there is a short-run migration hump, meaning thatthe disruptions and dislocations associated with deregulatingand opening an economy increase migratory pressure. If there areestablished migratory links, the same polices that reduce migrationin the long run can increase migration in the short run. Labor migration is a big business. The remittances sent to countriesof origin by the 20 to 25 million foreign workers in industrialcountries are in the $40 to $50 billion range, as each workerremits perhaps $2000 annually. If the industrial countries wereto succeed in stopping migration, or removing the foreign workersalready there, countries of origin might lose a major source offoreign exchange. Economic growth is the ultimate answer for economically-motivatedmigration, but economic growth does not have to equalize wagesto stop migration. Analyses and experience suggest that once economicdifferences are reduced to 4 or 5 to 1, and there is confidencethat wages will continue to increase in the country of origin,migration pressures fall sharply. The world community has not yet figured out how to deal with economically-motivatedmigration in international organizations and agreements. Mostcountries are avowedly not destinations for immigrants, makingthem more likely to cooperate to reduce immigration than to establishthe rules under which it should occur. However, regional tradeagreements, which tend to be more comprehensive than global agreementssuch as the GATT, increasingly deal with migration. Mexico is the ninth most populous country in the world, with about90 million people and a labor force of about 30 million. The countrygrew rapidly with an import substitution policy during the 1950sand 1960s, and thought that it could continue this policy whenoil prices rose in the 1970s. Debt rose, oil prices fell, andin 1982 the country was in crisis. Mexico changed its economic policies in the mid-1980s, embracingpolicies that aimed to attract foreign investment and to createjobs in export-oriented industries. One of the fastest-growingsectors of the Mexican economy have been maquiladoras, the 2000factories in the border areas that employ 500,000 Mexican workersto turn imported components into products that are mostly exportedto the US. NAFTA plus "correct" economic polices in Mexico promisefaster economic growth in the 1990s. But the need for faster economicgrowth is larger than even freer trade and investment can provide--Mexicohas 1 million new workforce entrants annually, so that even creating500,000 "real jobs" each year is not sufficient fornew entrants plus those displaced from inefficient industriessuch as agriculture. Furthermore, Mexico has a very unequal distributionof income, so that the benefits of fast growth are not automaticallyshared in a manner that leaves especially poor people in ruralMexico satisfied with their lot. Mexican researchers expect illegal Mexican immigration, estimatedat 800,000 to 2 million entries per year today, to decline significantlyafter NAFTA plus Mexico's current polices have been in effectfor at least 10 years--50 percent of the Mexican estimate of 800,000illegal entries were apprehended at least once by the US BorderPatrol. However, the next 10 years promise very contentious debatesover persisting illegal immigration. There is a fundamental difference in the definition of the migrationproblem. Mexicans see migration as an economic issue. They notethat it is not the bottom of the Mexican workforce that migratesto the US, and that the wages earned by unauthorized immigrantsin the US are just as legitimate as the profits earned by theirUS employers. The Mexican perspective is that if the US reallywanted to stop illegal immigration, it would crack down on USemployers, since their demand for Mexican workers is what motivatesMexicans to cross the border. The US perspective, in the Mexicans' view, is that unauthorizedMexican workers are criminals. This prevents, they say, usefulnegotiations toward a bilateral migration agreement. Europeans tend to favor aid rather than trade to reduce migrationpressures, in part because many of the emigration countries would,with freer trade, export agricultural products to Europe. In otherwords, agricultural protections are in part responsible for urbanizationand migration pressures from Morocco to Turkey. In the case of Morocco, freer trade would make the country anagricultural exporter. But freer trade alone would cause problems,one of which is that Morocco now gets one-fourth of its governmentalrevenue from import tariffs. The discussion emphasized that there are significant differencesin US-Mexican relations along the 2000 mile border. Even thoughnorthern Mexico is richer than other parts of Mexico, San Diegois one of the richer areas of the US, while the TX border townsare among the poorest in the US. Border Patrol operations thatreduce apprehensions sharply are popular in both areas. Practical Options for Managing Illegal Immigration There were very different practical options discussed. One approachis to review the various control options tried, to emphasize theflaws in each, and to conclude that the best option is to manageinevitable migration. For example, fortifying the border is expensive,and its long-run effectiveness is not yet clear. Eliminating socialservices for unauthorized aliens may not have much of a deterrenteffect on migrants seeking jobs, and may complicate the provisionof services to so-called mixed families that include members witha variety of legal statuses. The other approach is to acknowledge that no control measure isa magic bullet cure, but that enforcement measures can have effectson migration at the margin, and can send symbolic messages tothe public that something is being done. The US now enforces ontargets of opportunity--such as Prop 187's attempt to detect thosewho seek public services--and enforces indiscriminately--as whenall Haitian boat people are returned without screening. A strategy of detection and detention/deportation was urged. Oncean illegal alien is detected, there must be, it was argued, aprocedure to determine quickly who is not eligible to remain,and then those persons must be removed quickly in order to avoidthe development of equity stakes that lead to exceptions(the USdeported only 38,000 aliens in 1993). Island nations such as the UK tend to rely on border controls,and not on internal controls such as employer sanctions. Nationswith many borders and mass tourism industries such as France tendto place most of their enforcement emphasis on interior controls.Each country is debating how to engage in interior controls thatare effective while respecting human rights. What may seem overlyintrusive in one country is considered normal in another, suchas France's random ID checks on the streets, versus the oppositionto a national work permit in the US. These differences in whatare acceptable controls help to explain why international coordinationin immigration control efforts may be so difficult to achieve. It was also emphasized that the willingness to embrace immigrationcontrols depends on how much of a problem such immigration isperceived to be. Many of those who recoil at e.g., national workpermits believe that illegal immigration is not a serious problem,and are thus not willing to support what they see as an "extreme"solution. Prop 187 The seminar concluded with a discussion of Prop 187, the Californiaballot initiative that was approved by a 59 to 41 percent voteon November 8, 1994. Prop 187 can be modified only with a 2/3vote of the California Legislature or by another initiative. Prop. 187 has five major sections. First, it bars illegal aliensfrom the state's public education systems from kindergarten touniversity, and requires public schools to begin verifying thelegal status of both students (on January 1, 1995) and their parents(on January 1, 1996). Second, all providers of publicly-paid,non-emergency health care services must verify the legal statusof persons seeking services in order to be reimbursed. Third, Prop. 187 requires that all persons seeking cash assistanceand other benefits verify their legal status before receivingbenefits. Fourth, all service providers are required to reportsuspected illegal aliens to California's Attorney General andto the INS, and police must determine the legal status of personsarrested. Fifth, the making and use of false documents is nowa state felony. Some of these provisions restate current law, such as barringillegal aliens from cash assistance programs, but add a California-administeredverification procedure. Other provisions conflict with currentlaw, such as those barring illegal alien children from schools,and these conflicts will have to be resolved in the courts beforethey are implemented. The discussion generally decried the denial of education and healthcare services to persons needing them. There was little disagreementon the goal of doing more to reduce illegal immigration, and itwas suggested that better border and interior enforcement, aswell as persuading Mexico to cooperate in preventing illegal exits,would be preferable to the Prop 187 approach. However, it wasnoted that, at least in the case of public education, the majorargument against denying access is that the children will stay,which implicitly says that the US cannot control illegal immigration. The seminar ended on a consensus note that immigration issuesare likely to become more rather than less important, and thatissues such as Prop 187 will push the issue ever higher on nationaland international agendas. Home WT02-B12-222IA088-000636-B045-67http://migration.ucdavis.edu:80/mda/nur.htm 128.120.36.171 19970122192031 text/html 31899HTTP/1.0 200 OKMIME-Version: 1.0Server: WebSTAR/1.3.1 ID/6378Message-ID: Date: Wednesday, 22-Jan-97 19:21:19 GMTLast-Modified: Tuesday, 21-Jan-97 21:07:08 GMTContent-type: text/htmlContent-length: 31642 Immigration and Integration Issues: Focus on Europe Migration Dialogue Philip Martin and Michael Teitelbaum Co-Directors 1004 Eagle Place Davis, California 95616 (916) 752-1530 (Tel) (916) 758-4928 (Fax) (916) 752-5614(Fax) Immigration and Integration Issues inthe 1990s: Focus on Europe Sponsored by: Migration Dialogue, with the support of the German Marshall Fundof the United States October 23-26, 1993 Mercure Whrdersee Hotel, Drrenhofstr 8, D-90402 Nrnberg,Germany (Tel 911-99490; Fax 911-994-9444) Local arrangements: Elmar Hnekopp, Tel 911-179-3091, Fax 911-179-3258 Saturday, October 23, 1993. Arrival Day. 5:30 PM Bus Tour of Nrnberg 7:00PM Drinks and dinnerat Heilige Spital in the Old Town Welcome: Frank Loy, President, German Marshall Fundof the United States Sunday October 24, 1993 9 -10 AM Immigration Patternsand Policies Moderator: Michael Teitelbaum, Sloan Foundation andVice Chair, U.S. Commission on Immigration Reform Speakers: Philip Martin, Professor, University ofCalifornia, Davis, and Thomas Straubhaar, Professor, MilitaryUniversity, Hamburg 10-10:45 AM DiscussionQuestions  Immigration involves three fundamental questions:how many, from where (or who should have priority to enter), andin what status should immigrants enter. How are industrial countriesanswering these questions? Whose interests tend to be most important?What time dimensions enter into immigration debates?  What are current immigration flows into industrialcountries and how do countries rank in their openness to immigrants?Is there an upper limit on the immigrant share of the population(Switzerland, 17 percent; Germany, 9 percent; or the US., 8 percent)or are such numbers misleading because each country has a differentunderstanding of who an immigrant is, and how immigrants are integratedinto a new society?  What influences the absorptive capacity ofa nation? Gross numbers? History? Demography and Economics? Geography?Regional concentration/dispersal of immigrants? Views about culturalhomogeneity vs. multiculturalism? Is the absorptive capacity affectedby the speed at which the ethnic/racial/religious compositionof the population changes? Should the annual inflow of immigrantsbe set by an annual ceiling or "quota." Should it varywith domestic socioeconomic conditions such as the unemploymentrate, or with international events, such as the number of refugeesand asylees?  How large is the contribution of immigrationto population and labor force growth e.g., in a country with adeclining native population, such as Germany, where immigrationprevents the population from shrinking? 10:45-11:00 AM CoffeeBreak 11:00-12:30 AM Small GroupDiscussions Each group will have a discussion leader and rappatour. 12:30 PM Lunch 2 PM Refugees and Asylees Moderator: Wolfgang Weickhardt, Vice President, FederalOffice for the Recognition of Refugees Speakers: David Martin, Professor, University ofVirginia and Jonas Widgren, Director, International Center forPolicy Development Commentary: Roland Schilling, Head of UNHCR Office,Zirndorf 3-3:45 PM Discussion Questions  The Geneva Convention provides for an individualright to seek asylum. How should this fundamental human rightbe balanced against the state's right to control the entry ofnon-nationals?  What is the proper balance of rights vs. regulationin cases where, e.g., asylum applicants arrive with fraudulentdocuments or no documents? What issues arise when visa requirementsand airline deny passage to asylum applicants?  Worldwide, there are 18 million refugees.However, 1 to 2 million asylum applicants already in the industrialcountry in which they want to stay: what is the proper balanceof effort and expenditure on these groups. Have industrial countriescreated incentives for refugees to become asylum applicants, e.g.,should a refugee who is protected in a second country be prohibitedfrom applying for asylum in a third? 3:45 PM Coffee Break 4-6 PM Small Group Discussions 7 PM Dinner Monday October 25, 1993: 8:30 AM Visit Zirndorf,the central German hostel for asylum applicants. Attend asylumapplicant hearings and have lunch with applicants. 1:30 PM Return to Hotel 1:30-4 :30 PM Free Afternoon 4 :30 PM Immigration andIntegration Issues in Germany Moderator: Frank Loy, President, German MarshallFund of the United States Speaker: Cornelia Schmalz-Jacobsen, German Commissionerfor Foreigners 6: 30 PM Dinner /PanelDiscussion 7:30-9:30 PM IntegrationIssues in Europe Moderator: Elizabeth Midgley, President, WorkingEnglish Speakers: Cornelia Schmalz Jacobsen, Alessandra Venturini,Patrick Weil, Friedrich Heckmann and Ursula Mehrlnder  What does integration mean in the variousindustrial countries? Do policies that actively try to fosterintegration for particular groups work better than an overallintegration policy?  Do policies aimed at cultural maintenanceresult in more migrants returning home or do they merely handicapthe immigrants who remain?  How important is citizenship? Should birthin the host country lead to automatic citizenship, or should therebe an application process? How rigorous should be the requirementsfor naturalization? Tuesday October 26 9 am Reducing ImmigrationPressures Moderator: Philip Martin Speakers: Michael Teitelbaum, Sloan Foundation, andVice Chair, U.S. Commission on Immigration Reform and Elmar Hnekopp,Economist, German Institute for Labor Market Research 9:45-10:45 AM GeneralDiscussion  What is the importance of the pull of relativelyhigh-wage job and benefit options in industrial countries, unemploymentand low-wage pressures that push people from south to north, andnetworks that link immigration and emigration areas? How do thesefactors change in their importance over time and from countryto country? How can industrial countries confronted with unwantedimmigration reduce it over that period?  If EC- or North American Free Trade Agreement-styleeconomic integration is the best long-run policy to reduce labormigration, but such policies increase emigration in the shortterm, how should policymakers and opinion leaders shape the debateon such trade policies?  What role does ideology play in immigrationpolitics, such as the free-market-oriented Wall Street Journalasserting that free markets require open borders? To what extentdoes free trade "require" free migration?  Since immigration into industrial nationstends to add people at the extremes of these countries' socioeconomicladders, current immigration flows increase inequality. Shouldimmigration policies be designed to avoid such inequality-increasingeffects?  Should immigration policies be modified torespond to socioeconomic needs, such as admitting nurses to dealwith labor shortages or young immigrants to finance public pensions,or do such attempts to use immigration policy to offset demographictrends fail in any event and wind up postponing necessary structuralreforms? 10:45 -11:15 Coffee Breakand check-out 11:15-12:30 PM Small GroupDiscussions 12:30 Lunch 2:00 PM Reports from smallgroup meetings 4 PM Adjourn 7 PM Dinner for thosestaying Tuesday night Wednesday October 27 Finaldepartures. Europeans will depart on Tuesday evening. Americanson Wednesday morning. Immigration and Integration Issues: Focus on Europe by Philip L. Martin* February 9, 1994 Summary 1 Migration Patterns and Policies 1 The Goal-Outcome Gap 3 International Labor Migration 5 A World on the Move 5 Why International Migration? 6 Demand Pull 7 Supply Push 8 Networks 9 The Migration Challenge 11 Industrial Country Responses 12 Summary The purpose of the seminar was to discuss the fundamental issuesbehind current European immigration and integration issues among40 opinion leaders in an off-the-record setting. The seminar washeld in Nrnberg, so that participants could observe Germanofficials deciding asylum cases in nearby Zirndorf. Five topics were addressed, ranging from worldwide immigrationpatterns to the issue of whether Germany should introduce dualnationality. This report summarizes the discussion of each issue. Migration Patterns and Policies The world appears to be on the move. There are an estimated 100million immigrants, refugees and asylees, and authorized and unauthorizedworkers living and often working outside their country of citizenship.If this "nation of migrants" were assembled in one place,it would be equivalent in size to the 10th largest nation in theworld. Second, this "nation of migrants" has a significantimpact on both emigration and immigration areas. Emigration nationsreceive at least $75 billion annually in remittances, making labor,by some estimates, second only to oil as the world's most importanttraded good. Most of the world's migrants move from one developingcountry to another--the industrial democracies of Western Europe,North America, and Asia have only about 40 percent of the world'smigrants--but immigration is nonetheless a top domestic priorityin Brussels, Washington, and Tokyo because a significant shareof the migrants they host are "unwanted," and entrypressures seem to be rising rather than falling. Third, industrial democracies that coordinate policies in areasfrom defense to economics to the environment are only at the beginningstages of coordinating their immigration and integration policies.The coordination process is furthest along in Western Europe,where the European Union has taken the first steps to coordinatepolicies on asylum seekers and visa entry requirements. However,when viewed in the familiar tri-polar sense of Europe, America,and Asia, the surprise is that immigration and integration arestill perceived quite differently in each area, making it hardto find a common basis for coordination. There are two competing visions of immigration that make it hardfor an interested citizen to know whether she should welcome orfear the prospect of more immigrants. Two anecdotes from the UnitedStates illustrate the hopes and fears about immigrants on bothsides of the Atlantic. The optimistic extreme flows from pastfears that proved to be groundless. In the 1750s, Benjamin Franklinworried that Germans would not learn English, and thus becomeunassimable, yet two centuries later, Dwight Eisenhower, a descendentof these German immigrants, was a U.S. President. The pessimistic extreme is embodied in the probably apochraphylstory of a dying Indian chief in the American midwest at the endof the 19th century. The young braves gathered around his deathbedasked: what was your generation's biggest mistake. His reply:we failed to control the immigration of the white man. Both of these cases emphasize that the truly important consequencesof immigration may not be apparent for decades. It is also importantto remember that emigration and immigration played very differentroles in nation-building on the two sides of the Atlantic. Eventhough France and Germany were destinations for immigrants atthe turn-of-the-century, the process of nation-building in Europewas shaped more by emigration than immigration including, in somecountries "laws of return" and policies that transmitcitizenship through parents, even if parents and child are farfrom Western Europe. In the United States, by contrast, a nationof immigrants was quick to embrace the notion that the act ofstarting over in a new land was an important tie binding togetherdiverse immigrants, so that the path to naturalization was easyfor all, and especially easy for those born in the country, whobecame U.S. citizens by their birth. Migration has played different roles in nation-building in theold and new worlds, but the common challenge of dealing with highand rising immigration pressures, as well as integrating the newcomerswho have arrived, may lead to a convergence in migration policies.For example, most recent immigration policy reforms have had aGrand Bargain quality  a restrictionist policy such asstopping guestworker recruitment in Western Europe in 1973-74was accompanied by an admissionist policy that permitted the familiesof settled guestworkers to join settled guestworkers. Similarly,the United States in the mid-1980s coupled the introduction ofsanctions on employers to deter illegal entries with an amnestyfor some of the illegal aliens who had settled or worked in thecountry. The Goal-Outcome Gap This Grand Bargain approach to dealing with migration problemsreflects the competing optimistic and pessimistic visions of howimmigrants will ultimately be viewed by the receiving country.But Grand Bargain approaches to immigration reform guarantee frustration,a sense that governments are unable to articulate and implementconsistent migration policies. There are several reasons why Grand Bargains fail, including thefact that people eager to migrate to another country are flexibleand quick to learn, so that packages of toughness and generositytend, over time, to error on the side of generosity. For example,no amnesty program is complete  there are always personswho just miss the work or residency cutoff dates and, if theyplead their cases, are legalized or at least tolerated. Enforcementefforts, on the other hand, typically lag behind the ingenuityof workers and employers who want to begin a mutually beneficialwork relationship. These factors combine to help migration channels to widen overtime. In this sense, migration is unlike trade between countries.Trade channels tend to narrow over time unless international organizationsand treaties stiffen the resolve of national governments to resistspecial interests who would like to block imports of particularcommodities. There are no international organizations or treatiesaimed at narrowing migration channels directly  indeed,humanitarian organizations such as UNHCR and economic organizationssuch as the OECD and ILO have promoted international refugee andlabor migration. A relaxed international environment and the ingenuityof eager migrants makes the pressures different in trade and migrationmatters. International Labor Migration A World on the Move There appears to be a great deal of confusion on basic migrationfacts. Three seem important: - most people don't move; most people never cross national bordersto live or work in another country - most migrant workers move from one developing country to another - countries that have successfully made the transition from exportingto importing labor range from Korea to Spain. Given economic differences between nations, the surprise may behow little international migration occurs. The world's population in 1994 is about 5.6 billion, and almost3.5 billion people are in the 15 to 64 age group from which theworld's 2.5 million workers are drawn. The world's populationand its potential work force are increasing by 80 to 85 millionpersons annually. Neither people nor income are distributed equally around the globe.The World Bank divides the countries on which it collects datainto 22 "high-income" and about 100 middle and low incomecountries. High-income countries--the United States and Canada,Western European nations such as from Sweden to Spain, and Asiancountries such as Japan, Singapore, and Australia--include 15percent of the world's population, but they accounted for overthree-fourths of the world's $22 trillion GDP in 1991. The averageincome in these rich countries was over $21,000 annually, versusa worldwide average $4000. These data suggest that an average person from one of the poorer100 countries could increase his or her income 5 to 6 times bymoving into one of the 22 richest countries. Young people areresponding to the opportunity to "go abroad" for opportunity,but most of them travel only a short distance to another developingcountry. About 60 percent of the world's "nation of migrants"is in developing countries, and there is a great deal of not-well-studiedlabor migration between developing countries. However, the 40 or so million immigrants, refugees and asylees,and authorized and unauthorized migrant workers in the industrialdemocracies are an important socio-economic and political issue.Many are unwanted, in the sense that their settlement was notanticipated--as with guestworkers who settled in Western Europeor applicants for asylum whose claims that they would face persecutionat home are rejected, but who nonetheless are allowed to stay.The United States recognized as legal about 9 million immigrantswho arrived since 1982, but one-third of them initially arriveillegally, and then had their status legalized. Polls in NorthAmerica and Europe indicate that a majority of the public wantssuch unwanted immigration curbed. Why International Migration? One hundred years of migration research has identified three majorfactors that influence economically-motivated international migration.They are: - demand-pull factors that draw migrants into another country, - supply-push factors that encourage migrants to leave their owncountries, and - networks of friends and relatives already settled in destinationcountries who serve as sources of information and anchor communitiesfor newcomers. The relative importance of each factor changes over time in particularmigration streams. Demand Pull Most labor migrations began in the industrial countries, as employersthere, with or without explicit government approval, recruitedmigrant workers. During the early years of such labor migrations,demand-pull factors so dominate that, in Germany during the 1960s,the annual influx of workers could be explained almost entirelyby fluctuations in the German unemployment rate, giving guestworkercountries a false assurance that they really can regulate withprecision migrant worker flows. However, in what has become a familiar story, demand-pull, supply-push,and network factors evolved to prove the aphorism that there isnothing more permanent than temporary workers. In all of the industrialdemocracies, migration has seemingly taken on a life of its own,with migrants continuing to arrive in Western Europe, the UnitedStates, and Japan despite historically high unemployment rates.Migrant workers are often prized for their flexibility: they arewilling to accept jobs that offer low wages, unpleasant or seasonalwork, or unusual hours. As a result, migrant workers are foundin the same industries and occupations in all industrial democracies:construction, agriculture, and service jobs that offer low wages,such as restaurants and hotels, or night and weekend work, suchas nursing. Relatively few migrant workers are employed in industries in whichtrade in place of migration is a near term option. Labor-intensivemanufacturing industries such as garments and shoemaking are oftendependent on migrant workers and protected from developing nationimports, but freeing up trade in goods would directly affect lessthan one-fourth of the migrant workers in industrial countries.Thus, while free trade is desirable as a means to accelerate economicgrowth, it will not immediately curb the desire to employ migrantconstruction workers, janitors, and nurses. Supply Push The demand-pull of jobs in industrial democracies is matched neatlyby the supply push of low wages and joblessness in the developingcountries from which most migrant workers come. About 5 in 6 ofthe world's workers are in the world's poorer nations, and everyyear another 80 million workers join the 2 billion strong workforcethere. This leads to an enormous job creation challenge. Developingnations from Mexico to Turkey to the Philippines must create from500,000 to 1 million new jobs annually for the youth who everyyear enter the workforce. In addition, they need to find jobsfor the 20 to 40 percent of the workforce that is currently unemployedor underemployed. On top of these job creation challenges, developingnations must find jobs for ex-farmers and workers who are notseeking work because there aren't enough jobs. Two examples help to illustrate the dimensions of the job creationchallenge. Almost half of the workforce in developing nationsare farmers, but 1 billion farmers are not needed to produce theworld's food and fiber--in the industrial democracies, less than5 percent of the workforce produces such an abundance that richcountries feel compelled to subsidize prices and incomes for theirfarmers. Developing countries, on the other hand, often tax theirfarmers by requiring them to sell their cotton or coffee at belowworld prices to a government agency, which in turn exports thecommodity at the world price and pockets the difference. Farmingthus generates only one-fourth to one-third of the average incomein countries such as Mexico and Turkey, and ex-farmers crowd boomingcities from Mexico City to Manila. Once rural residents migrateto these capital cities, it is much easier for them to migrateaboard, either by boarding an airplane and, a day or two later,arrive in Frankfort or Los Angeles, or making contact with a middlemanwho promises to smuggle them abroad. A second example of the job creation challenge facing the worldis the fact that many workers in developing nations do not seekwork because they know jobs are scarce. In the industrial democracies,half of the population is typically in the workforce, so thatthe United States, with a population of 260 million, has a workforceof about 130 million. In developing nations, one-third of thepopulation is typically in the workforce, so that Mexico, with90 million people, has a workforce of about 30 million. Many ofthe Mexicans who are not in the workforce are urban women whowould seek jobs they were available. Network The demand pull of jobs is linked to the supply push of low wagesand joblessness by migration networks. Migration networks encompasseverything that enables people to learn about opportunities abroadand take advantage of them. These networks or linkages have beenshaped and strengthened by three of the major revolutions of thepast generation: the communications revolution, the transportationrevolution, and the rights revolution. The communications revolution refers to the fact that potentialmigrants know far more about opportunities abroad than did turnof the century migrants from southern and eastern Europe who setout for North and South America and Australia. As in the past,the major source of information is countrymen already settledabroad who can tell the migrants about opportunities in Parisor Los Angeles, and in many cases provide advice and funds tomigrate, legally or illegally. The industrial democracies perhapsunwittingly add to their allure by portraying, in TV shows suchas Dallas and Dynasty that are exported even to the remote cornersof the globe, a life of opulence. Some migrants have their expectations raised by these portrayalsof life in the industrial democracies, and many hope to achievea better life for themselves by migrating to the just slightlyricher areas. Others are motivated to go abroad by contractors,labor brokers, and other often shadowy middlemen who promise,for a fee often equivalent to 1/4 to 1/2 of a migrant's firstyear's earnings abroad, access to the promised land. The transportation revolution is simply the fact that thecost of traveling has dropped enormously, while convenience hasincreased geometrically. Even the most remote peasant is lessthan one week away from the bright lights of New York--once hegets to the capital city of his country, the international networkof flights can take him anywhere within a day or two for lessthan the average monthly earnings of even an unskilled and seasonalworker in an industrial country, $1000 to $2000. The third revolution that encourages migration is the rightsrevolution, or the spread of individual rights and entitlementswithin many nations. All of the industrial democracies have strengthenedpersonal rights vis-a-vis government agencies, and most have signedinternational treaties that, for example, commit them to providerefuge to those fleeing persecution. One effect of this rightsrevolution is that, once an migrant arrives in an industrial country,he or she can avoid deportation for 2, 3, or even 4 years. While a migrant's case winds its way through the legal system,industrial countries face a Hobson's choice. If they prohibitthe migrant from working because his legal right to do so is indoubt, then the government must support the migrant. If the migrantis permitted to work, then the humanitarian right not to be returnedto persecution becomes a backdoor guestworker program. The Migration Challenge Demand pull, supply push, and network factors are evolving inways that encourage more migration. In light of these easily understandableforces, the world should be on the move, and it may seem to somethat it is: the migrant nation is 100 million strong, and it hasin recent years been increasing by between 2 and 4 million annuallyin the industrial democracies. But the surprise to many observers is how few, not how many, migrantsmove into the industrial democracies. Most people do not move:most people will live and die within a few miles of their birthplace.International migration remains an extraordinary event despitethe evolution of demand, supply, and network factors that encouragemigration. Furthermore, most of those who migrate internationallymove only a short distance, so that 60 percent of the world'smigrants move from one developing nation to another. One unlikelycountry, Iran, includes almost one-fourth of the world's 19 millionrefugees. The 40 million migrants in the industrial democracies aresignificant. But it should be emphasized that most people do notmigrate despite ever more incentives to do so. The industrialdemocracies are not being overrun by a tidal wave of immigrants.The migration challenge remains manageable, and responsible policymakersmay not be well-served by doomsday scenarios such as those paintedin the film March from Africa, in which desperate Africansset out for Europe accompanied by news crews while political leadersthere debate what to do to stop them. The logical quick fix forsuch mass migrations is tight border controls and relief outsidethe industrial democracies to avoid rights and settlement, butthere are steps that can be taken to avoid such crises. Industrial Country Responses How are the industrial democracies responding to the migrationchallenge? Despite long-run forces promoting convergence, thereare considerable differences between the policy responses in WesternEurope, North America, and Asia. Home WT02-B12-223IA088-000636-B045-102http://migration.ucdavis.edu:80/mda/speaker.html 128.120.36.171 19970122192056 text/html 15855HTTP/1.0 200 OKMIME-Version: 1.0Server: WebSTAR/1.3.1 ID/6378Message-ID: Date: Wednesday, 22-Jan-97 19:21:54 GMTLast-Modified: Thursday, 21-Nov-96 20:30:18 GMTContent-type: text/htmlContent-length: 15597 Migration Dialogue Migration Dialogue Speakers Bureau Migration Dialogue in a non-profit educational organization thatbegan in 1992 with a grant from the German Marshall Fund of theUnited States to organize, on an experimental basis, off-the-record,non-partisan seminars for young opinion leaders from North Americaand Europe. As part of our commitment to provide non-partisan and balancedmaterials on immigration and integration issues, we have establisheda list of speakers who are willing to make presentations to WorldAffairs Councils, Committees on Foreign Relations and similarorganizations. If you would like to have one of the persons below speak to yourgroup, please contact that person directly and negotiate honorariumand travel arrangements directly with him/her. If you have any questions, please contact: Migration Dialogue 1004 Eagle Place Davis, CA 95616 tel 916 759-9754 fax 916 758-4928 Email: migrant@primal.ucdavis.edu Speakers Thomas Espenshade Office of Population Research Princeton University 21 Prospect Avenue Princeton, NJ 08544-2091 Phone: (609) 258-5233 Fax: (609) 258-1039 Email: tje@opr.princeton.edu Thomas Espenshade is Professor of Sociology and Faculty Associateof the Office of Population Research, Princeton University. He receivedhis PhD in Economics from Princeton in 1972 and taught and/or conducted researchat the University of California (Berkeley), Bowdoin College, FloridaState University, The Urban Institute, and Brown University before returningto Princeton in 1988. From 1984-87, Espenshade directed the UrbanInstitute's Program in Demographic Studies, and he was the Associate Directorof the Population Studies and Training Center at Brown University during1987-88. Espenshade's research focuses on contemporary immigration to theUnited States. He has testified before Congress and spoken before numerouslay audiences, including the Council on Foreign Relations, the Councilof New Jersey Grantmakers, and the Council of Southwest Foundations.His research has examined the effectiveness of the 1986 Immigration Reformand Control Act in controlling illegal immigration to the United States, thefiscal impacts of U.S. immigrants including measures of taxes paid andpublic benefits received, and public attitudes toward immigrants. Hisresearch has been funded by the National Institutes of Health and by severalprivate foundations (including the Andrew W. Mellon and the Alfred P.Sloan Foundations). Recent Presentations Fiscal Impacts of Immigrants and the Shrinking Welfare State,Social Science Research Council, January 1996. Undocumented Migration: Considerations for Policy, U.S. Congress, Washington, D.C., March 1996. U.S. Public Perceptions and Reactions to Mexican Migration, Centerfor Strategic and International Studies, Washington, D.C., June 1996. Philip Martin Professor, Agricultural & Resource Economics Chair, UC Comparative Immigration & Integration Program University of California-Davis Davis, CA 95616 Office: (916) 752-1530 Fax: (916) 752-5614 Email: martin@primal.ucdavis.edu Home Page: http://www.agecon.ucdavis.edu/Faculty/Phil.M/Martin.html Philip Martin studied Labor Economics and Agricultural Economicsat the University of Wisconsin-Madison, where he earned a PhD in 1975. Martin has published extensively on farm labor, labor migration,economic development, and immigration issues. He has testified before Congressand state and local agencies numerous times on these issues, and wasthe only academic appointed to the 12-member Commission on AgriculturalWorkers to assess the effects of the Immigration Reform and Control Act of1986 on US farmers and workers. Since 1987, Martin has chaired the WRCC-76,a group of 35 researchers from land-grant universities that meets annuallyto discuss research on the effects of immigration reform on US agriculture. Martin has been asked to develop practical solutions to complexand controversial migration and labor issues in many countries. Between1988 and 1990, he assessed competing predictions of how many Turks mightemigrate if Turkey were admitted to the European Union. In 1994, he evaluatedthe effects of immigration on Malaysia's economy and its labor markets.In 1995, he assessed the effects of the peso devaluation on Mexican migrationto the United States. Martin was awarded UCD's Distinguished Public Service award in1994. Recent Presentations What's Happening with Immigration to California? California Research Library, Sacramento, June 1996 Managing Migration: Challenge for the 21st Century, San FranciscoCommittee on Foreign Relations, March 1996 Immigration and Economic Development in California, LeadershipCalifornia, San Diego, November 1995 Mark J. Miller Dept of Political Science and International Relations University of Delaware Assistant Editor, International Migration Review Newark, DE 19716 Phone: 302-831-1926 Fax: (302) 831-2828 Email: mjmiller@brahms.udel.edu Mark J. Miller is the long-serving assistant editor of the International Migration Review and a past U.S. correspondent to the OECD's groupof migration experts. A graduate of the University of Wisconsin,Miller has testified extensively to Congress on temporary foreign labor policyand enforcement of employer sanctions in Western Europe. Miller recently authored two research papers published by the Commission on Immigration Reform and is currently revising The Age of Migration, co-authoredwith Stephen Castles, for a second edition. His current lecture topicsinclude The Future of International Migration to Europe, Islamic migrants,terrorism and democracy and US immigration policy after Proposition 187:Can and should we close the door? J. Edward Taylor Professor, Agricultural & Resource Economics Member, US-Mexico Bi-National Study on Migration University of California-Davis Davis, CA 95616 Office: (916) 752-0213 Fax: 916-752-5614 Email: taylor@primal.ucdavis.edu Home Page: http:// www.agecon.ucdavis.edu /Faculty/Ed.T/Taylor.html Recent Presentations The Immigrant Subsidy in Agriculture: Farm Employment, Poverty,and Welfare in Rural Towns, Conference on Immigration and the ChangingFace of Rural California, Riverside, CA. April 1996 Guest Worker Programs. Testimony to House Subcommittee on Immigration and Claims. December 1995. Mexican Agricultural Policy Reforms, the Peso Devaluation, and Migration. Stanford University, June 1995. Michael S. Teitelbaum Program Officer, Sloan Foundation Vice Chair, Commission on Immigration Reform 630 Fifth Ave. #2550 New York, NY 10111 Office: (212) 649-1649 Fax: (212) 757-5117 Email: teitelbaum@sloan.org Teitelbaum earned his doctorate in Demography in 1970 from Oxford University, where he was a Rhodes Scholar. He has served on thefaculty at Princeton and Oxford Universities; on the professional staffsof the Alfred P. Sloan Foundation, the Ford Foundation, and the Carnegie Endowmentfor International Peace. He has also been a consultant to the WorldBank and the Population Council. Teitelbaum has written extensively on: * Fertility: both high fertility patterns in developing nations,and low fertility in industrial nations. * International Migration: forces underlying international migration patterns, the ethical dilemmas posed by international and US policies regarding refugees and asylum seekers, and the formulation ofUS immigration policies. * Economic Development: with special reference to the role offertility and migration. From 1987 to 1990, Teitelbaum was one of 12 commissioners appointedto the US Commission for the Study of International Migration and Cooperative Economic Development (Ascencio Commission). Since 1991, Teitelbaumhas served as one of eight commissioners appointed to the US Commissionon Immigration Reform (Jordan Commission), which has undertaken anextensive analysis of current US immigration issues, and made significantand largely unanimous recommendations for change. In 1993, he was elected by his fellow commissioners to serve asvice-chair of the Jordan Commission. Recent Presentations Formulating a Just Immigration Policy for the U.S, Bar of theCity of New York, February, 1996 The Future of U.S. Immigration and Refugee Policy, New Schoolfor Social Research, March, 1996 Sidney Weintraub CSIS-Center for Strategic and International Studies 1800 K Street, N.W. Washington DC 20006 Phone: 202-775-3292 Fax: 202-466-4739 Email: sidney_weintraub@umail.umd.edu NAFTA and the U.S. Election: A Trinational Assessment of the Progress, Prospects and Risks Center for Strategic and International Studies September 19, 1996 Integration and Migration El Colegio de Mexico June 3, 1996 Current and Future Immigration Pressures to the U.S. Population Resource Center March 1, 1996 Aristide Zolberg University in Exile Professor, Department of Political Science,and New School for Social Research Director, International Center for Migration, Ethnicity, and Citizenship 65 Fifth Ave., Room 232 New York, NY 10003 Voice: 212 229-5475 Fax: 212 989 0504 Email: arizol@newschool.edu Home Page Address-URL: HTTP//www.Newschool.edu/ICMEC Aristide R. Zolberg is University-in-Exile Professor at the GraduateFaculty of the New School for Social Research in New York City. He isalso Director of the International Center for Migration, Ethnicity, and Citizenship;and Co-chair of the MacArthur Program on Global Change and Liberalism.He has served twice as Chair of the Department of Political Science andis a member of the Committee on Historical Studies as well as Chair of theNew School component of the New York City Consortium on West European Studies.He is a member of the editorial board of International Migration Review;of the advisory boards of Actes de la Recherche en Sciences Sociales(Paris), Politique (Quebec), and Journal of Refugee Studies (Oxford); andserves on the advisory boards of the Center for Refugee Studies, York University (Canada) and the Institute of French Studies, New York University.He is also a member of the Council on Foreign Relations and of the Groupof Lisbon, and serves on the Advisory Board of Human Rights Watch/ Africa, as well as the Scientific Advisory Board of the Fondation Mdecinssans Frontires. Zolberg has written extensively in the fields of comparative politicsand historical sociology, on ethnic conflict and immigration and refugeeissues, in both English and French. Within his initial specializationin African studies, he is best known for Creating Political Order: The Party-Statesof West Africa (1966; reprinted 1985), and One-Party Government inthe Ivory Coast (1964; rev. ed. 1969); and The Specter of Anarchism (Dissent,Summer 1992). He has also written extensively on language conflict inBelgium. Recent major works include Working-Class Formation: NineteenthCentury Patterns in Western Europe and the United States (Princeton, 1986; co-authored and co-edited with Ira Katznelson); Escape from Violence: Conflict and the Refugee Crisis in the Developing World (Oxford,1989; co-authored with Astri Suhrke and Sergio Aguayo; translated intoDutch; revised edition in French, pending); "The Future of International Migrations," Working Papers, Commission for the Study ofInternational Migration and Cooperative Economic Development, No. 19 (February1990); and "Bounded States in a Global Market: The Uses of InternationalLabor Migrations," in Pierre Bourdieu and James S. Coleman (eds.),Social Theory for a Changing Society (Boulder: Westview / Russell Sage, 1991). Zolberg has received grants from the Social Science Research Council,as well as the Ford, Rockefeller, and MacArthur Foundations. Bornin Belgium, he came to the United States in 1948, where he attended ColumbiaUniversity (B.A.), Boston University (M.A.), and the University of Chicago(Ph.D.). He has taught at the University of Wisconsin, Madison, and was formany years at the University of Chicago, where he served as Chair of theDepartment of Political Science. He has also been a visiting member of the Institutefor Advanced Study and held visiting appointments at the Woodrow WilsonSchool of International Affairs, Princeton University; the Departmentof Political Science of the University of Paris I, the Institut d'tudesPolitiques, the cole des Hautes Etudes en Sciences Sociales, and the Collgede France, also in Paris; the Post-Graduate Institute of Sociology, Amsterdam;and the Institut fur Hohere Studien, Vienna. He has been awarded the Palmes Academiques by the French Republic. Continuing to work on international migration and refugee issues,Zolberg is currently completing a book on the role of immigration policyin American political development, tentatively titled The Main Gate and theBack Door, and a work on the contemporary world-wide migration crisis tentatively titled, Aliens Myths: Defusing the Immigration Crisis. Other pending research and publications concern the politics of multi-ethnicand multi-lingual societies, the emergence of anti-immigrant parties(U.S. Institute for Peace grant, with Martin Schain); and the challengesthat contemporary globalization poses for democratic governance. HomeWT02-B12-224IA088-000636-B045-115http://migration.ucdavis.edu:80/mda/mdaabt.htm 128.120.36.171 19970122192110 text/html 3737HTTP/1.0 200 OKMIME-Version: 1.0Server: WebSTAR/1.3.1 ID/6378Message-ID: Date: Wednesday, 22-Jan-97 19:22:03 GMTLast-Modified: Tuesday, 26-Nov-96 23:02:35 GMTContent-type: text/htmlContent-length: 3481 About Migration Dialogue About Migration Dialogue Migration is a global challenge for the 21st century. In a world of 185-odd nation states, each of which regulates who can cross its borders, there are about 125 million people living outside their country of citizenship. This "nation of migrants" is equivalent in size to the world's eighth largest nation, Japan, and is growing by two to four million annually, faster than world population growth. Most of the world's 5.8 billion people never cross a national border and, when they do, most move only a short distance, from one developing nation to another. But over half of the world's migrants are in the world's 15 richest nations, making foreigners or foreign-born residents five to 10 percent of the populations of the United States, Germany, and France. Immigration accounts for almost half of US population growth, and prevents population decline in Germany. The industrial democracies are divided about how to deal with immigration. Many residents of the industrial democracies want immigration reduced. Efforts to reduce immigration take many forms, from arson attacks on foreigners' homes in Germany, to political parties committed to stopping immigration in France, to enormous increases in expenditures on border controls in the US. At the other extreme, some call for open borders, because, they allege, industrial countries cannot democratically control immigration, or because rich countries should open themselves to economic migratns and refugees. Migration Dialogue promotes an informed discussion of the issues associated with international migration in industrial democracies by providing unbiased and timely information on immigration and integration issues to opinion leaders in government, media, and academic circles. Its goal is to bolster the middle of a debate that lends itself to calls for extreme actions: it is our belief that durable solutions to migration issues are to be found in this broad middle. Migration Dialogue accomplishes its goals with five reinforcing activities: Migration Briefs. These are 50 to 75 page balanced treatments that explore the tradeoffs inherent in making migration decisions. The briefs are aimed at opinion leaders interested in international affairs, and each helps readers to think through issues such as the linkages between population growth and immigration, refugees and foreign policy, and migration and the environment. Migration Speakers. This is a list of nonpartisan and balanced materials and migration speakers. MD Seminars. Migration Dialogue sponsors an annual intensive three-day seminar for American and European opinion leaders to consider, in an off-the-record setting, immigration issues in a comparative perspective. These seminars permit elected officials, journalists and other leaders of opinion to learn about immigration issues in other industrial democracies. Each seminar includes several field trips that enable participants to discuss these issues with immigrants as well as employers, service providers, and local officials. Return to About Migration Dialogue WT02-B12-225IA088-000636-B045-150http://migration.ucdavis.edu:80/cc/10_96.htm 128.120.36.171 19970122192125 text/html 20039HTTP/1.0 200 OKMIME-Version: 1.0Server: WebSTAR/1.3.1 ID/6378Message-ID: Date: Wednesday, 22-Jan-97 19:22:21 GMTLast-Modified: Thursday, 24-Oct-96 23:05:14 GMTContent-type: text/htmlContent-length: 19781 Comparative Immigration and Integration Program Comparative Immigration and Integration Program Fall Workshop Friday, October 4, 1996 8AM-4PM IGA Reading Room Shields Library, Third Floor Immigration and Welfare Reform 1 Illegal Immigration 2 Removing Aliens 2 Legal Immigration 3 What's Next? 3 California Implications 4 Los Angeles and San Diego 5 Los Angeles and Amsterdam 6 Mexicos Labor Market 6 Bi-National US-Mexican Migration Study 6 Some 45 UC faculty and graduate students interested in comparativemigration issues held a workshop October 4, 1996 at UCD. Immigration and WelfareReform Susan Martin, Executive Director of the Commission on ImmigrationReform, discussed the origins, provisions, and likely consequencesof three major three major laws that had their origins in the1994 and 1995 recommendations of the Commission on ImmigrationReform: the Anti-Terrorism and Effective Death Penalty Act, signedinto law on April 24, 1996, the Personal Responsibility and WorkOpportunity Reconciliation Act, signed into law on August 22,1996, and the Immigration Control and Financial ResponsibilityAct, signed into law on September 30, 1996. There is never a "good time" to make immigration policy,and 1996 was particularly difficult because of the need to findsavings in government expenditures, and American insecurity andfrustration. The CIR's recommendations were based on two principles. First,the US should do more to reduce illegal immigration. To accomplishthis goal, CIR recommended that the borders be "managed"to prevent the entry of illegal immigrants, increasing penaltiesfor smuggling, and testing systems to help employers determinequickly and reliably who is legally authorized to work in theUS. Second, the CIR recommended that the US strike a "grand bargain"on legal immigration--reduce the growth of immigration, but maintainlegal immigrants' full access to the social safety net. Specifically,CIR recommended that the US speed up the admission of immediatefamily members of immigrants living in the US, but eliminate theright of brothers and sisters of US citizens to immigrate. Congress adopted many of the CIR's recommendations to reduce illegalimmigration, but rejected the CIR's grand bargain proposal. Illegal Immigration The CIR urged a three prong effort to reduce and deter illegalimmigration: prevent entry over borders, prevent those insidethe US from getting jobs or benefits and, if detected, quicklyremove illegal aliens from the US. Congress agreed to add Border Patrol agents and support personnelto deter illegal entries over US borders, and also agreed to addstaff to expedite legal entries. However, Congress did not addsignificantly to efforts to prevent illegal aliens in the US fromgetting jobs: US employers may, but do not have to, participatein experimental employee verification systems. The INS will get1200 more inspectors, including 900 whose primary responsibilityis to deal with employer sanctions and alien smuggling. However, at the last minute, Congress refused to authorize thehiring of 350 more labor inspectors to the DOL. Removing Aliens The anti-terrorism bill made it easier to remove from the US alienswho are convicted of felonies in the US. Once apprehended, criminalaliens must be detained, and they have fewer opportunities toappeal to stay in the US and, under the new immigration law, theymay be required to serve their sentences in their country of origin,if the US negotiates agreements with other countries. The immigration bill also made it easier to exclude foreignerswho enter the US without valid documents. If an unauthorized alienapplies for asylum to remain in the US, she must make a credibleclaim to an INS asylum officer. If the INS officer rejects herclaim as not credible, then she has one appeal to an immigrationjudge, who must make a decision within 7 days. Unauthorized aliens in the US for seven or more years may applyfor "suspension of deportation," an acknowledgment that,over that time, the alien may have developed US roots. However,Congress adopted a tougher standard for suspension of deportation,and limited the number of foreigners who can obtain this reliefto 4000 per year. The new immigration law allows the US Attorney General to deportwithout any judicial review any illegal alien apprehended insidethe US, who has been in the US for less than two years. Legal Immigration According to Susan Martin, the US legal immigration system, whichmanages immigration by backlogs or waiting lists, needs a majoroverhaul. Over 1.1 million spouses and children of legal immigrantsliving in the US are waiting--up to 10 years--to come to the US.Many do not wait; they come illegally. Similarly, there are 1.7million siblings, such as the adult brothers and sisters of UScitizens, in the Philippines, Mexico, and other countries waiting,sometimes 20 to 30 years, until they receive permission to migratelegally to the US. The CIR recommended that the US eliminate immigration slots forbrothers and sisters of US citizens. However, an unusual alliancebetween business and religious and ethnic groups prevented changesto the legal immigration system, but not changes to the US welfaresystem that make most legal immigrants ineligible for benefits. The CIR recommended that the US draw a firm line between the accessof legal and illegal immigrants to welfare and other public assistancein the US. The CIR recommended that illegal immigrants receiveonly emergency services, and those authorized by the US constitution,including K-12 education for illegal alien children. The CIR recommended that legal immigrants be eligible for thesame public assistance services as US citizens, but that sponsorshipagreements be made legally binding--if a US citizen or legal immigrantagreed to support a relative, and that relative, after arrivingin the US, applied for welfare, the applicant would be assumedto have access to the income and assets of the sponsor, and thuslikely not be eligible for benefits. In order to sponsor the admission of an immigrant, a US residentwould have to earn at least 125 percent of the poverty line forthe sponsor and the immigrant(s) who would arrive, and sign anaffidavit promising to support the immigrant in the US. The US-sponsorcould have another US-cosponsor. The welfare law makes newly-arrived legal immigrants not eligiblefor most welfare benefits for at least five years after theirarrival in the US. What's Next? Susan Martin believes that immigration, which accounts for about40 percent of US population growth, will continue to be a prominentissue in the US and California. Four issues not addressed in 1996are likely to get attention: legal immigration, refugees, immigrantpolicy, and the administration of US immigration. Martin believes that the US will eventually have to strike sometype of Grand Bargain of the sort recommended by the CIR because.With legal immigration rising, and welfare services ending, poorimmigrants may become more vulnerable and visible. Second, the end of the cold war has eliminated the major rationalefor refugee admissions over the past 50 years--providing a havenfor those fleeing communism. The US must rethink what it wants to accomplish with refugee policy--justwho among the world's 25 million refugees should US admit to startover in the US? Third, the US has admitted about 15 million immigrants since 1980,and many of them are not faring well in the US economy. As immigrantsand US citizens compete in a labor market crowded by ex-welfarerecipients, the US may have to consider immigrant integrationpolicies. Fourth, the INS is one of the few federal agencies whose budgethas doubled in a time of reduced government spending. The US needsto study what has become a large and expensive system for managingimmigration. California Implications Phil Romero explained why Governor Wilson in the early 1990s leda campaign to reduce illegal immigration. The 1991-92 recessionincreased the demand for state-funded services, but made it impossibleto pay for more state services. However, immigration continuedto bring large numbers of people into the state who needed state-fundedservices, including unauthorized aliens. According to Romero, Wilson thought that the federal governmentshould either reimburse CA for the cost of providing servicesto illegal aliens, or prevent their entry. When the federal governmentdid neither, Wilson endorsed a state effort to reduce servicesto unauthorized aliens, Proposition 187. David Illig explained that the major assistance programs affectedby 1996 immigration and welfare legislation include AFDC, whichhad about 380,000 legal immigrants on the rolls in summer 1996,Food Stamps, with about 436,000 non-US citizen recipients, SSI,with 331,000 immigrant recipients, and in-home supportive services,with 55,000 non-US citizen recipients. Perhaps 500,000 non-UScitizens now receiving one or more welfare benefits may lose themunder 1996 legislation. The major fear in CA is that, as non-US citizens are removed fromwelfare rolls, state and local government may have to provideassistance to them. Under CA law, county governments must providelocally-paid-for General Assistance to persons not eligible forany other benefits who need assistance, and in July 1996, about150,000 persons in CA were receiving assistance that cost countygovernments $300 to $400 million per year. CA politicians are waiting until after the November 1996 electionsto decide how to respond to the non-eligibility of most newly-arrivedimmigrants for welfare benefits, and the removal of immigrantsfrom the welfare rolls. Among the options are to prolong the eligibilityof current immigrant recipients--non-US citizens currently receivingFood Stamps can continue to do so until April 1, 1996, encouragenaturalization, or simply ignore federal sanctions that are threatenedif CA does not remove immigrants as the law requires. One proposal is to have parallel welfare programs in CA--a 100percent federally-funded program that meets all federal criteria,and a 100-percent state-funded program that would permit e.g.people to draw benefits longer than five years, and perhaps servesome immigrants. Los Angeles and San Diego Roger Waldinger, UCLA, discussed the conclusions to his book,Ethnic Los Angeles. Waldinger noted that, in 1990, about 33 percentof LA county residents, and 37 percent of LA city residents, wereforeign born, comparable to the foreign born share of the populationof New York City in 1910. However, while New York City has experienced immigration continuouslyfor two centuries, Los Angeles experienced mass immigration onlysince 1980. Today, 55 percent of the immigrants in the US livein five cities, including 20 percent in Los Angeles, and 18 percentin New York City. In Los Angeles, Mexicans are the dominant immigrant group, andmost of them have very little education--over half of the adultMexican immigrants in 1990 in Los Angeles had less than eightyears of education. Waldinger believes that social networks and economic developmentevolved in ways so that the supply of unskilled immigrants createda demand for them in "niches," industries and occupationsin which an immigrant group is over represented, compared to itsshare of the work force, by 50 percent or more. One of the moststriking findings of this niche analysis is that Mexican immigrantsare over-represented in low wage industries such as non-durablesmanufacturing, and in occupations such as gardening, while African-Americansare over represented in government jobs. Commentator Dan Walters, Sacramento Bee, stressed the differencein the characteristics of the population of CA--about 53 percentof state residents are non-Hispanic whites--and voters in CA--about80 percent of the voters are non-Hispanic whites. White votersare older than the average residents, setting up potential ethnicand age political conflicts that, Walters believes, will continueto be resolved in favor of the older whites. Some institutions are trying anticipate and plan for these demo-politicalchanges. Only 20 percent of CA voters still have children in K-12public schools, which may have contributed to Prop 98, which guaranteesstate funding for K-12 schools. Finally, Walters argued that the 1996 naturalization wave hasnot yet shown up on voter rolls. There are 19 to 20 million eligiblevoters in CA, 14 million registered voters, and 9 million votescast in November 1994--Hispanics cast 8 to 9 percent, or 800,000of these votes. Wayne Cornelius, UCSD, reported on a comparative study of employersand workers in San Diego and Japan that is examining whether foreignworker employment fluctuates over the business cycle. Preliminaryanalysis suggests that, employers dependent on foreign workersdo not lay off immigrant workers and hire natives when nativesare presumably more available. Los Angeles and Amsterdam Ivan Light, UCLA, summarized his contribution to a book that comparesimmigration's effects on the garment industry in Los Angeles andAmsterdam. In contrast to Saskia Sassen, who argues that globalizationcreates a demand for immigrant workers by increasing the incomesof the very rich who demand immigrant services from gardeningto maids, Light stresses that social networks enable immigrantsto cross borders and find jobs by lowering the cost and risk ofmigrating. Combining globalization and network theories yields a "spillover"or threshold date, when migration switches from being mostly ademand-pull to mostly a supply-push phenomenon. Light notes that, in the LA garment industry, jobs are being createdby immigrants for immigrants. Joshua Skov, UCB, noted that the globalization theory seems toconcentrate on structural explanations for migration, while networksemphasize agency factors. Mexicos LaborMarket Agustin Escobar, Ciesas Occidente, Guadalajara,reviewed the evolution of Mexico's labor market since the 1980s,and emphasized that the number of 16-64 year olds, many of whomwould be expected to join the labor force, increased much fasterthan the number of jobs, both formal and informal. However, theinformal sector has lost some of its ability to serve as Mexico'sshock absorber after 1989, so that, as the mobility of Mexicansincreased, more Mexicans moved to border cities within Mexico,and from Mexico to the US. Inequality increased in Mexico throughoutthe past decade; the highest 10 percent of Mexican income earnersgot 47 percent of Mexico's total income in 1992, and 48 percentin 1994. Bi-National US-MexicanMigration Study The Bi-National US-Mexican MigrationStudy was proposed by Mexico to quantify migration between Mexicoand the US, and the US and Mexico, as well as the characteristicsof migrants, factors that sustain migration, the impacts of migrationin both countries, and policy responses. The study will be completedin summer 1997. There were 4.5 million Mexican-born persons in the US in 1990,according to the Census, and 6.7 million in March 1996, accordingto the CPS. Mexicans in the US have traditionally come from thelower ends of the Mexican education and skill ladder, in partbecause Bracero farm workers were recruited. Migration seems tobe less selective today than in the past; there are more urbanresidents, more migrants with skills, and from new regions ofMexico. Demand-pull, supply-push, and network factors sustain Mexico-USlabor migration, but their roles have changed. Demand-pull factorshave declined in importance, and supply-push and network factorshave increased in importance. As Mexico-US migration has increased in magnitude, changed incharacter, and sustained by factors other than US-government approvedrecruitment, the context of US-Mexican relations, as well as thecontext for dealing with migration, has changed. Agenda Comparative Immigration and Integration Program Fall Workshop Friday, October 4, 1996 8AM-4PM IGA Reading Room Shields Library, Third Floor 7:30AM Continental Breakfast 8 -9:30 AM What hath Congress wrought? The Implications of Immigration andWelfare Reform for California Susan Forbes Martin, Executive Director, Commission on ImmigrationReform Discussant: David Illig, CA Research Bureau 9:30-10am Break 10:00 AM CIIP purposes and goals, Philip Martin, UCD and RichardBuxbaum, UCB 10:05AM Introductions and 1-minute presentations on each participant'scurrent comparative immigration and integration research. 10:30 AM Roger Waldinger, UCLA, Prospects for Immigrants in LosAngeles Discussant: Dan Walters, Sacramento Bee 11:30 AM Wayne Cornelius, UCSD, Determinants of Employer Dependenceon Immigrant Labor in San Diego County. 12PM Lunch 1:15PM Ivan Light, UCLA, Globalization and Migration Networks Discussant: Joshua Skov, UCB 2PM Augustin Escobar, Guadalajara. The Mexican Labor Market--1976-1996 2:45PM Break 3PM The Bi-National US-Mexican Migration Study Susan Forbes Martin, Commission on Immigration Reform Ed Taylor, UCD Philip Martin, UCD Manuel Garcia y Griego, UCI 4 PM Adjourn Migration Dialogue HomeWT02-B12-226IA088-000636-B045-169http://migration.ucdavis.edu:80/cc/1_96.htm 128.120.36.171 19970122192136 text/html 14600HTTP/1.0 200 OKMIME-Version: 1.0Server: WebSTAR/1.3.1 ID/6378Message-ID: Date: Wednesday, 22-Jan-97 19:22:33 GMTLast-Modified: Tuesday, 21-Jan-97 21:07:07 GMTContent-type: text/htmlContent-length: 14343 Center for German and European Studies Center for German and European Studies International and Area Studies and Lewis Center for Regional Policy Studies University of California Comparative Immigration and Integration Program Winter Workshop January 26, 1995 9AM-4PM Room 3343B, Public Policy Building 375 Circle Drive East UCLA UC faculty and students interested in comparative immigrationand integration issues are invited to participate in the WinterWorkshop of the CGES-CIIP, scheduled for Room 3343B in thePublic Policy Building, UCLA, from 9am to 3:30pm--the Public PolicyBuilding is near corner of Hilgard and Wyton Aves., across fromUCLA Guest House--tel (310) 206-4417 or 206-0753. Please RSVP to Gia White at gia@uclink.berkeley.edutel 510 642-4555 or fax 510 643-5996by January 19, 1996. Regular members of the CIIP can buy air tickets and send receiptsto Gia White after the meeting, or contact Paulette Ianello ofMiller Gove Northbrae Travel at 510-655-9113--note corrected number--to have a prepaid ticket issued to you. Please take Super Shuttle (213-775-6600) from the airport to thePublic Policy Building at UCLA; the cost should be about $15.For reimbursement, please get a receipt. A taxi costs about $25,so if two or more people share a taxi, the cost is equivalent. For those driving, park in Structure 3; UC campus parking permitscombined with a UC identification campus parking will get youfree parking at UCLA. If you have questions, please contact MargaretJohnson at (310) 206-0573 or mcjohnso@ucla.edu Others interested in participating and having their travel reimbursedshould contact Gia White or Andrea Rapport, explaining their immigrationand integration research and why they need travel funds to participatein the workshop. Please remember that the 1996 CIIP RFP for $2500 faculty researchgrants will be distributed at the January 26, 1996 winter workshop,and requests for funding must be received at CGES by February29, 1996. Contact Andrea Rapport at CGES at 510-643-2115 if youneed an RFP announcement. Comparative Immigration and Integration Program Winter Workshop January 26, 1995 9AM-4PM Room 3343B, Public Policy Building 375 Circle Drive East UCLA 9:00 AM Update on CIIP purposes and goals, Philip Martin, UCDand Richard Buxbaum/Gerry Feldman, UCB 9:15AM Introductions and 2 minute presentations on each participant'scurrent comparative immigration and integration research. 10:00 AM Ivan Light, UCLA, Anti-Immigrant Movements Discussant: Andres Jimenez, Ca Policy Seminar 10:45 AM Break 11:00 AM Philip Martin, UCD, Prospects for a New Bracero Program Discussant: Manuel Garcia y Griego, UCI 11:45 AM Lunch 12:15 Bill Frey, U-Michigan, Internal Migration Dynamics in the United States 2 PM Programs for Research on Immigration to California-- Roger Waldinger, UCLA, Ethnic Los Angeles Dowell Myers, USC, Immigration and Housingand Transporation in Southern California Georges Vernez, Rand, Immigration and California Hans Johnson, CA Public Policy Institute, Immigration and California Linda Gage, CA Department of Finance, Immigration and California 4 PM Adjourn Comparative Immigration and Integration Program Winter Workshop January 26, 1995 9AM-4PM Room 3343B, Public Policy Building 375 Circle Drive East, UCLA The CGES Comparative Immigration and Integration Program heldits sixth Workshop on Friday, January 26, 1996 at the Lewis Centerfor Regional Policy Studies at University of California at LosAngeles. Three papers were presented and discussed by the 40 facultyand students who participated, and an afternoon panel discussedprograms of research on immigration's impacts on California. The purpose of the CIIP is to promote interdisciplinary and comparativeresearch on immigration and integration issues facing the industrialdemocracies. The CIIP each year funds 10 to 20 faculty researchers,and 10 to 20 graduate student projects, and holds two to threework shops. The CIIP supports the production of Migration Newseach month, which goes to 2000 readers around the world. In 1996, the CIIP plans to inaugurate an annual research conferencewith German immigration and integration researchers. Announcements. The RFP for faculty and graduate studentCIIP awards for 1996 were announced; faculty proposals are dueby February 29, 1996, and graduate student proposals are due March8, 1996. Grant letters will include an explicit statement thatfaculty receiving CGES-CIIP awards are expected to be active membersof the work group, which means participation in CIIP workshops,and submitting CIIP working papers. For a copy of the RFP, contactGia White at gia@uclink.berkeley.edu--tel510 642-4555 or fax 510 643-5996 Past agendas and minutes can be accessed through the MigrationNews home page-- http:// migration.ucdavis.edu Minutes. Participants are working on a variety of comparativeprojects, ranging from whether some firms in industrial democraciesare structurally dependent on immigrant workers to how the localeffects of immigrants in turn influence a nation's immigrationpolicies. Ivan Light (UCLA) presented a paper on anti-immigrant movements,noting that many anti-immigrant groups argue that they are actingin the "national interest." Light emphasized that itis very hard to define the national interest, and that what mayseem to be in the national interest in one period can be shownto have not been in the national interest in a later period. Forexample, Hitler's aim for racial and ethnic purity left Germanyin ruins, while the 1960s decision to admit guest workers addedboth economic growth and diversity. The discussion emphasized that it is very hard to define the "nationalinterest," and that what is considered to be the nationalinterest may simply reflect the relative strength of interestgroups at a point in time. Immigration rose in all the industrialdemocracies over the past 30 years--does this reflect a consensusthat it is in the national interest to open borders, or the operationof international pressure and domestic interest groups? Philip Martin (UCD) presented a paper entitled "Guest Workersfor Agriculture: New Solution or New Problem?" The purposeof guest or foreign worker programs aim to add workers to thelabor force without adding permanent residents to the population,but Martin noted that none of the world's 100-plus countries withguest worker programs has succeeded in having their programs adherestrictly to this goal. The worldwide experience with guest workers is captured in theaphorism "There is nothing more permanent than temporaryworkers. " No where is this statement more true than in USagriculture. Martin contrasted past and current certificationand contractual programs with the current push of US farmers foran attestation and free-agent program, concluding that it is unlikelyCongress will approve a free agent program for unskilled seasonalworkers, but that farmer pressure might lead to a further "streamliningof the certification and contractual H-2A program. The discussion emphasized that many of the lessons from US experiencewith past guest worker programs are not well understood. For example,Operation Wetback in 1954 resulted in 1.1 million apprehensionsduring what was then a July-1953-June 1954 fiscal year. Most ofthese apprehensions occurred at the border--there were only 80,000apprehensions during the height of the June-August interior sweeps. In other words, most apprehensions have been and continue to beat the border, and it is very hard to judge the total size ofthe Mexican influx from apprehension data. However, most participantsexpressed skepticism of assertions that "tens of millions"of Mexicans have been employed illegally in the US--the sourceof such assertions appears to be a 1989 LA Times poll in Mexicoin which about 30 percent of the Mexicans polled reported thatthey had a relative living in the US. Bill Frey (U-Michigan) presented a paper on internal migrationdynamics in the US. According to census data on where people livedin 1985 and in 1990, immigration has noticeable effects on internalUS migration. The states and cities that get the most immigrantsare those that saw native-born non-Hispanic persons with lessthan a high school education move out, and native-born non-Hispanicpersons with college degrees or more move in. Since many immigrantsare Hispanics with less than a high school education, the secondaryor internal migration associated with immigration accentuate economicand other inequalities in states such as CA, and cities such asLos Angeles. These results suggest that unskilled immigrants push unskillednatives out of immigration areas, while native "elites"are attracted to immigrant areas. If such patterns continues,Frey projects that there will be growing differences between thestates that might manifest themselves as competition similar tocentral city-suburb tensions. For example, if current trends continue,by 2020 13 mostly northern Plains states such as the Dakotas willbe at least 85 percent non-Hispanic white, while 11 states, includingthe Big 4 of CA, TX, NY, and FL, will be less than 60 percentnon-Hispanic white. The discussion emphasized that the same patterns--unskilled nativesmoving out of CA, and professionals moving in--may have occurredin the low-immigration 1960s. Second, some participants worriedthat the same model was being used to explain both leaving andentering a state--the depvar is net migration--but there may bedifferent forces at work. Third, several participants noted thatthe model explained relatively little of the variance across statesin migration patterns. During the afternoon panel discussion of immigration research,Roger Waldinger (UCLA) noted that an analysis of Census data forLos Angles for 1970, 1980, and 1990 emphasizes that there arefar more immigrants arriving at the bottom than at the top ofthe job ladder, and that especially Mexicans at the bottom arenot enjoying rapid upward mobility. A fifteen chapter book onEthnic Los Angeles will be published in 1996. Waldinger, Rogerand Mehdi Bozorgmehr (Eds). 1996. Ethnic Los Angeles. New York:Russell Sage. Dowell Myers (USC) reported on his double cohort method--by ageand year of entry-- of analyzing what happened to immigrants arrivingin the seven southern CA counties after 1980. His analysis showsthat especially young immigrants make considerable economic progressafter their arrival--as measured by their total incomes--and thatsome of their behavior converges rapidly to that of natives, e.g.,they rapidly abandon buses and drive cars to work. In southernCA, one-third of all bus riders are recent immigrants. Myers noted that immigration is raising other issues, includingovercrowded housing. The US definition of acceptable housing wastwo or less persons per room until 1960, when the definition waschange to one or less per room. However, as immigrants moved intosouthern CA, overcrowding jumped, raising questions about howaggressively cities should enforce housing codes developed duringa non-immigrant era. George Vernez (Rand) outlined an ambitious project that is dealingwith the question of whether immigration is, on balance, a plusor minus for CA by examining the effects of immigration on internalmigration, on wages, and on public sector finances since 1960.These studies show that immigrants from most countries do catchup to similar natives in average weekly earnings after 10 to 20years, but not immigrants from the major country of origin--Mexico.Furthermore, immigrant children tend to follow in their parents'footsteps, meaning that the children of Asian immigrants tendto do well in school, etc., while the children of Mexican immigrantsdo not. The Mexican lag may be even more severe if Mexicans tend to reporta more recent arrival date than they actually arrived. For example,many Mexicans who may have arrived in the US before 1987 reportedin the 1990 Census that they arrived in 1987, the year that theyapplied for legalization. It was also noted that, in the threemajor industrial democracies of France, Germany, and the US, thelargest immigrant group--Algerians, Turks, and Mexicans--seemto do "worst" on most integration measures. Hans Johnson (CA PPI) reported that the institute has a numberof immigration projects underway, including an examination ofinternal migration patterns, Mexican return migration, and theeffects of Prop 187 on prenatal care. Home